
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04469/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 28th September 2016              |On: 11th November 2016               |
|and 9th November 2016                |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     HG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Greater Manchester
                    Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Senior Home Office Presenting Officers Mr Harrison
                    (on 28th September 2016) and Mr Bates (9th November
                    2016)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on the 14th September 1979. He
    appeals with permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Herwald)[2] to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse to grant him leave to enter the  United  Kingdom[3].
    That  decision  followed  a  rejection  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to
    international protection[4].




    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Error of Law

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he had a well-founded  fear
    of persecution in Iran:

          a) Because he has converted from Islam to Christianity;

          b) As a failed asylum seeker who had exited Iran illegally.

 4. In respect of (a) the First-tier Tribunal rejected the evidence and the
    grounds contain no challenge to those findings. Judge Herwald  accepted
    that  the  Appellant  may   have   learned   some   information   about
    Christianity, but  rejected  the  contention  that  he  was  a  genuine
    convert.

 5. In respect of (b) the determination notes  that  Counsel  (Mr  Schwenk)
    placed reliance on a skeleton argument and the fact that the  Court  of
    Appeal had granted permission in similar cases dealing with the  point.
    The Respondent's own Operational Guidance Note (October 2012) and  COIS
    recognised that the penalty for leaving the  country  without  a  valid
    passport is a sentence of imprisonment of between 1-3 years,  and  that
    conditions in Iranian jails are harsh and life  threatening.  Of  these
    matters the determination concludes "I am not persuaded that  there  is
    enough in the skeleton argument produced by Mr Schwenk to cause  me  to
    depart from the country guidance decision in SB (risk  on  return  etc)
    and note that where returnees may be held for a few days,  once  it  is
    clear that they have  not  been  involved  in  political  activity,  it
    appeared  that  they  are  released".    It  would  appear  that   this
    conclusion is based on one paragraph in the  COIS  which  is  concerned
    with the treatment of those who have claimed  asylum  abroad.   It  was
    that finding that was the subject of  the  challenge  mounted  in  this
    appeal.

 6. In a decision dated 26th December 2015 I found the decision to  contain
    an error of law limited to the refusal to depart from SB. The error was
    found in line with the terms of grants of permission  in  a  number  of
    cases before the Court of Appeal.  The grounds make extensive reference
    to the skeleton argument and evidence that was placed before the First-
    tier Tribunal. The Appellant submitted that the risk of serious harm to
    those who had exited Iran illegally had considerably  heightened  since
    the decision in SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT
    53.  Although the various sources cited (US State  Department,  Amnesty
    International etc) do  make  reference  to  an  apparent  crackdown  on
    perceived dissent, the central focus of the material was the  worsening
    in prison conditions.  The error of law was the failure to consider all
    of this material evidence and do so with anxious scrutiny. Having  made
    reference to it, the Tribunal does not then address it.




    The Re-Making

 7. There followed a long delay whilst the parties and the Tribunal  waited
    for a panel of the Upper Tribunal to  resolve  the  central  matter  in
    issue: what happens to failed asylum seekers upon return to Iran and in
    what circumstances will there be a reasonable likelihood of harm?  That
    resolution came in June of this year with the publication of SSH and HR
    (illegal exit: failed  asylum  seeker)  [2016]  UKUT  308  (IAC).   The
    findings are summarised in the headnote as follows:

         "(a) An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to Iran, who  does
         not possess a passport, will be returnable  on  a  laissez  passer,
         which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on proof  of  identity
         and nationality.

         (b)  An Iranian male in respect of whom  no  adverse  interest  has
         previously been manifested by the Iranian State  does  not  face  a
         real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights  on  return
         to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or  being  a
         failed  asylum  seeker.  No  such  risk  exists  at  the  time   of
         questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e. of  illegal
         exit and being a failed asylum seeker) have  been  established.  In
         particular, there is not a real  risk  of  prosecution  leading  to
         imprisonment."

    The Tribunal thereby rejected the proposition in the Appellant's  case:
    that questioning on arrival for either illegal exit or  having  claimed
    asylum, would necessarily entail detention and ill-treatment.

 8. That, one would think, would be that, given the  narrow  parameters  of
    the terms of the onward  appeal.    Not  so,  submitted  Mr  Brown.  He
    pointed to the clear distinction drawn in  SSH  between  failed  asylum
    seekers simpliciter and those who might have other risk factors. In the
    hiatus between Judge  Herwald's  determination  and  the  appeal  being
    relisted for remaking, the Appellant had created a profile for  himself
    which would place him at risk. He had continued to attend  church,  had
    been officially baptised, and importantly, had placed references to him
    being a Christian on his Facebook page, which was open to the world  to
    see. Appellant 'google' search of the Appellant's name threw up  a  hit
    of him 'liking' the webpage of a church. Mr Brown submitted that  these
    factors placed him at enhanced risk of detention and ill-treatment.

 9. For the Respondent Mr  Bates  pointed  to  the  clear  and  uncontested
    findings that this claimed conversion was  wholly  cynical.   If  asked
    about the basis of  his  asylum  claim  the  Appellant  could  not,  in
    accordance with the principles  in   HJ  (Iran)  and  HT  (Cameroon)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, be  expected
    to lie.  He would simply tell the Iranian border guard that he had made
    a false claim for asylum based on a fabricated claim to have  converted
    to Christianity. If they asked about his Facebook page, or  whether  he
    had been baptised, he could explain them away by telling  the  truth  -
    these matters are all part and parcel of the falsehood.




    My Findings

10. I begin with the relevant  findings  in  SSH  and  HR.   That  decision
    indicates that in order to affect the Appellant's return  to  Iran  the
    Secretary of State will have to obtain on his behalf  a  laissez-passer
    style document from the Iranian embassy in London.  The  Tribunal  held
    that arrival with such a document may indicate to the authorities  that
    the holder left Iran illegally and a fine would result. He would likely
    be subject to some  questioning.    It  has  long  been  accepted  that
    returnees to Iran - at least those without regular documentation - face
    interview by officials on arrival. That is  unsurprising.  No  doubt  a
    British national returning to Heathrow without a  passport  would  also
    have to answer some questions.  The  difference  is  that  the  'wrong'
    answer, in the Iranian context, could lead to persecution.

11. In SSH the Tribunal heard evidence  that  the  questioning  could  take
    anything from 10 minutes [at 21], to 2-3 hours [13], to 3-5 hours  [14]
    to several days [22]. It was prepared to accept  Dr  Kakhki's  evidence
    that there is a  special  court  near  the  airport  which  deals  with
    penalties for illegal exit and other immigration offences. The Tribunal
    was not at all satisfied that there was, in general,  a  real  risk  of
    persecution at this stage. The panel endorsed Dr Kakhki's evidence that
    a returnee simpliciter would not face a real risk of harm:

         "If they co-operated and accepted  that  they  left  illegally  and
         claimed asylum abroad then  there  would  be  no  reason  for  ill-
         treatment, and questioning would be for a fairly brief period. That
         seems to us to sum up the position well, and as  a  consequence  we
         conclude that a person with no history other than that of  being  a
         failed asylum seeker who had exited  illegally  and  who  could  be
         expected to tell the truth when questioned would not  face  a  real
         risk of ill-treatment during  the  period  of  questioning  at  the
         airport".

12. It is implicit in this that the questioning would cover whether or  not
    the individual and claimed asylum. This was indeed the evidence  of  Dr
    Kakhki,  recorded  at  paragraph  35  of  Appendix  1.   The   Tribunal
    specifically considered, and rejected, the proposition that the act  of
    claiming asylum would in itself expose the individual to prosecution  -
    with the attendant risk of harm - for propaganda against the state.  At
    30:

         "We can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian authorities may
         have towards perceived slights against their own state in the  form
         of untruthful allegations about  the  conduct  of  the  state,  but
         equally one can expect  a  degree  of  reality  on  their  part  in
         relation to people who in the interests of advancing their economic
         circumstances would make up a story in  order  to  secure  economic
         betterment in a wealthier country".

13. Mr Bates emphasised these findings  in  his  submissions.  The  Iranian
    authorities are no doubt aware  that  their  citizens  use  the  asylum
    system in Europe for the purpose of economic  migration  and  generally
    speaking they are not going to pursue questioning of an individual  for
    that reason alone.

14. For his part Mr Brown accepted that this was so for the  failed  asylum
    seeker with no other issues, but asked me  to  consider,  applying  the
    lower standard of proof, whether actual baptism, and  open  declaration
    of that fact, would increase the likelihood of problems at that  'pinch
    point'. He pointed out that the panel in SSH are  careful  to  separate
    out those cases where there might be an additional risk factor:

         "31. Elsewhere in Dr Kakhki's report there are a number of examples
         given of people who were prosecuted for other offences and also for
         illegal departure. It seems to us that  these  cases  establish  no
         more than that people may be prosecuted and indeed  imprisoned,  as
         some of these cases show, for the separate offence of illegal exit,
         but they are clearly to be distinguished from cases where there  is
         no history and where the person is no more  than  a  failed  asylum
         seeker who exited Iran illegally. Cases such as Mr Jazari who was a
         corrupt businessman, Ms Bayazidi who was convicted of an offence of
         disinformation and  other  examples  of  people  who  were  clearly
         political dissidents or  at  least  perceived  as  being  political
         dissidents, are different again. We do not consider it to have been
         shown that somebody who has made a failed asylum claim would simply
         as a consequence of that be  regarded  as  a  political  dissident.
         These cases where people were imprisoned show much more by  way  of
         specific activity than a simple imputation. The description of  the
         case of Mr Hadi Keikhosravi, referred to at page 13 of the  report,
         which refers to  a  conviction  of  six  months'  imprisonment  for
         illegal departure, says nothing about the surrounding circumstances
         and as such cannot be an example of any materiality.  The  examples
         given show that people found  guilty  of  another  offence  may  in
         addition receive a prison sentence for illegal exit,  but  they  do
         not show that people are sentenced to imprisonment for illegal exit
         per se. Indeed, the evidence suggests that there is no appetite  to
         prosecute for illegal exit alone, but if there is another  offence,
         illegal exit will be added on".

         [emphasis added]

15. Mr Brown further took me to the findings of the Upper  Tribunal  in  AB
    and Others (internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]  UKUT
    0257 (IAC):

        457. We accept the evidence that some people who have  expected  no
             trouble have found trouble and that does concern us.  We  also
             accept the evidence that very few people seem to  be  returned
             unwillingly and this makes it very difficult to  predict  with
             any degree of confidence  what  fate,  if  any,  awaits  them.
             There is clear evidence that some people are asked about their
             internet  activity  and  particularly   for   their   Facebook
             password.  We can think of no reason whatsoever to doubt  this
             evidence.  It is absolutely clear that blogging and activities
             on Facebook are very common amongst Iranian citizens and it is
             very  clear  that  the  Iranian  authorities  are  exceedingly
             twitchy about them.  We cannot see  why  a  person  who  would
             attract the authorities sufficiently to  be  interrogated  and
             asked to give account of his conduct outside of Iran would not
             be asked what he had done on the internet. Such a person could
             not be expected to lie, partly because that is how the law  is
             developed and partly because, as is illustrated in one of  the
             examples given above, it is often quite easy to check  up  and
             expose such a person.  We  find  that  the  act  of  returning
             someone creates a "pinch point" so that returnees are  brought
             into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have both
             the time and inclination to interrogate  them.   We  think  it
             likely that they will be asked about their  internet  activity
             and likely if they have any internet activity for that  to  be
             exposed and if it is less than flattering of the government to
             lead to a real risk of persecution.

16. Given these findings it must be accepted that  the  Appellant's  online
    presence  will  necessarily  come  to  attention  of  the  interviewing
    officers. The Appellant produces before  me,  along  with  his  baptism
    certificate, screenshots of his Facebook profile. The latter included a
    photograph  of  him  in  Church,  and  links  to  various   individuals
    identifying as Christians.   He  has  also  'liked'  various  Christian
    related posts and websites.   He has shared posts from  other  people's
    pages which are openly critical of Islam, for  instance  one  in  which
    various dictators are pictured with Qur'an in hand,  and  these  images
    are  juxtaposed  with  others  depicting  their  human  rights  abuses.
    Another page shared by the  Appellant  explains  why  all  Muslims  are
    actually Christians.

17. Conversion from Islam is a crime  in  Iran,  and  indeed  in  classical
    Islamic law. It is also a matter likely to  inspire  revulsion  in  the
    average observant Muslim.    It seems to me that in those circumstances
    there must be a more than  a  fanciful  chance  that  the  interviewing
    officer will not overlook this online material on the  basis  that  was
    part of a fraudulent claim.   Although  these  are  not  the  political
    matters discussed in SSH, they are certainly matters that would  engage
    the Refugee Convention as well as the adverse interest of  the  Iranian
    state.  I find it to be  reasonably  likely  that  such  a  'frontline'
    officer would consider that that this was a  matter  requiring  further
    investigation and that transfer to detention would follow. I find it to
    be reasonably likely that the Appellant  would  be  subjected  to  ill-
    treatment in those circumstances.

18. Mr Bates was quite correct to  rely  on  Judge  Herwald's  findings  of
    cynicism. Whether the intervening two years have  resulted  in  a  more
    genuine conversion, or simply an amplification of the Appellant's false
    claim, is not however for me to decide.  There is evidence  both  ways.
    The Appellant has continued to attend Church, but  on  the  other  hand
    openly admitted to having deliberately turned his privacy settings  off
    on his profile page.  My decision is based  simply  on  the  view  that
    would be likely be  taken  by  the  authorities  upon  the  Appellant's
    arrival.




    Decisions

19. There is an order for anonymity.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    is set aside to the limited extent identified above.

21. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee.

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          10th November 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by Designated Judge Peart of the First-tier
Tribunal on the 5th September 2014 but granted upon renewed application by
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on the 19th December 2014.
[2] Determination promulgated on the 12th August 2014
[3] Immigration decision served on the 19th June 2014
[4] Reasons for refusal letter dated 7th June 2014

