
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04811/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2014                            |On 3 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                 Master A M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Raza Halim, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


       DETERMINATION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
    Immigration Judge Kelsey  ("the  Immigration  Judge")  to  dismiss  his
    appeal against the refusal of the respondent to grant him  humanitarian
    protection or leave to remain on the basis that he is a refugee or that
    his human rights under Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR) would be unlawfully interfered with.

2.   Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman gave him permission on 28  February  2014
    because he considered that the grounds "may disclose significant errors
    of approach" which justified the grounds being properly  argued  before
    the Upper Tribunal.  There was also a  potential  lack  of  clarity  in
    paragraph 27 of the Immigration Judge's determination.

Background

3.   The appellant is an Afghan national whose claimed date of  birth  is  1
    January 1998.

4.   The appellant claims to have fled Afghanistan in fear  of  the  Taliban
    at the end of 2011 or beginning of 2012.   He  then  travelled  through
    Iran, Turkey, Greece, Austria, Italy  and  France  before  arriving  in
    Dover hiding in a lorry on 4 July 2012.  He claimed asylum on  20  July
    2012 in Croydon.  He had a screening interview on 6 February  2013  and
    on 13 February 2013 a substantive  asylum  interview.   The  respondent
    assessed his claim and gave detailed reasons for refusal on 3 May 2013.
     Having rejected the appellant's asylum claim the respondent,  in  view
    of the appellant's age, nevertheless decided  to  grant  him  leave  to
    enter on a discretionary basis outside the  Immigration  Rules  "for  a
    specified period".  The specified period is set out in paragraph 71  of
    the refusal letter: 1 July 2015 when the appellant turns 17�.

5.   The appellant appealed that refusal  of  asylum  by  notice  of  appeal
    dated 21 May 2013, claiming that expert evidence about  Afghanistan  as
    well as a psychological report and the  in-country  evidence  supported
    his claim to being a credible witness to events  in  Afghanistan.   The
    appellant's  father  was  "in  the  Taliban"  who  were  aware  of  the
    whereabouts of the family.  The appellant claimed that his  father  had
    been killed "by the British" and as a consequence the Taliban would  be
    arriving to "take the appellant".  The police came to get  him  instead
    and knocked him unconscious.  He was taken to hospital where he  stayed
    for two or three days.  After he returned home the Taliban came to  his
    house, told him that they would put him in the car and took  him  to  a
    deserted building.  The appellant escaped with the  help  of  a  hidden
    mobile telephone which enabled him to contact his uncle, who  took  him
    "back home".  The journey to the UK took seven months.

6.   The hearing of the  appellant's  appeal  came  before  the  Immigration
    Judge on 14 November 2013 and  he  prepared  his  determination  on  16
    December 2013.  He  determined  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  a
    truthful  witness,  indeed  he  was  described  as  "contradictory  and
    inconsistent" in paragraph  21  as  well  as  "extremely  vague".   The
    Immigration Judge dismissed the expert evidence of Peter Marsden having
    noted its contents.  He had also seen a psychological report  which  he
    claims was "not drawn to my attention  until  after  the  hearing"  but
    noted the appellant had learning difficulties.  He also noted  that  he
    appeared to be a willing witness and was able to answer  questions  put
    to him without apparent difficulty.  The Immigration  Judge  found  the
    appellant had no formal education.   He  found  that  there  was  "some
    factual basis for the account" but the appellant had not told the whole
    truth.  He noted the contents of Mr Marsden's  report  and  found  that
    although there were deficiencies on the part of the police  service  in
    Afghanistan there was not sufficient evidence that the appellant  would
    be subject to a real risk of harm  or  indiscriminate  violence  if  he
    returned  there.   Although  the  Immigration  Judge  recognised   that
    forcible recruitment into the Taliban was a feature of life  for  young
    men like the appellant in Afghanistan, particularly in  areas  of  high
    militant activity, nevertheless, the evidence did not support the  view
    that the appellant would  be  recruited  into  that  organisation.   He
    therefore dismissed the appeal on all grounds argued.

Proceedings before the Upper Tribunal

7.   There are two sets of grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal.   It
    seems that the first set of grounds was submitted with the  application
    for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This resulted in First-tier Tribunal Judge  Heynes  refusing
    permission to appeal on 29 January on the  basis  that  the  judge  had
    reached findings open to him on the evidence which did  not  reveal  an
    arguable case that those findings contained a material  error  of  law.
    The "renewed grounds of appeal" are dated  10  February  2014  and  are
    settled by Counsel.  They assert that the report of Mr Marsden not only
    deals  with  the  background  information  but  applies  that  to   the
    consideration of credibility of the appellant's claim.   Secondly,  the
    report from a chartered educational psychologist found the appellant to
    suffer from "moderate learning  difficulties"  with  an  extremely  low
    threshold of perception.  Given his  "significant  difficulties"  these
    were matters to take into account when looking at his  willingness  and
    ability to recount events in Afghanistan.  These were the two principal
    grounds argued before the Upper Tribunal.

8.    The  respondent  submitted  a  Rule  24  response  stating  that   the
    Immigration Judge had plainly considered the expert evidence  including
    the psychological assessment and found the appellant nevertheless to be
    incredible.  He was entitled to  make  those  findings  and  they  were
    neither perverse nor irrational.  The Immigration Judge had rightly not
    considered the issue of human rights because the appellant had leave to
    remain in the UK until 1 July 2015 and removal  was  not  due  to  take
    place before 1 January 2016.

9.   Standard directions were sent out by Mr Southern  specifying  that  any
    new evidence not before the First-tier Tribunal had to be  the  subject
    of formal notice to the Upper Tribunal indicating the  nature  of  that
    evidence and explaining why it had not been submitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Hearing

10.  The hearing lasted approximately one  hour,  at  the  end  of  which  I
    reserved my decision as to whether or not there was a material error of
    law and if so to what extent the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    needed to be set aside.

11.  Mr Halim said that expert evidence was highly  material  and  that  the
    Immigration Judge had erred in his references to it.  I was referred to
    page 44-45 of the appellant's bundle submitted for the  hearing  on  23
    October 2014.  That sets out the passages that are considered important
    in Mr Marsden's report.  The Immigration Judge failed  to  have  proper
    regard to the whole report which contains frequent  references  to  the
    appellant's  situation  compared  with  the  objective  evidence.   The
    Immigration Judge failed to properly assess credit  and  Mr  Halim  was
    particularly critical of paragraph 27 of the determination.  The expert
    evidence should have been assessed  in  the  round  rather  than  being
    "tagged on" to the end of paragraph 27.  The Immigration Judge had been
    wrong  to  say  that  he  had  not  had  his  attention  drawn  to  the
    psychological report until after the hearing.  All passages should have
    been considered anyway, the evidence having been submitted  in  advance
    of the hearing.  The expert had found consistency in the account of the
    appellant and that the appellant's evidence had  been  consistent  with
    the objective evidence.

12.  Secondly, the Immigration Judge was criticised for  failing  to  attach
    proper weight to the expert educational  psychologist's  report.   This
    too was drawn to his attention and should have gone  to  the  issue  of
    credibility.  The appellant ought to have been found  to  be  truthful.
    The educational psychologist's report had not been properly  considered
    and that was a material error.

13.   The  third  ground  of  appeal  related  to  the  Immigration  Judge's
    subjective view of credibility.  It was wrong of the  appellant  to  be
    characterised as being "unable to answer  simple  questions"  when  the
    expert evidence makes clear that there is an explanation for that.  The
    appellant was especially vulnerable to the approaches  of  the  Taliban
    and could easily have been involved in a suicide attack.

14.  Finally, the Immigration Judge was criticised for  applying  the  wrong
    test to the question of risk on return.  I was particularly referred to
    paragraph 21 and later paragraphs where  the  Immigration  Judge  found
    that unless and until the appellant is actually  returned  he  did  not
    regard him as being at risk of harm within Article 3 of the ECHR.  This
    was the wrong approach.  The fact that removal may be in the future did
    not absolve the Immigration Judge from making findings.  I was referred
    to AA (Afghanistan) [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC).  I was  invited  to  treat
    the appellant as a person who would be returned as at the date  of  the
    hearing.  But were this to occur, as a  child,  he  would  be  forcibly
    recruited into the Taliban and there was a  real  risk  of  this.   The
    determination was unsustainable and I should remit it  for  a  de  novo
    hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.  I pointed out  to  Mr  Halim  that
    this was not the normal practice and that now the matter was before the
    Upper Tribunal any future hearing would be before that Tribunal  if  it
    were necessary.

15.  The respondent said that the  fundamental  problem  was  not  with  the
    expert evidence but with the appellant's own evidence  which  had  been
    rejected.  It is clear that the psychological report was  not  actually
    in  the  bundle,  although  a  copy  may  have  been  provided  to  the
    Immigration Judge.  The Immigration Judge had recorded the  appellant's
    educational difficulties at paragraph 15 of the determination.  He  had
    regard to that evidence but rejected the appellant's allegation that he
    would be a suicide bomber.  Overall the assessment of  credibility  was
    not something that the Upper Tribunal should interfere with.

16.  Dealing specifically with ground 4 the Immigration Judge had looked  at
    the background situation.  It was not particularly  clear  as  to  what
    parts he accepted and what  parts  he  did  not.   However,  the  judge
    accepted that there was  no  risk  based  on  his  adverse  credibility
    findings.   The  Immigration   Judge   should   have   more   carefully
    distinguished between the asylum situation and the claim under  Article
    3 of the ECHR.  But this could be addressed by re-making that  part  of
    the decision rather than setting aside the entire determination.

17.  Mr Halim's response was that the treatment of the expert  evidence  had
    been unreasonable.  The determination was unsustainable in its  present
    form.  Given the consistency with the objective evidence this was a key
    factor in deciding the credibility of the appellant's  account.  I  was
    urged to have regard to both reports.  At the  end  of  the  hearing  I
    reserved my decision, as I have indicated.  I also indicated that if  a
    fresh hearing  became  necessary  I  would  make  directions  but  that
    evidence would be limited to any developments since the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  It would also be held in the  Upper  Tribunal
    not in the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

18.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision
    of the respondent to refuse him leave to remain on the  basis  that  he
    was a refugee/a person in need of humanitarian  protection/entitled  to
    remain on human rights grounds.  He claims  that  as  an  Afghan  child
    (allegedly born on 1 January 1998 - disputed)  his  father,  a  Taliban
    member, was killed by the British.  He claims to fear that he  will  be
    recruited into that organisation following a period when he  was  taken
    captive for eight to ten days and trained in the techniques of  suicide
    bombing.  He claims that his reaction to these events was to embark  on
    a long journey by lorry across  Turkey,  Greece,  Austria  and  France,
    finally arriving in the UK on 4 July 2012 and  submitting  a  claim  to
    asylum.  It seems this was the  second  such  claim,  the  first  being
    submitted in Austria but not having been determined by the  authorities
    there, if the appellant is to be believed.  The appellant fears that if
    he returns to Afghanistan he will become a  suicide  bomber  under  the
    control of the Taliban.  The above events forced him to escape with the
    aid of an uncle in the manner described.

19.   The  Immigration  Judge  comprehensively  rejected   the   appellant's
    account, finding it "contradictory and inconsistent".  He took  account
    of the appellant's young age and his limited education  and  made  more
    than one reference to his learning difficulties.   He  also  took  full
    account of the country  background  information  by  reference  to  the
    report of Mr Peter Marsden and other information including the  leading
    case law of HK and Others [2010] UKUT 378.

20.  There are three principal lines of attack on the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal:

    (1)  that the Immigration Judge failed to have adequate regard  to  the
         detailed contents of Mr Marsden's report;


    (2)  that the Immigration Judge should not have made  adverse  findings
         as to the appellant's account given his learning difficulties;


    (3)  the Immigration Judge ought to have assessed the risk on return at
         the date of the hearing and not have assumed, as it is suggested he
         did, that were  he  to  do  that  he  ought  to  have  reached  the
         conclusion that the appellant was at risk  and  should  be  granted
         asylum/humanitarian protection/human rights protection.

21.  I have examined these contentions very carefully and I am  assisted  by
    Mr Halim's persuasive submissions.  However,  having  done  so  I  have
    concluded that there was no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

22.  The Immigration Judge did consider the expert evidence  and  made  more
    than one reference to it but he  was  entitled  to  set  that  evidence
    against the other credibility findings he  made.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant  had  travelled  through  several  safe  countries  and   had
    submitted a claim in one of those countries (Austria) without  allowing
    it to be concluded was a relevant factor for the Immigration  Judge  to
    take into account in judging credibility.  A child  conscript  who  was
    able so easily to escape from the Taliban's control and who was  unable
    to give any details of the methods they  used  in  terms  of  preparing
    suicide bombers, are also  relevant  factors.   The  Immigration  Judge
    demonstrated that he had regard to the appellant's  lack  of  education
    and  also  considered   his   learning   difficulties.    Indeed,   the
    respondent's representative before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  conceded
    that the appellant suffered  from  "learning  difficulties".   But  the
    Immigration Judge demonstrated that he took account of these factors in
    paragraphs 14 and 21 of his determination.  He took full account of  Mr
    Marsden's report and its  conclusions  as  he  also  demonstrated  (see
    paragraph 27 of his  determination).   It  was  not  incumbent  on  the
    Immigration Judge to set out fully each and every item of evidence that
    he accepted and each and every item of evidence that he  rejected.   He
    was entitled to look at the overall cogency of the appellant's case.

23.  Mr  Halim  also  pointed  out  that  it  is  necessary  to  assess  the
    hypothetical risk  of  persecution/humanitarian  protection  need/human
    rights grounds at the date of the hearing.  The burden  rested  on  the
    appellant but that was to be discharged to a  low  standard  of  proof,
    that of a reasonable degree of likelihood.  It is trite  law  that  the
    appellant had to establish that he had been pursued with malignancy and
    that there would be a risk on return to Afghanistan.

24.  The reference to the absence of removal directions in paragraph  20  of
    the determination is curious but it must  be  read  with  the  previous
    paragraph which states that in judging  whether  the  appellant  has  a
    right to be granted humanitarian protection the issue is decided at the
    "date hereof". Therefore, I am not satisfied  that  it  is  a  material
    error on the part of the Immigration Judge having regard to  the  whole
    decision that he has  reached.  In  particular,  in  paragraph  27  the
    Immigration  Judge  recognised  that  there  is  "some   indiscriminate
    violence in Afghanistan" and he accepted that  the  objective  evidence
    was broadly consistent with the appellant's account.  The  problem  for
    the appellant is  that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  not  believe  his
    account.  I am satisfied that  the  Immigration  Judge  did  take  into
    account the correct test, namely whether there was a real risk  to  the
    appellant if he were returned  to  Afghanistan  at  the  date  of  that
    hearing.  The fact that the appellant  was  not  at  risk  of  imminent
    removal was merely a background matter that the Immigration Judge  took
    into account and was not central to his decision.

25.  Finally, the Immigration Judge took into account Article 8 of the  ECHR
    but did not find any evidence had been produced to support a family  or
    private life in the UK such as to discharge the burden of showing  that
    the appellant qualified under either the Immigration Rules or under the
    ECHR on this basis.

Conclusion

26.  In conclusion, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  conclude  that
    the  appellant  had  not  met  the  requirements  for  the   forms   of
    international protection that he relied on and I find no material error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

There was no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and the decision to dismiss the appeal against the decision of  the
respondent to refuse the appellant's claims therefore stands.

The Immigration  Judge  made  an  anonymity  direction  and  that  direction
stands.

The Immigration Judge made no fee award as no fee was payable.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


