
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04080/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 July 2017                              |On 01 August 2017             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between
                                    [S U]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr. P. Turner of counsel, instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Ms K. Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL

1.   It is the Appellant's case that  he  is  a  national  of  Burma  and  a
    Rohinga Muslim, who was born on [ ] 1985. It is also his case  that  he
    first entered the United Kingdom from Bangladesh in September 2004  and
    applied for asylum on 19 February 2014.   The  Respondent  refused  his
    application on 23 February 2015. He appealed and his appeal first  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher on 3  August  2015,  when  the
    Appellant  gave  substantial  oral  evidence.  He  mentioned  attending
    demonstrations at the Burmese Embassy in support of the Rohinga and the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge adjourned the hearing part-heard in order for
    the Appellant to obtain further evidence about his attendance  at  such
    demonstrations.

2.   In order to demonstrate that the Appellant had been a  Rohinga  refugee
    in Bangladesh, the Appellant had submitted a Refugee Family Book, which
    had been issued to his father, Ali Ahammad, dated 16 February 1995, and
    bearing the MRC No.[ ]. The Appellant  was  listed  on  this  document.
    However, at the adjourned hearing on 28 September 2015, the  Respondent
    submitted a Refugee Family Book in the name of Ali Ahmed, which had the
    same MRC number but did not contain the Appellant's name.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher adjourned the hearing  for  a  second
    time in order for the  Appellant  to  respond  to  this  new  evidence.
    However, the Appellant did not appear at the hearing on 25 January 2016
    and the First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to dismiss his  appeal  in  a
    decision, promulgated on 10 March 2016.

4.   The Appellant appealed  against  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wilsher's
    decision and permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew, who found that she was satisfied  that  it  was  possible
    that the Appellant was not aware of the hearing that took place  on  25
    January 2016 and, therefore, the decision may be unfair.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

5.   It would appear from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wilsher
    that his previous directions had only been partially complied  with  by
    the Respondent as there was no copy of the Refugee Family Book for  Ali
    Ahmed or any copies of the grant of leave to his family on file and  no
    further interview had taken place. It appeared that these documents had
    been shown to First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher but  that  he  had  not
    been provided with copies of them. The Home Office  Presenting  Officer
    had copies of these in her file and was initially reluctant to  provide
    them to the Tribunal or the Appellant's counsel due to issues  of  Data
    Protection. But she  subsequently  accepted  that,  if  the  Respondent
    wished to rely on them, copies had to be provided to the Appellant  and
    to the Tribunal and so copies were made. She also said that a  decision
    would be taken by the case worker as to whether it was necessary to re-
    interview the Appellant and make a further decision on his application.



6.   I also heard oral  submissions  from  counsel  for  the  Appellant  and
    further submissions by the Home Office Presenting Officer  and  I  have
    referred to the content of both  submissions,  where  relevant,  below.



DECISION

7.   I looked at the documents and  correspondence  in  the  Tribunal  file,
    which related to the arrangements being made  for  the  hearing  on  25
    January 2016.

8.    I  have  noted  that  Time  Solicitors   in   Leytonstone   previously
    represented the Appellant and on 4 January 2016 they were  sent  notice
    that his adjourned appeal hearing would be heard on 27 June 2016.  They
    were then sent a second notice on 7 January  2016,  which  brought  the
    hearing  date  forward  to  25  January  2016.  Meanwhile,  it  is  the
    Appellant's case that Time Solicitors  closed  down  and  there  was  a
    letter of authority on the file, dated 9 January 2016, which  indicates
    that on that day he instructed his present solicitors. There is also  a
    letter from Bespoke Solicitors, dated 21 June 2016, to HMCTS at  Taylor
    House, which states that the notice, dated 4 January 2016,  was  passed
    to them. There was no mention of the letter sent on 7 January 2016.

9.   I have also noted that in a separate letter from Bespoke Solicitors  to
    the Home Office Presenting Officers Unit, dated 21 June 2016, reference
    is made to an earlier letter to the Unit, dated 20 January 2016, asking
    when they can expect disclosure of the documents directed by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wilsher on 28 September 2015. There is a copy  of  these
    directions on file,  which  indicated  that  the  Respondent  had  been
    directed to file and serve any  relevant  documents  from  Ali  Ahmed's
    asylum file, re-interview the Appellant and file and  serve  any  fresh
    decision at least 28 days prior to the adjourned  hearing.   Therefore,
    it would appear that on 20 January 2016,  Bespoke  Solicitors  and  the
    Appellant  were  waiting  for  the  Respondent  to  comply  with  these
    directions and had no idea that the adjourned hearing had  been  listed
    for 25 January 2016. It also raises the question of why this letter  to
    the Home Office  Presenting  Officers  Unit  was  not  brought  to  the
    attention of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher at that hearing.  If  it
    had been it would have indicated that the Appellant did not have notice
    of the hearing.

10.  There is also a fax from HM Courts & Tribunal Service on  the  Tribunal
    file, which indicates that on the day of the hearing the clerk  to  the
    court phoned Time Solicitors and left  a  voice  mail  and  it  is  not
    disputed that the second notice was posted to them by first class  post
    on 7 January 2016. However, Rule 28 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 states that:

     "If a party fails to attend a hearing the  Tribunal  may  proceed  with
    the hearing if the Tribunal-

    (a)  is satisfied that the party has been notified of  the  hearing  or
         that reasonable steps have been taken to notify the  party  of  the
         hearing; and
     (b) considers that it is in the interests of justice  to  proceed  with
    the hearing".

11.  The evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wilsher  was  sufficient
    to meet the requirements in Rule 28(a) and he confirmed, in paragraph 2
    of his decision, that he was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    served with notice of the  hearing.  However,  he  did  not  go  on  to
    consider whether it was in the interests of justice to proceed with the
    hearing.

12.  In particular,  he  did  not  take  into  account  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had attended previous hearings and engaged  with  the  appeal
    process. He also did not take into account the fact that, as  a  result
    of the directions made at the previous  hearing,  the  Appellant  would
    have been expecting disclosure of documents  and  a  further  interview
    before any adjourned hearing took place or that the  adjourned  hearing
    had originally been set down for 27 June 2016.
.
13.  Therefore, I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  comply
    with Rule 28(b).

14.  I also note that the first part of the head note in MM  (unfairness;  E
    & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC) states that "where there is  a  defect
    or impropriety of a procedural  nature  in  the  proceedings  at  first
    instance this may amount to a  material  error  of  law  requiring  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") to be set aside".

15.  As a consequence, I find that there was a procedural irregularity  that
    undermined the legality of  the  decision  reached  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and which amounted to an error of law.

DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.

(2)  The decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher is set aside.

(3)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Wilsher.


Nadine Finch


Signed                                  Date 27 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


