
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04847/2014
     AA/04848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|Stoke-on-Trent                    |On 10th December 2014             |
|On 10th November 2014             |                                  |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES


                                   Between

                               MRS YUMEI CHEN
                              MISS JOANNA CHEN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Lane instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants, who are Chinese nationals,  are  mother  and  daughter.
    The first Appellant was born on 4th May 1985 and the  second  Appellant
    was born in the United  Kingdom  on  27th  January  2014.   The  second
    Appellant is dependent upon her mother's appeal.  In the  remainder  of
    this determination I propose to refer to the first  Appellant  as  "the
    Appellant" unless the context requires otherwise.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history shows that she  made  a  claim  for
    asylum in Ireland  before  travelling  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  be
    reunited with her husband, Mr Jin Pin Cheng,  who  is  also  a  Chinese
    citizen.  It appears that Mr Cheng made  a  claim  for  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom but his claim was refused and he  has  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom without leave as a failed asylum seeker.

 3. On 4th July 2014 removal directions were given for the Appellants to be
    removed from the United Kingdom to Ireland  on  29th  July  2014.   The
    notice stated that the decision was not one against which there  was  a
    right of appeal.  On 7th April  2014  the  Respondent's  representative
    sent a letter to the Appellant  giving  the  reasons  for  the  removal
    decision.  The letter contained a third country certificate.   On  11th
    July 2014 the Respondent's representative signed a  further  notice  of
    immigration decision stating that the Appellant had a right  of  appeal
    but one which could only be exercised after she  had  left  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. On 30th June 2014 the  Appellants'  solicitors  sent  a  letter  before
    action to the Judicial Review Unit of the Home Office.   On  15th  July
    2014 the solicitors submitted Notices of Appeal together  with  Grounds
    of Appeal  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.   The  accompanying  letter
    requested the First-tier Tribunal to confirm jurisdiction in respect of
    the appeal.

 5. It appears that on 21st July 2014 the Respondent also made  a  decision
    certifying  that  the  Appellant's  human  rights  claim  was   clearly
    unfounded.  A copy of that letter is before me.

 6. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal V A Osborne  on
    31st  July  2014.   Both  parties  were  represented.   Judge   Osborne
    determined the issue of validity  and  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear an appeal.  The only  remedy  open
    to the Appellant was by way of judicial review.  It would  appear  that
    the letter dated 21st July 2014, to which I have  referred  above,  was
    not included in the bundle of  documents  before  Judge  Osborne  since
    there is no reference to it in the determination.  The judge  issued  a
    decision stating that there was no valid appeal.

 7. The Appellants' representatives applied for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal and permission was granted in the First-tier Tribunal by
    Designated Judge McCarthy on 8th September 2014.

 8.  The  application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  submitted  by  the
    Appellants' representatives but was five  days  out  of  time.   It  is
    apparent from the application form IAFT-4 that no reasons were given to
    explain why the application was made late and there was no  application
    for an extension of  time.   Nevertheless,  Designated  Judge  McCarthy
    addressed the issue of lateness at  paragraph  5  of  his  reasons  for
    decision  to  grant  permission.   The  judge  stated   that   although
    unexplained  lateness  would  usually  lead  to  a  decision  that  the
    application should not be  admitted,  in  this  case  the  interest  of
    justice required time to be extended as to do otherwise  would  prevent
    the Appellants from being able to  exercise  their  rights  of  appeal.
    With due respect, it seems to me that this  is  a  consideration  which
    would apply  to  every  out  of  time  application  which,  apart  from
    timeliness, had arguable merit.

 9. That is the background against which the matter came before me  in  the
    Upper Tribunal on 10th November 2014.  Representation was as  mentioned
    above.  I had before me all the documents which were before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In addition, I had two appeal bundles submitted by  the
    Appellants' representatives, a skeleton argument by Mr Lane and a  copy
    of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in The Queen on the  Application
    of AM (Somalia) and SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 114.

10. After hearing submissions  from  both  representatives  I  reserved  my
    decision which I now give.

11. Mr Lane adopted his skeleton argument dated 7th November 2014 which  he
    amplified in oral submissions.  After setting out the chronology, which
    I have attempted to summarise above, Mr Lane's main submission was that
    Judge Osborne erred in law and that the appeals should be  allowed  and
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard substantively on  human
    rights grounds.  Reliance was placed on the decision of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in AM (Somalia) which, Mr Lane submitted, is  closely  analogous
    to the present appeal.

12. Reference is made to a Rule 24 response submitted by  the  Respondent's
    representative on 17th September 2014.  This states that the writer  of
    the response did not have access to the  file.   However,  Home  Office
    electronic records make no mention of any human rights claim  that  had
    been made, and therefore it was not clear  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    erred in finding that he [sic] had no jurisdiction to entertain an  in-
    country right of appeal.

13. Mr Lane submitted that there was a right of appeal  which  was  validly
    exercised  and  brought  before  the  Respondent  issued  the  "clearly
    unfounded" certificate in respect of the Appellant's human rights claim
    on 21st July 2014.  Therefore, it  is  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Judge made a material error of law in holding that there was  no  valid
    appeal.  Mr Lane submitted  that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  and
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  substantive  consideration  as
    mentioned above.

14. For the Respondent, Miss Johnstone argued that there were two  separate
    claims.  A claim for asylum had been made initially and  then  on  30th
    June 2014 a human rights claim was made after the asylum claim had been
    certified by the Respondent on 7th April 2014.  Miss Johnstone  pointed
    out that human rights issues were not raised in the original claim.  Mr
    Cheng, the father/husband of the Appellants, is a failed asylum  seeker
    with no right to be in the United Kingdom.  Therefore, there  could  be
    no prospect of success on human rights grounds.

15. Given that the asylum claim has been certified as manifestly unfounded,
    and the family member whom the Appellant and  her  child  came  to  the
    United Kingdom to join is himself a failed asylum seeker without status
    in the United Kingdom, it is difficult to see  how  there  can  be  any
    arguable merit in a human rights appeal.  For those  reasons  I  uphold
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision and dismiss this appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 10th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates

