
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04992/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Birmingham ET               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, counsel instructed by Birnberg  Peirce  &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Graham, promulgated on  30
    July 2015, in which she dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse to grant him asylum.

Background


 2. The appellant left Sri Lanka in early 2013 and arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom, via India and Malaysia, with the assistance of an  agent.  The
    basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that he is a Sri Lankan  Tamil
    who was forced to work for the LTTE from 2004 and who was  shot  during
    the war in the course of his duties for the movement.  After  the  war,
    the  appellant  was  identified  as  an  LTTE  member   and   detained,
    interrogated and tortured. After 23 months detention, the appellant was
    released with reporting restrictions.  Approximately  18  months  after
    his release, the appellant was further detained when he went to report.
    He was accused of knowing where weapons were kept, detained for 88 days
    and mistreated. The appellant was  released  after  his  uncle  paid  a
    substantial bribe. He was informed by CID officers  that  it  would  be
    recorded that he escaped. The appellant immediately left Sri Lanka.

 3. The Secretary of State rejected the appellant's claimed  arrests  owing
    to  what  were  said  to  be  inconsistencies  between  his   accounts.
    Furthermore, it was not accepted that a forced conscript  to  the  LTTE
    would be of any interest to the Sri Lankan authorities. The appellant's
    claim that he had taken part in a television programme was not accepted
    to result in any additional adverse interest in him. The respondent was
    of the view that the scarring on the appellant's  body  was  not  as  a
    result of being tortured.

 4. During the course of the hearing before the FTTJ,  the  appellant  gave
    evidence regarding his attendance at a number of demonstrations in  the
    United Kingdom as well as his membership of the  British  Tamil  Forum.
    Article 8 was not argued on the appellant's behalf.  The FTTJ  accepted
    the appellant's claim as credible including that he would not have been
    regarded as an ordinary LTTE soldier. She dismissed the appeal  on  the
    basis that the appellant did not fall within the categories of  persons
    at risk of persecution as identified in MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    829 and the Country Guidance case of GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

Error of law


 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that
    it was arguable that the FTTJ failed to properly consider the  risk  to
    the appellant on return in line with GJ in that she failed to give  any
    or adequate reasons as to why she reached those conclusions  given  the
    evidence before her of the appellant's work with  the  LTTE's  military
    intelligence unit; that he was detained after the end of the civil war;
    that he had spoken on a Tamil TV programme;  attended  diaspora  events
    and  was  a  member  of  the  British  Tamils   Forum,   a   proscribed
    organisation.

 6. Secondly, it was argued that the FTTJ had failed to  properly  consider
    the appellant's claim for humanitarian protection.

 7. Thirdly, there was said to be a failure to properly consider Article  3
    in relation to  the  appellant's  mental  health  with  regard  to  the
    findings of GJ as to mental health services available in Sri Lanka.

 8. FTTJ PJG White granted permission on the basis that the first and third
    grounds  disclosed  an  arguable  error  of  law.  Permission  was  not
    expressly refused in relation to the second ground.

 9. The Secretary of State's response of 8 September 2015 robustly defended
    the FTTJ's decision, stating that she "provided a plethora  of  reasons
    why the appellant is  not  at  risk."  The  grounds  were  said  to  be
    unmeritorious and to merely disagree with the adverse  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

The hearing


10. Mr Lewis argued that the FTTJ  found  the  appellant  credible  on  all
    issues.  Those  issues  included  his  first  and  second  periods   of
    detention; that the appellant was accused of having  knowledge  of  the
    existence of arms; that no weapons  were  found  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant's  attempt  to  assist  the  authorities  and  that  he  was,
    consequently, returned to detention and subject to further torture. The
    FTTJ accepted that the Sri Lankan authorities did not believe that  the
    appellant did not know where weapons were hidden. The appellant refused
    to assist the authorities  any  further.  Following  his  release  from
    prison by bribery, the authorities sought the appellant at  his  family
    home. The FTTJ  accepted  all  this  as  well  as  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's release would be recorded as an escape.

11. Mr Lewis stressed that the appellant had  applied  for  asylum  on  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom and that he had continued  his  pro-Tamil
    activities in this country. Again, this had all been  accepted  by  the
    FTTJ. Mr Lewis argued that the reasons provided by the FTTJ at [48] for
    concluding that the appellant would not be  at  risk  were  inadequate.
    Furthermore, the FTTJ failed to properly apply GJ  to  the  appellant's
    case. He made no submissions  in  relation  to  the  second  and  third
    grounds of the permission application.

12. Mr Diwnycz made very brief  submissions.  He  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    response. He argued that  the  decision  and  reasons  was  a  detailed
    document as to what happened during the hearing. He referred me to [48]
    of the decision in its entirety and asked me to note that the FTTJ  had
    mentioned the case of MP. In short, the FTTJ was not satisfied that the
    appellant had a significant role in post conflict Tamil separatism.  Mr
    Diwyncz agreed with Mr Lewis that it was not possible for  evidence  to
    be available as to whose names were on a secret stop list,  however  he
    asked me to accept the FTTJ's  conclusion  that  the  appellant's  name
    would not be on it.

13. In reply, Mr Lewis emphasised that the Sri Lankan authorities  believed
    that the appellant was withholding information and  as  a  result,  the
    appellant is clearly in a category of risk. Furthermore, the  appellant
    had partaken in significant activities in the United Kingdom  including
    participating in a television programme and  attending  demonstrations.
    The FTTJ had been wrong to conclude that facial  recognition  equipment
    was not available, given what was said in GJ on this topic. It remained
    the case that the appellant was suspected of involvement  in  the  LTTE
    and continuing to support the movement via his activities in the United
    Kingdom. The first appellant in GJ succeeded on a lesser  profile  than
    that of the appellant. He argued that  the  FTTJ  materially  erred  in
    discounting the appellant's activities.



Decision on Error of Law

14. I concluded that the FTTJ materially erred in law in finding  that  the
    appellant was not at continued risk  in  Sri  Lanka  for  the  specific
    reasons given at [48] of the decision and  reasons,  which  include  an
    absence of evidence of an arrest warrant; or that he was on a stop list
    and that face recognition technology is not  used  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

15. The evidence before me, including in GJ,  is  that  an  arrest  warrant
    would not be provided to the person sought or their family.  It follows
    that if the appellant had been able to produce an  arrest  warrant,  it
    was unlikely to be a reliable document. The absence of a document  does
    not amount to an adequate reason for concluding that the  appellant  is
    not at risk.

16. The same point made above can be made about the stop  list.   The  FTTJ
    said there "was no evidence to show that he is on a "stop" list."  This
    reasoning is inadequate because the list is unpublished and it  is  not
    reasonably likely that an asylum applicant would have access to such  a
    document.

17. The FTTJ accepted at [45] that  the  appellant  "would  not  have  been
    regarded as an ordinary LTTE member" and that he could "accept that the
    appellant's affiliation with military intelligence could explain why he
    was detained a second time." The appellant's second period of detention
    occurred between November 2012 and January  2013,  significantly  after
    the end of the civil war. During  that  detention,  the  appellant  was
    asked about the whereabouts of LTTE weapons. The said accepted facts go
    some way to indicating that the appellant would be someone of continued
    adverse interest.

18. The appellant continued his pro-Tamil activities in the United Kingdom.
    The FTTJ did not accept that the appellant's appearance on a television
    programme and attendance at a number of demonstrations would "not  have
    brought the appellant to the adverse attention of  the  authorities  in
    Sri Lanka who do not  have  facial  recognition  equipment."  The  FTTJ
    referred to no evidence in relation to his finding that the Sri  Lankan
    authorities did not have the said equipment, whereas  in  GJ  at  [336]
    there was an explicit finding that former Tamil areas and the  diaspora
    are "heavily penetrated by security forces", photographs were taken  of
    public  demonstrations  and  the  authorities  "may   be   using   face
    recognition  technology."  There  was  reference  to  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities sponsoring a face recognition  technology  project  at  the
    University of Colombo.

19. In conclusion the FTTJ's reasons were inadequate and failed to  explain
    why the appellant did not fall with the category of risk  at  356(7)(a)
    of GJ.

20. I considered that I could proceed immediately to remake  the  decision,
    preserving the previous judge's credibility findings in their entirety.
    Both representatives were in agreement with this course of action.  The
    appeal proceeded by way of further brief submissions only.

21. Mr Diwnycz wished to make only one point; that is, that  there  was  no
    evidence to show that the Sri Lankan authorities possess and  use  face
    recognition technology. He accepted that they may be  investing  in  it
    but argued that at the time of GJ they did not have it.

22. Mr Lewis argued that the Sri Lankan authorities may be using  the  said
    technology and while it could not be said that they were using it owing
    to a lack of transparency, it was reasonably likely they were. Finally,
    he relied on paragraph 339K of  the  Immigration  Rules,  in  that  the
    appellant had been detained and ill-treated in the past and  there  was
    good reason to believe he would continue to be at risk.  Detention  for
    the purpose of interrogation brought with it the risk  of  torture  and
    sexual abuse, as found at paragraph [168] of GJ. He urged me  to  allow
    the appeal.

23. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Consideration and findings

24. In assessing the appellant's claim, I have applied the  lower  standard
    of proof. I have also born in mind the relevant case law including  the
    very detailed assessment of country conditions in GJ  as  well  as  the
    conclusions of the Court of Appeal in MP.

25. Having considered all the evidence before me,  including  the  positive
    findings of fact of FTTJ Graham, I conclude  that  the  appellant  fits
    with a category of person at risk  of  persecution  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka. The specific category is in headnote 7(a) of  GJ,  that  is  the
    appellant is an individual who is perceived  to  be  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka owing  to  the  perception  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities that he has a significant role in relation to post-conflict
    Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal  of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka. My reasons are as follows.

26. The appellant was detained on the second occasion long after the end of
    the civil war. Put simply, he was accused of  knowing  where  the  arms
    were. The information provided by the appellant did  not  lead  to  the
    discovery of any weapons.  His account, which was fully accepted by the
    FTTJ, was  that  the  authorities  believed  that  he  was  withholding
    information from them. This along with the fact that he  was  found  by
    the FTTJ not to be an ordinary LTTE member  and  his  affiliation  with
    LTTE military intelligence causes me to conclude,  that  the  appellant
    was perceived to have a significant role in the renewal of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka.

27. The appellant was told, when released by  bribery,  that  he  would  be
    identified as an escapee. I note from [275] of GJ that the  seriousness
    of any charges against an individual is not determinative of whether  a
    bribe can be paid  to  obtain  release.  I  consider  it  a  reasonable
    inference that an arrest warrant would have been  issued  or  that  his
    name was added to a computerised list in order to identify  him  should
    he return to Sri Lanka.

28. The appellant was detained and tortured in Sri  Lanka  as  recently  as
    2013.  Paragraph 339K of the Rules states, to paraphrase, that the fact
    that a person has already been  persecuted  is  to  be  regarded  as  a
    serious indication of a well-founded fear of persecution "unless  there
    are good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will
    not be repeated." I heard no submissions on behalf of the respondent as
    to there being any good reasons to conclude that the appellant  was  no
    longer at risk of harm.

29.  I  find  that  the  appellant's  diaspora  activities  would  not,  by
    themselves, result in a risk of persecution in Sri  Lanka.  I  consider
    that these activities serve to heighten the risk, which already  exists
    on account of the authorities' perception that  he  has  a  significant
    role in relation to the renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka. It  is
    reasonably likely that the Sri Lankan authorities are able to  identify
    participants in diaspora activities. The findings in GJ indicated  that
    photographs are taken at events and furthermore the appellant took part
    in a televised event. Given that the appellant's photograph  and  other
    details were taken by the Sri Lankan authorities when he  was  detained
    on both occasions, I consider that it  is  reasonably  likely  that  he
    would be  identified  from  either  the  television  programme  or  via
    photographs taken at demonstrations. As  indicated  above,  I  consider
    there to be a real possibility that the appellant's  details  would  be
    contained on a stop list  and  therefore  he  would  be  identified  on
    returning to Sri Lanka. From being identified, the appellant is  likely
    to be detained for interrogation, which entails a risk of torture.

30. The appellant has demonstrated that  he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason, that he will  be  perceived  as  a
    political opponent of the Sri Lankan authorities.

31. An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. I consider it  appropriate
    for  anonymity  to  be  continued  and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings."

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, except  that  the
    credibility findings are preserved.

    I remake the decision by allowing the appeal (on asylum grounds).


Signed      Date: 7 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal, I have considered making a fee award and  have
decided to make an award of the full fee if such was paid.


Signed      Date: 7 February 2016

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
