

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04570/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th  March 2016                   |On 12th April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                    F.N.
                                    K.A.

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:     Mr P. Draycott of counsel, instructed by Ison
Harrison, solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The first appellant is the mother of the  second  appellant,  who  was
      born on [ ] 2006 and so who was 8 years old at the date of the hearing
      before the First-tier Tribunal. Both are citizens  of  Pakistan.   The
      appellants have been granted permission to appeal against the decision
      of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Mulvenna  who  dismissed  their  appeal
      against the refusal of their asylum and human rights claim. The  claim
      of the second appellant is entirely dependant upon that of the  first,
      so that it is convenient, generally, to refer to the  first  appellant
      as "the appellant".  In granting permission to appeal, the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge said:


           "The grounds argue, inter alia, the judge erred in law: by using
           s.8 of the 2004 Act as his starting point for  credibility;  the
           judge  acted  unfairly  in  attaching  weight  to  a  2005  visa
           application without putting his concerns to  the  appellant;  he
           similarly erred in law in relation to the evidence of [SA];  the
           judge  partly  based  his  credibility  assessment  of  [SA]  on
           demeanour; the judge erred in law by making findings on  matters
           not raised by the respondent in the  RFRL and  not  put  to  the
           appellant or witnesses; the judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
           substance  of  the  supportive  expert   country   report;   the
           tribunal's findings at 60-62 were internally  inconsistent  with
           its findings at 29-35."


   2. The nature of the appellant's claim was summarised by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge as follows:


           "The first appellant claims that, on 31 July [2005], she married
           her husband [JAC] ("the first  appellant's  husband"),  who  was
           born on [ ] 1976. She claims that  their  marriage  was  a  love
           marriage which was opposed by her family because her husband was
           of a lower caste  and  arrangements  were  being  made  for  the
           marriage of the first appellant to a distant relative who was 20
           years older than her.


           Following the marriage, the first appellant claims that she  and
           her husband were subjected to threats by two of her brothers who
           actually caused them physical harm. The incidents in which  harm
           was caused occurred on 10 August 2005 and 12 June 2012 when  the
           first  appellant  was  attacked  and  beaten;  and,  whilst  the
           appellants were  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  visitors,  on  18
           February and 18 April 2012, when the first appellant husband was
           attacked.


The first appellant claimed asylum on 28 July 2014 claiming that she feared
persecution on return to Pakistan as a member of a particular social group.
The second appellant was joined in the claim as the first appellant's
dependent child."


   3. The chronology of events in the appellant's bundle suggests  that  the
      dates given for some of those events may not be absolutely correct but
      nothing material  turns  on  that  should  any  of  those  dates  been
      incorrectly stated.  The judge then summarised the respondent's case:


           "Essentially, the respondent found that  the  first  appellant's
           account lacked credibility and plausibility; but, in any  event,
           considered  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  in
           Pakistan for the appellants; and that it was  open  to  them  to
           relocate to other areas in Pakistan."

   4. Before undertaking her assessment of credibility, the judge set out  a
      brief discussion of the country evidence the parties  had  put  before
      her, which was broadly supportive of  the  appellant's  case,  and  an
      account of the relevant immigration history. The  appellant's  husband
      had made unsuccessful applications for entry  clearance  as  a  family
      visitor in 2004 and in 2005. Of these, the judge observed that:


           "The 2005 application (made on 19 July)  was  accompanied  by  a
           passport valid from 12 May 2004 to 11 May 2009 in  the  name  of
           [JA] date of birth 1976. These details do not represent the full
           details of the first appellant's husband as the  name  "[C]"  is
           missing as  are  the  day  and  month  of  his  date  of  birth.
           Additionally, the passport indicated that the holder was married
           to (K.F.K), born on 2 February 1984. The passport also contained
           an address and telephone number which did  not  correspond  with
           the first appellant's husband's subsequent passport."

   5. In 2008 the appellant, together with her husband and  child,  appealed
      against refusal of a subsequent application  for  entry  clearance  as
      family visitors. That appeal was allowed by  a  judge  who  considered
      that the sponsor, who  is  the  appellant's  brother  in  law,  was  a
      "credible and responsible  person"  and  so  the  judge  accepted  his
      evidence that the purpose of the visit was for the appellant to attend
      his wedding, postponed while the  appeal  took  its  course.  However,
      Judge Muvenna noted that:


           "According to the first appellant's current evidence as  to  her
           present circumstances, in a statement that was prepared with the
           sponsor's assistance, she says that the sponsor "has 2  children
           and a wife who are  separated  since  12  years".  There  is  no
           mention  of  a  subsequent  spouse  in  or  around   2009.   The
           arrangement might have foundered but,  equally,  it  might  have
           been contrived to aid the appeal."


   6. Next, the judge recorded that, having succeeded in  that  appeal,  the
      appellant came to the United Kingdom on 22 October  2009,  accompanied
      by her husband and child, returning to Pakistan on 24 March 2010.  The
      judge found the timing and duration of that visit "surprising" because
      the appellant's husband said he operated a poultry business in respect
      of which, according  to  evidence  given  at  the  visit  visa  appeal
      hearing, the peak selling period was "February to May, just before the
      monsoon broke". That judge, who allowed the appeal, had been told that
      although a friend would look after the business in the absence of  the
      first appellant's husband, the visit  could  not  extend  beyond  8-10
      weeks because of the friend's family and business responsibilities. As
      we have seen, in the event, the visit lasted just over 5  months.  The
      judge noted that the explanation offered, which was that  her  husband
      needed  to  remain  to  assist  his  brother  to  resolve  matrimonial
      difficulties that had arisen was one that was rejected  by  the  judge
      who dismissed the appeal  in  September  2012  against  refusal  of  a
      further visit visa application. In doing so that judge had said:


           "It may well be that the sponsor had some  marital  difficulties
           but given that Immigration Judge Thorndyke (who had allowed  the
           earlier appeal) had been specifically told that [Mr C] could not
           stay longer than eight to ten  weeks  because  of  his  business
           commitments, I do not accept that [Mr C] then  stayed  for  five
           months to do something that could have  been  relatively  easily
           done from Pakistan  or  with  the  assistance  of  other  family
           members."


      Taken together with the tension detected  by  the  judge  between  the
      apparently inconsistent assertions that the purpose of the visit was a
      planned marriage, that had been delayed while an appeal  was  pursued,
      and the  reference  to  an  existing  wife  and  children,  the  judge
      concluded that credibility had been damaged.


   7. A subsequent application for visit visas were  refused  on  the  basis
      that there had been a dishonest failure to  disclose  material  facts,
      that being a failure to mention  the  appellant's  husband's  passport
      relied upon in the 2005 application, that being the one referring to a
      wife  other  than  the  appellant.  An  appeal  against  refusal   was
      determined by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson in August  2012.  He
      dismissed the appeal of the appellant's husband,  finding  as  a  fact
      that he had  dishonestly  failed  to  disclose  details  of  the  2005
      refusal, but he allowed the appeals of the  appellant  and  her  child
      because he  was  satisfied  that  her  husband's  dishonesty  had  not
      infected her own application.

   8. Against that background, the judge went on  to  set  out  her  adverse
      credibility findings. She gave a number or reasons for her conclusion,
      at paragraph 57 of her decision, that:


        "I do not believe that there is any truth whatsoever in any part of
        the account. In particular, I am not satisfied on the basis of  the
        evidence before me that the applicants are at risk  of  persecutory
        action because of the first appellant's family seeking  to  restore
        their honour..."

   9. While the reasons given for arriving at that conclusion, considered in
      isolation, may be thought to be sound, perhaps compelling, the problem
      is that to be legally sustainable such  findings  cannot  be  made  in
      isolation but must be arrived  at  in  the  context  of  the  evidence
      considered as a whole. Having made clear that the  judge  rejected  as
      untrue the appellant's account of the risk  on  return  asserted,  the
      judge then said, at paragraph 58 of her decision:


           "I have been presented with an expert's  report.  I  accept  the
           credentials of the  author,  Mrs  Uzma  Moeen,  and  her  expert
           opinions on the matters which are at the heart of this appeal. I
           observe, however, that Mrs Moeen indicates that:


                 "my assessment ... stands independent of truth  or  falsity
                 ... (which I am fully aware  is  the  domain  of  the  Home
                 Office or the Court to assess and judge)."


           I have, for the reasons given above,  found  that  there  is  no
           merit in the  appeal.  The  expert  report  is,  therefore,  not
           material to the case.  I  give  it  no  weight  in  reaching  my
           conclusions."


  10.  This was  a  lengthy  and  detailed  report,  running  to  40  pages,
      commissioned specifically for  this  appeal.  It  addressed  the  very
      issues in respect of which the appellant's evidence  was  rejected  as
      untrue yet, as the judge made  clear,  she  gave  it  "no  weight"  in
      reaching credibility findings that were  comprehensively  adverse.  As
      the judge did not consider that expert evidence we  simply  cannot  be
      sure that she would have reached  the  same  conclusion  had  she  not
      excluded it from her consideration. This was not a  report  predicated
      upon an unquestioning acceptance  of  the  truth  of  the  appellant's
      account. At para 10 of the report, Mrs Moeen said:

           "I say at the  outset  that  I  have  read  carefully  the  Home
           Office's decision in this case and I am  aware  of  the  adverse
           credibility findings. My findings below are made being conscious
           of those."

      There followed a detailed review of country  evidence  relevant  to  a
      consideration of the appellant's claim and the assessment of the judge
      should have been informed by that but, of course, it was not.

  11. The consequence of the approach taken to  this  potentially  important
      evidence, relied upon by the appellant, is that the judge has left out
      of account a material consideration. In so doing  the  judge  made  an
      error of law that can only be regarded as material to the  outcome  of
      the appeal. Mr Draycott pursues other challenges in addition to  this.
      There is no discussion to be found in the decision of the judge of the
      evidence of one of the witnesses who gave oral evidence. There are  no
      findings of fact in respect of some matters that were in issue between
      the parties.  The judge has taken points against  the  appellant  that
      were not put to the witnesses not raised in submissions.  However,  in
      view of the error relating to the expert evidence, it is not necessary
      to examine those other grounds further because for that reason  alone,
      the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  cannot  stand.  Therefore,  the
      decision of the judge will be set aside and the appeal remitted to  be
      determined afresh by a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


      Summary of Decision


  12. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna made an error of  law  material  to
      the outcome of the appeal.


  13. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulvenna is set aside in its
      entirety.


  14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.



                               Signed              [pic]
                               Date:    21 March 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

