
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04499/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th September 2016                         |On 14th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                 Ayodeji [A]
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant born on 9th August 1989 is a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Khan of  Counsel.   The
    Respondent was represented by Mr Harrison, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum and that was  refused  by
    the Respondent on 1st March 2015.   The  Appellant  had  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by Immigration Judge Smith sitting in
    the First-tier Tribunal in May  2015.   The  judge  had  dismissed  the
    Appellant's claim on all grounds.  Application for permission to appeal
    was made and permission to appeal was refused in the first instance  on
    17th July 2015.  Application was renewed and permission was granted  by
    the Upper-tier Tribunal on 10th September 2015.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Davey sat on this case on 21st March 2016 in order
    to decide whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had made an  error  of
    law.  The judge concluded that an error had been made and the  original
    Tribunal's decision could not stand and the matter  would  have  to  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal and he reserved it to himself.  A transfer
    order dated 7th July 2016 was made transferring the appeal to be  heard
    by a differently constituted Tribunal and the matter comes before me as
    a result of such transfer order.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. The Appellant was present and had no need for an interpreter.

 5. The documents before me in this case consist of the Respondent's bundle
    which contains:

      a) Immigration history.

      b) Those documents listed at folios A to I on the index sheet.

 6. The Appellant's documents consist of:

      c) Original bundle containing those documents at pages 1 to 120 on the
         index sheet.

      d) First supplementary bundle containing  those  documents  listed  at
         pages 1 to 21 on the index sheet.

      e) Second supplementary bundle containing those  documents  listed  at
         folios 1 to 66 on the index sheet to the bundle.

 7. We briefly discussed the issues in this  case.   The  first  issue  was
    whether or not the Appellant was gay as claimed.  The second issue  was
    whether there was a real risk of persecution on his return  to  Nigeria
    if he was found to be gay.  Whilst Mr Harrison relied upon the  refusal
    letter  it  was  accepted  having  carefully  considered  the  original
    determination and indeed the error of law decision  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Davey that the first issue was not necessarily a difficult one to
    make.

The Proceedings - Evidence

 8. The Appellant was called to give evidence.  He identified himself.   He
    identified his latest witness statement dated 31st August  2016  within
    the second  supplementary  bundle.   He  confirmed  that  that  witness
    statement was true and correct.

 9. In cross-examination he said that he  had  first  come  to  the  UK  in
    January 2008.  When he was living in Nigeria he had not lived openly as
    a gay man.  He said that he and his community had been  taught  not  to
    like gay people and he was afraid if it was known that he  was  gay  he
    would be beaten to death.  He was a regular  church  goer  and  at  the
    churches he attended it was said that gay people were  different,  were
    not part of God's plan for humanity and were  treated  as  people  with
    afflictions or infirmities.  He was 18 in 2008 when  he  left  Nigeria.
    He said that he had to come to terms with what he  was  first  when  he
    arrived in the UK and had not been  openly  gay  on  arrival.   He  had
    ventured into gay bars and restaurants in  the  Canal  Street  area  of
    Manchester as time had gone on and had a number of friends that he  had
    met in that community.  He said he had an original group of friends who
    were all straight and when he had told them of his sexuality  some  had
    remained as friends but others had not.  He said that he had  not  been
    back to Nigeria.  He said he had not had any lasting gay  relationships
    in the UK but had had sexual relationships with men.  He said  that  he
    was naturally a hesitant person and had not originally mentioned  about
    his sexuality but had in time done so and found now that it was  easier
    as time went on to tell people about his sexuality.  He  said  that  he
    was by nature generally a private or discreet person.

10. He said that he had mentioned it to family in Nigeria in particular his
    elder brother and uncle.  The elder brother he said was now head of the
    household following the death of his father.  His brother and uncle had
    been angry with the disclosure.  They looked to blame many  people  and
    circumstances for the Appellant's sexuality including  themselves,  the
    people that he met or society in the UK.  They had  not  mentioned  the
    matter to his younger sister.  His elder brother was  an  environmental
    manager and toxicologist employed by  a  firm  and  the  government  in
    Nigeria.  He accepted that he would be hiding  his  sexuality  to  keep
    away from persecution if he returned to Nigeria.  He said  he  did  not
    want to face the risk or the gamble of how society would treat  him  in
    that country.

11. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that  I  would  allow  the
    appeal but would provide my decision with reasons.

The Law

Asylum

12. Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules states that the  applicant  will
    be granted asylum if the  provisions  of  that  paragraph  apply.   The
    burden of proof rests on an Appellant  to  satisfy  me  that  he  falls
    within the definition of a refugee in Regulation 2 of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  In essence an Appellant will have to show there are  substantial
    grounds  for  believing  the  Appellant  is  outside  his  country   of
    nationality or if applicable his country of former  habitual  residence
    by  reason  of  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason, and is unable or unwilling owing  to  such  fear  to
    avail himself of the protection of that country.



Humanitarian Protection

13. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states that  an  applicant  who
    does not qualify as a refugee will be granted  humanitarian  protection
    if the provisions of that paragraph apply.  The burden of  proof  rests
    on an Appellant to satisfy me he is entitled to humanitarian protection
    under paragraph 339 of the Immigration Rules.  In essence an  Appellant
    will have to show there are substantial grounds for believing  that  if
    returned he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm and he  is
    unable or owing  to  such  risk  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of the country of return.

The ECHR

14. The burden of proof rests on an  Appellant  to  satisfy  me  there  are
    substantial grounds for believing that as a result of the  Respondent's
    decision he will be exposed to a real risk of  torture  or  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment or punishment contrary to Article 3.

Decision and Reasons

15.  The  Appellant's  case  was  heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal   by
    Immigration Judge Smith an experienced judge.  He  had  considered  the
    Appellant's evidence and for clear and  well-considered  reasons  found
    the Appellant was gay and accepted the credibility of  the  Appellant's
    account.  In like manner when the  error  of  law  decision  was  being
    considered by Judge Davey that aspect of Judge Smith's decision was not
    one that was considered either unsafe or erroneous.   I  have  had  the
    benefit of considering the documentary evidence  as  listed  above  and
    also the oral evidence  presented  by  the  Appellant  who  was  cross-
    examined.  I entirely agree with the decision of Judge Smith  that  the
    Appellant presented as a credible witness, not prone to exaggeration or
    stereotypical comments and I accept his account that he is gay.

16. The reason why Judge Smith dismissed his case was that he had taken the
    view that the Appellant would and could be discreet about his sexuality
    if returned to Nigeria as he had been discreet about it in the  UK.   I
    have carefully considered that  matter.   Firstly  I  accept  that  the
    Appellant as an individual is a person who is private and discreet  and
    would neither be flamboyant or vociferous about any aspect of his life.
     To that extent he is no different  to  many  individuals.   I  further
    accept that when he  first  arrived  in  the  UK  he  was  particularly
    discreet  regarding  his  sexuality  because  he  had  many  years   of
    indoctrination from his home that it was wrong for him to be  gay.   It
    is clear that it took the Appellant some time to come to terms with his
    sexuality but as time has moved on in the UK he  has  firstly  come  to
    terms with that matter and has been able to be somewhat more  open  and
    expressive about his life.  He has referred the matter to his family in
    Nigeria.  I accept his evidence as to the manner  in  which  they  have
    taken that information namely that they are angry and seeking  to  find
    blame from a number of sources including themselves.  They are unlikely
    to deliberately make reference to the  matter  outside  of  the  family
    because they would feel that such  knowledge  would  reflect  badly  on
    themselves.  It does not however guarantee that  such  knowledge  would
    not inadvertently be communicated to others or  found  out  from  those
    family members in Nigeria who know  about  the  Appellant's  sexuality.
    That is a  particular  risk  to  the  Appellant.   However  I  am  also
    satisfied that the Appellant whilst exercising some  level  of  privacy
    and discretion as he would naturally do in regard to other  aspects  of
    his life would nevertheless seek to be somewhat open  and  express  his
    sexuality when appropriate and meet others openly as he has done in the
    UK.  However the Appellant has made it clear that he would be prevented
    from living a normal life such as he currently leads in the UK  because
    of his fear of retribution from Nigerian society.

17. I have carefully considered the country material regarding  Nigeria  in
    this respect and that provides an insight into the position in Nigeria.
     The Home Office's own country guidance notes  that  the  existence  of
    criminal laws such  as  those  which  specifically  target  homosexuals
    supports the finding that those persons must be regarded as  forming  a
    particular social group.   It  noted  that  same-sex  sexual  relations
    between men are criminalised in federal law in twelve  northern  states
    and that the Same-Sex Marriage Prohibition Act 2013 prohibits  same-sex
    marriage, the public show of same-sex  amorous  relationships  and  the
    registration and operation of support  groups.   Further  at  paragraph
    1.3.5 it is noted that when assessing an application for refugee status
    the Competent Authorities cannot reasonably expect in  order  to  avoid
    the risk of persecution the applicant for asylum to conceal his  sexual
    orientation in his country of origin or  to  exercise  reserve  in  the
    expression of his sexual orientation.   That  is  consistent  with  the
    ruling in HJ (Iran).  The Same-Sex Marriage Prohibition  Act  2013  was
    enacted as recently as January 2014.  Further the report  notices  that
    Nigeria is  a  religious  and  culturally  conservative  country  where
    homophobic attitudes are widely held and a  survey  conducted  in  2013
    noted that 98% of Nigerians stated they believed  homosexuality  should
    not be accepted by society.  It further  notes  that  such  individuals
    have experienced loss of accommodation, jobs and denial  of  access  to
    health services.  It is said that because of societal attitudes and the
    threat from the state with the legislation internal relocation is not a
    viable option.

18. It is necessary to look at cases individually.  I accept the  Appellant
    is gay and I further  accept  that  in  his  time  in  the  UK  he  has
    increasingly become more open about his sexuality and the life that  he
    has led.  I find that if returned to Nigeria additional to a  potential
    risk of information  deliberately  or  inadvertently  coming  from  his
    family the Appellant would be at risk of persecution if he led the life
    he leads in the  UK  in  the  same  manner.   The  Appellant  would  by
    necessity suppress and alter the manner in which he conducted his  life
    but that would be largely out  of  fear  of  retribution  from  society
    generally or  specifically  from  the  authorities  who  have  recently
    enacted legislation that would open the Appellant to  the  prospect  of
    arrest and prosecution.   There  is  not  in  my  view  an  option  for
    relocation and indeed the area of the country where  the  Appellant  is
    from presents a slightly less  of  a  risk  than  other  parts  of  the
    country.

19. When applying the country material, the Home Office  guidance  and  the
    principles established in the case of HJ (Iran) I  find  the  Appellant
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  namely
    being a member of a  particular  social  group  as  a  gay  person  and
    therefore his asylum claim succeeds.

Notice of Decision

20. I allow this appeal on asylum grounds.

21. Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date 14th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable


Signed   Date 14th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

