
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04238/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 27 March 2015                     |On 28 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


                                   Between

                               MELUSI NDIMANDE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, instructed by Peter G Farrell
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mathews, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal concerns a fairness challenge to a finding  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal panel (comprising Judges J C Grant-Hutchison and A Green)
    that the appellant, a national of Zimbabwe, was  not  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with his wife, Ms Ncube.

 2. The background is that the appellant had appealed a  decision  dated  9
    June 2014 to remove him on the  basis  of  rejection  of  his  refugee,
    humanitarian  and  Article  8  grounds.   The  Tribunal  concluded  the
    appellant had no Convention reason for his fear and in any event  there
    was no reasonable likelihood of his persecution  on  return.   It  also
    found there was no real risk of serious  harm  under  the  humanitarian
    protection  provisions.   Likewise  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
    grounds relied on under Articles  2  and  3  were  not  made  out.  The
    residual appeal on Article 8 grounds with reference to the  appellant's
    private and family life was  also  unsuccessful.   The  sole  challenge
    relates to the family life element as was made clear in the grounds  of
    application and by Mr Winter at the hearing.

 3. Specifically the following assertions are made in the grounds:

      a) The appellant and his wife were not  asked  questions  regarding  a
         letter of support from the Social Care  Services  of  Glasgow  City
         Council  dated  16  September  2014  that  had  referred   to   the
         appellant's relationship with his ex-wife.  This should  have  been
         brought to the attention of the appellant  or  his  representative.
         Had that been done an adjournment may well have been requested  for
         clarification.  The same letter in any event referred to  Ms  Ncube
         as the appellant's wife.

      b) The concerns by the Tribunal over the content of letters from  four
         named individuals had not been put to the  appellant  and  fairness
         required that they should have been.

      c) The Tribunal had "totally" overlooked material evidence  comprising
         a letter from a fifth individual in the Home  Office  bundle  which
         confirmed the couple were  married  and  were  "dedicated  to  each
         other".

      d) The Tribunal appeared to have ignored  "crucial  evidence"  in  the
         statements.

      e) The Tribunal had erred in concluding  that  the  only  evidence  of
         cohabitation was a gas bill.  Material evidence had been overlooked
         or ignored with reference made to a  marriage  certificate  showing
         that the parties reside at the same address  in  Glasgow  and  were
         married 29 July 2011.

 4. In the course of Mr Winter's submissions I examined each of  the  items
    of evidence relevant to the unfairness challenge on the  basis  of  the
    guidance given by Lord Reed in HA v SSHD [2010] CSIH  28.   The  points
    arising are considered below.

 5. In response, Mr Mathews argued that the challenge  was  a  disagreement
    with findings on the evidence dressed up as a fairness challenge.   The
    relationship concerns were fairly put in the decision  letter  and  the
    Tribunal had looked at the evidence in some detail.  The  reference  to
    Mehmet Kocer (AP) v SSHD [2005] CSIH 41 as referred to in  the  grounds
    was misconceived (as  accepted  by  Mr  Winter  in  the  light  of  the
    observations of Lord Reed in HA).

ANALYSIS

 6. Lord Reed observed at [7] in HA that:

         "...The Tribunal may identify an issue which has not been raised by
         the parties to the proceedings, but it will be  unfair,  ordinarily
         at least, for it to base its decision upon its view of  that  issue
         without giving the parties an opportunity to address  it  upon  the
         matter.  ..."

 7. He also observed at [8]:

         "As an expert body, the Tribunal is  entitled  to  reject  evidence
         notwithstanding that the evidence has not  been  challenged  before
         it.  Fairness may, however, require it  to  disclose  its  concerns
         about the evidence so as to afford the parties  an  opportunity  to
         address them."

 8. Additionally at [10]:

         "There is, on the other hand, no general obligation on the Tribunal
         to give notice to the parties during the hearing of all the matters
         on which it may rely in reaching its decision."

 9. With reference to R v Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  ex  parte  Williams
    relating to inconsistency in the argument that the  Adjudicator  should
    have reminded the applicant of earlier  accounts,  Lord  Reed  observed
    that leave to apply for judicial review had been refused by Harrison J,
    who noted that the applicant had been represented  by  Counsel  at  the
    hearing and

         "...had had the opportunity to deal with discrepancies between  his
         oral evidence and what had been said in his asylum  application  or
         in his interview.  The Adjudicator was not bound, as  a  matter  of
         natural justice, to point out the inconsistencies."

10. Lord Reed continued at [12]:

         "There is in general no unfairness in proceeding in that way, since
         an applicant can  generally  be  expected  to  be  aware  that  the
         Tribunal will have to assess his credibility, and  the  consistency
         of the account he has given in evidence with any previous  accounts
         contained in the documents before  the  Tribunal  will  plainly  be
         relevant to that assessment.  ..."

11. He continued at [13] in these terms:

         "...There  are,  however,  circumstances  where,  as  a  matter  of
         fairness, the Tribunal cannot remain silent  in  the  face  of  the
         evidence presented to it.  One example of  such  circumstances  has
         already been given, in the case of Kriba v  SSHD.   Other  examples
         can be found amongst the reported decisions, such circumstances are
         fact-sensitive.  The Tribunal is not under a general obligation  to
         air its concerns about the evidence presented to it,  even  if  the
         evidence is unchallenged.  ..."

12. As accepted by Mr Winter there is no question  that  the  Tribunal  had
    identified an issue which had not been  raised  by  the  parties.   The
    reasons letter that accompanied the  decision  makes  the  respondent's
    position plain as to the relationship on which  a  grant  of  leave  on
    Article 8 grounds had been sought.  It  refers  to  the  claim  by  the
    appellant that he had customarily married Ms Ncube  in  December  2008.
    She had been granted asylum and leave to remain in  February  2009  and
    had now been granted indefinite leave  to  remain.   A  statement  from
    Scottish Gas dated October 2010  had  been  submitted  to  confirm  the
    couple were living together and in addition three  letters  of  support
    from friends.  Specifically as to the relationship the  respondent  had
    this to say:

         "44. Accordingly your client's application has been reconsidered on
             the basis of the information already received.   It  is  noted
             that very little evidence has been provided  to  confirm  your
             client's relationship with Ms Ncube is genuine or  subsisting.
             It is further noted that the address held on the  Home  Office
             database for your client is different to the one held for  his
             wife/partner,  Ms  Ncube,  when  your  client  has  previously
             claimed that they had  been  living  together  since  December
             2008."

    The respondent also observed at [48] that it was

         "... noted that  your  client  has  failed  to  provide  sufficient
         evidence of any subsisting  relationship  with  his  partner  Shile
         Ncube.  Your client therefore fails to fulfil E-LTR.1.7 of Appendix
         FM of the Immigration Rules."

13. After considering paragraph EX the respondent continued at [50]:

         "As  previously  stated  your  client  has  failed,  after  several
         requests to provide sufficient evidence to confirm that he is in  a
         genuine and subsisting  relationship  akin  to  marriage  with  his
         partner Shile Ncube.  No evidence of insurmountable  obstacles  had
         been provided as to why your client and his partner cannot continue
         their  family  life  outwith  the  United  Kingdom.   Your   client
         therefore does not meet the requirements of EX.1 of the Immigration
         Rules."

14. Turning to the specific evidence which it is  contended  gave  rise  to
    unfairness, the first challenge relates to the treatment of the  Social
    Services letter.  Prior to addressing this point the  Tribunal  had  at
    [34] set out  their  concerns  regarding  the  absence  of  documentary
    evidence to show that the parties had ever lived together but  for  one
    gas bill in autumn 2010.  They referred to a letter  dated  21  October
    2010 (which had been produced to the  respondent)  that  confirmed  the
    couple had entered into a customary  marriage;  the  Tribunal  observed
    that there was nothing to confirm that the parties have lived  together
    since.  A letter from another individual dated 29 October 2010 (also in
    the respondent's  bundle)  had  described  the  couple  as  dependable,
    honest, peace-loving and courteous but it did not  say  that  they  had
    lived together.  The  Tribunal  observed  there  were  no  more  recent
    letters from either person to confirm that  the  parties'  relationship
    was subsisting.  Statements in the form of letters from the appellant's
    two cousins had made no mention of Ms Ncube at all.

15.  The  Tribunal  observed  at  [35]  that  by  their  own  account   the
    relationship between the appellant and Ms  Ncube  had  been  difficult.
    Reference is made to his supplementary witness statement  which  stated
    that he had struggled with his relationship with his wife, the lack  of
    income and financial pressures leading him to turn to alcohol.

16. After noting the appellant's criminal offending and the measures  taken
    to address his alcoholism, the Tribunal then turned to the evidence  of
    the parties in these terms:

         "Despite Ms Ncube's attendance at the hearing to give oral evidence
         in support of the appellant and their relationship we note that the
         parties continue to live apart.  In fact in the  said  letter  from
         the appellant's Social Worker she refers to the discussion she  has
         had with the appellant in relation to 'his offending behaviour, his
         relationship  with  his  ex-wife  and   his   alcohol   use'   (our
         underlining).  We find this calls into question whether the parties
         are in actual fact in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.   In
         his witness statement dated 22 July, 2014 the appellant  says  that
         when he was charged in relation to his conduct he had to live apart
         from his wife.  There were bail conditions that they could not live
         together when he had to carry out  his  community  payback  orders.
         However as stated in the said letter from  the  Social  Worker  the
         appellant completed his order in August 2013 and yet they are still
         not living together.  They appear to live apart because this allows
         the appellant to claim NASS support and yet the appellant's wife is
         working.  Whilst we accept that Ms Ncube is also studying  we  fail
         to understand why they are not living together  simply  because  of
         finance.  Many couples and families struggle financially but do  so
         together.  There is no evidence of how often they  are  in  contact
         with each other, how often they see each other and how  they  spend
         their time together as in any normal relationship."

17. After addressing the medical aspect arising out of both  parties  being
    HIV-positive the Tribunal concluded that it did not accept the  parties
    were in a genuine and subsisting relationship.

18. The letter from Social Care Services does refer  to  Ms  Ncube  as  the
    appellant's ex-wife but also in the following sentence to the appellant
    having "demonstrated increased insight into his  behaviour  within  his
    relationship with his wife and his alcohol use".

19. A letter dated 12 December 2014 from Social Care Services does not seek
    to correct the reference to an ex-wife but explains that the  appellant
    had separated from his wife for a period whilst he was subject  to  the
    order imposed by the court on 16 August 2012 but at the time of the end
    of the order the couple were reconciled.

20. In my view the Tribunal was entitled to note the reference  to  ex-wife
    in the context of the other aspects which concerned them.  It was  only
    one aspect of the evidence and by no means determinative.  As Mr Winter
    accepted, the statements by the appellant are  silent  on  the  matters
    that concerned the Tribunal  as  to  the  nature  of  current  contact.
    Likewise the statement by Ms Ncube explains her desire that  he  should
    be granted status so that he can start  working.   She  continues  that
    were he able to work it would make her life so  much  easier  and  that
    they could then afford to live together again.

21. As to the Tribunal's concerns  regarding  the  letters  from  the  four
    individuals, the appellant was capably  represented  and  there  is  no
    ambiguity in the reasons  letter  regarding  the  basis  on  which  the
    relationship had not been accepted.  That being so I do not consider it
    was  incumbent  upon   the   Tribunal   to   remind   the   appellant's
    representatives of the deficiencies in the evidence  which  were  self-
    evident.  The letter from the fifth individual,  Effort  Munzarikwa  is
    also caught by the Tribunal's concerns about  the  absence  of  updated
    letters.  There was no need for the Tribunal to refer to  every  single
    piece of evidence before it  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  this
    particular letter can be characterised as material.

22. The further complaint that the Tribunal had ignored crucial evidence in
    the statements was acknowledged by Mr Winter  is  not  made  out.   The
    Tribunal was rationally entitled to observe that the couple were  still
    not living together.  The statement do not suggest otherwise.

23. Finally I do not consider the Tribunal erred in  identifying  that  the
    only item of documentary evidence  indicating  the  parties  had  lived
    together was the gas bill.  The marriage certificate dated 29 July 2011
    does record the couple as at the  same  address.   That  is  merely  an
    indication of an address provided by the  parties  and  is  of  limited
    corroborative value.

24. My conclusion therefore is that the challenge  does  not  identify  any
    unfairness by the Tribunal, who gave cogent reasons on the evidence for
    concluding that the appellant had not established that the relationship
    was subsisting.  No error of law came about in the Tribunal's decision.
     There is no other aspect of this decision which has  been  challenged.
    This appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 24 April 2015

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

