
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04027/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 27 March 2014                              |                             |
|Decision given orally                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                              ms sanya mushtaq

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. As conceded by Ms Holmes, I am satisfied that the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is infected by error in the following respects.

 2. The first is because of procedural unfairness.  The judge is stated  to
    have indicated  at  the  hearing  that  he  was  satisfied  as  to  the
    appellant's credibility which was challenged in the refusal letter  but
    rejected her account as fabricated  in  his  ultimate  decision.   This
    assertion is unchallenged by Ms Holmes

 3. The second ground is because  of  a  failure  by  the  judge  to  reach
    conclusions on an expert's report relied on  to  meet  the  credibility
    concerns that had been addressed by the Secretary of State.

 4. The third ground relates to the judge's finding on the reliability of a
    document which, on the face of it supported  the  negative  credibility
    findings. This ground is best considered in the context of the first.

 5. As to the history of this matter, the appellant who is  a  national  of
    Pakistan born in 1990 appealed against the decision of the Secretary of
    State dated 12 April 2013 to remove her  as  an  illegal  entrant,  the
    Secretary of State having refused to recognise her  as  a  refugee  and
    having refused to accept her claim that she had been  trafficked.   The
    appellant arrived here in 2009 to work for the Deputy High Commissioner
    at the Pakistan High Commission with a  visa  for  that  purpose.   Her
    claim to asylum is based on a fear from her family of being  forced  to
    marry against her will and she fears also the influence of  her  former
    employer because of the allegations she has  made  that  she  had  been
    trafficked in the context of her transfer to the  United  Kingdom  from
    Pakistan for her continuing employment by the diplomat concerned.

 6. The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal took  place  on  two  dates.
    The first was on 2 September 2013 and the second on  16  January  2014.
    At the first hearing the witness statements previously provided by  the
    appellant were adopted and she was then tendered for cross-examination.
     That did not take place on that occasion but was deferred to  a  later
    date because the judge directed  the  Secretary  of  State  to  produce
    certain documents she relied on to support her case that the  appellant
    had not been trafficked.  There was a different Presenting  Officer  at
    the resumed hearing in January, a Ms Jones, who had no  papers.   There
    had been no compliance with directions.  The judge did not  permit  his
    papers to be copied and in summary, as a consequence there was no cross-
    examination and the Presenting Officer's submissions were  confined  to
    reliance on the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 12 April 2013.

 7. According to statement from Ms Smith of counsel (she had  appeared  for
    the appellant on the  first  occasion),  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    requested to make enquiries of those  instructing  her  as  to  certain
    documentation which had been referred to in  a  supplementary  decision
    rejecting the appellant's claim to have been  trafficked.   She  states
    that the judge commented in open court that  in  the  absence  of  such
    evidence by the Secretary of State to undermine her  account  he  would
    "accept the appellant's evidence-in-chief and the  submissions  in  the
    skeleton argument" and that there was  "nothing  to  counter  what  she
    said" and that the "appellant's account was consistent on the whole".

 8. Ms Smith's statement refers also to the events that took place  at  the
    January hearing.  She explains that Ms Jones indicated she would not be
    cross-examining the appellant after she had taken instructions from the
    Secretary of State.  Ms Smith explains that the appellant relied on the
    evidence-in-chief given at the earlier hearing  and  tendered  her  for
    cross-examination.  She was not cross-examined and she  was  not  asked
    any questions by the judge.  Ms Smith records in her statement  further
    comments she had noted were made by the judge as follows:

         "...The alleged counter story given by diplomat but not provided...
         appellant's account consistent and falls within submissions  of  Ms
         Smith... may reach another decision but at the moment I am  in  her
         favour.  The delay added anxiety to young woman  alone  in  foreign
         country.  I cannot tell you  today  what  exact  decision  will  be
         because her duty to look at evidence completely.  At the moment the
         balance is in your favour.  The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department has a right to appeal to the Upper Tribunal."

 9. The reasons given by the judge in his determination  for  his  findings
    reveal that he clearly had a change of heart about the case.  That  can
    happen but in my view fairness demands that the party affected is given
    the opportunity of addressing the matters  that  led  to  that  change.
    This is so, even if the reasons  given  for  doubting  the  credibility
    appear to  be  cogently  given.   It  is  no  answer  to  say  that  as
    credibility was under the spotlight by virtue of the refusal letter, it
    was open to the judge to proceed as he did.  The reasons given  by  the
    judge for rejecting the claims may have been along the lines  of  those
    in the refusal letter but having indicated that credibility was not  of
    concern or in terms that it was reasonable for Counsel to suppose  that
    was the case, such an indication may well have shaped the way in  which
    Counsel structured her submissions.  If there were matters in  addition
    to the reasons in the refusal letter that were of concern to the judge,
    the appellant or her representative  through  submissions  should  have
    been given the opportunity for comment or further questioning  if  that
    was considered desirable.  The proper course would have  been  for  the
    judge to reconvene to explain his concerns and for  the  appellant  and
    her representatives to decide how to  respond.   The  first  ground  is
    sufficient in itself for the decision to be set aside.

10. The judge referred to the expert's report in his determination  but  it
    is correct that he  did  not  explain  how  he  factored  it  into  his
    credibility findings.  He was not required to reach  a  view  on  every
    aspect of the evidence but the  report  formed  a  major  part  of  the
    evidence before him and it required more than simply a summary  of  its
    contents.  As I have already observed the third ground is bound up with
    the first.

11. For these reasons I therefore find the  determination  is  infected  by
    error of law and set aside the decision.  Having regard to  the  nature
    of the error and the extent to which credibility is a fundamental issue
    in this case, I propose that it be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for the decision to be made pursuant to s.12 of the 2007 Act.  None  of
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  are  preserved  at  what
    will effectively be a de novo hearing.  As to the outstanding direction
    for the Secretary of State to produce the documentation that will be  a
    matter for a judge of the First-tier Tribunal  to  address  at  a  case
    management review but it appears to me  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    should endeavour to produce that documentation in time  for  that  case
    management review.    I direct that the appeal should not be  heard  by
    FtTJ Vaudin d'Imecourt.





Signed                                                Date 2 April 2014
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

