
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04263/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     T V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Soloman (counsel) instructed by Aschfords law
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant, because the case  involves  discussion  of
the appellant's mental health.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 28 August 2015, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 30 August 1987 and  is  a  national  of  Sri
Lanka.

4.    On 23 February 2015 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge M A Khan ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  23  September  2015  Judge
Roberston gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.     Although  there  is  little  arguable  merit  in  the  claimant
    Professor Lingham's report cannot carry significant weight  because  it
    is  incomplete,  there  is  some  merit  in  the  submission  that  the
    appellant's sister's witness statement supported Dr Persaud's reference
    to brain damage suffered by the appellant at birth. It is unclear  what
    tests, if any, were conducted by  Dr  Persaud  to  assess  the  current
    effects of this on the appellant. It is also arguable  that  the  judge
    did not consider the risk on return on article 3 grounds in view of his
    mental health, which was referred to in the  skeleton  argument  before
    him. Permission is granted on all grounds because much of the substance
    of the grounds relates to the findings made by the judge on  the  basis
    of the appellant's evidence which may (or may not) have  been  affected
    by his mental health."

The Hearing

7.    (a)   Mr Solomon, counsel for the appellant, adopted  the  grounds  of
appeal and argued that the judge's approach  to  the  medical  evidence  was
flawed. He told me that the scarring report was superficially considered  by
the Judge at [55] and [56] of the decision, and  that  no  adequate  reasons
for finding that the expert report is  incomplete  had  been  given  by  the
judge. He argued that the Judge failed to follow the guidance  given  in  KV
(scarring - medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC), and that the Judge  had
not given sufficient consideration to the  appellants  diagnosis  of  mental
disorders. He argued that the Judge failed to take account of  the  evidence
provided by the appellant's sister.

    (b)    Mr Solomon told me the Judge had materially erred in law because
the Judge found the appellant not to be a credible  witness  before  turning
to consideration of the medical evidence produced. The  Judge  then  rejects
the medical evidence and expert report because he  finds  the  appellant  is
not credible. Mr Solomon argued that that was not the correct approach

    (c)    Mr Solomon argued that the Judge gave  inadequate  consideration
to the appellant article 3 ECHR rights, and that the Judge took  no  account
of the appellant's diagnosis of  mental  disorder  in  his  Article  3  ECHR
assessment. He argued that the determination as  a  whole  was  inadequately
reasoned,  and  that  the  Judge  was  incorrect  to  find  that  there  was
inconsistency in the various strands of the appellant's evidence.  He  urged
me to set the decision aside and  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.

8.    (a)   Ms Fijiwala, for the respondent, told me that the decision  does
not contain any errors and that the Judge carefully considered  each  strand
of evidence placed  before  him,  before  reaching  conclusions  which  were
reasonably open to him. She argued that  the  decision  contains  a  careful
analysis of medical and expert evidence and that the Judge had followed  the
guidance in both KV (scarring - medical evidence) [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC)  and
GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
(IAC). She relied on the cases of HH and  Mibanga  and  told  me  there  was
nothing wrong with  the  Judge's  approach  to  either  credibility  or  the
medical evidence, arguing  that  "fact  finders  should  not  be  put  in  a
forensic straitjacket".

    (b)    Ms Fijiwala argued that it was open to the  judge  to  find  the
appellant was both vague and evasive in his evidence. She told me  that  the
Judge carefully recorded cross examination of  the  appellant  between  [26]
and [35], before setting out the appellant's  re-examination  at  [36].  She
told  me  that  those  passages  of  evidence  were  inconsistent  with  the
appellant's witness statement and invited me to  find  that  the  Judge  had
properly assessed the medical evidence  and  reached  the  conclusion  after
correctly taking guidance from the  relevant  case  law.  She  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

9.    In KV (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230  (IAC)
it was held that (i) When preparing medico-legal reports doctors should  not
- and should not feel obliged to -  reach  conclusions  about  causation  of
scarring  which  go  beyond  their  own  clinical  expertise;  (ii)  Doctors
preparing  medico-legal  reports  for  asylum  seekers  must  consider   all
possible causes of scarring; (iii) Where there is a  presenting  feature  of
the case that  raises  self-infliction  by  proxy  (SIBP)  as  a  more  than
fanciful possibility of the explanation for scarring:- (a) a medical  report
adduced on behalf of a claimant will be expected to engage with that  issue;
it cannot eliminate a priori or routinely the possibility of SIBP;  and  (b)
a judicial fact-finder will be expected to address  the  matter,  compatibly
with procedural fairness, in deciding whether,  on  all  the  evidence,  the
claimant has discharged the burden of proving that he or she was  reasonably
likely to have been scarred by torturers against his or  her  will;  (iv)  a
lack of correlation between a claimant's account and what is revealed  by  a
medical examination of the scarring may  enable  a  medico-legal  report  to
shed  some  clinical  light  on  the  issue  of  whether  SIBP  is  a   real
possibility; (v)  Whilst the medical literature continues to  consider  that
scarring cannot be dated beyond 6 months from when it was  inflicted,  there
is some medical basis for considering in relation to certain types of  cases
that its age can be determined up to 2 years; (vi) Whilst if  best  practice
is followed medico-legal reports  will  make  a  critical  evaluation  of  a
claimant's account of scarring said to have been  caused  by  torture,  such
reports cannot be equated with an assessment to be undertaken  by  decision-
makers in a legal context  in  which  the  burden  of  proof  rests  on  the
claimant and  when  one  of  the  purposes  of  questioning  is  to  test  a
claimant's evidence so as to decide whether (to the lower  standard)  it  is
credible.

10.   At [56] the Judge finds that Professor Lingham's report is  incomplete
because it does not address self-infliction by proxy (SIBP). At  page  5  of
his report, Professor Lingham refers to KV, and reminds  himself  that  when
considering the possibility of SIBP he  "...  first  of  all  will  have  to
assess whether there are any presenting features in the  patient's  scarring
that cause me to enter this  forum  and  make  this  assessment."  Professor
Lingham does not thereafter return to consideration of SIBP. His opinion  is
at page 7 of the report, where he records inter alia

    "There are a few non-specific scars  but  the  one  linear  scar  could
    assist me to collaborate the history of trauma"

What Professor Lingham means is far from clear. He  frames  his  opinion  in
the conditional mood, and probably uses the word "collaborate"  incorrectly.
("Collaborate" usually means to work jointly with another on an activity  or
project.)

11.   Professor Lingham's conclusion is at page 13 of his report,  where  he
states

    "I have not investigated any mental health issues. He still has problem
    sitting for a prolonged period. He stated that he is much stressed  and
    has reported his sleeping problems. His memory is poor and he is having
    problem in concentrating and this is likely be due to the mental health
    issues. The perceived pain is also likely be due to mental scars"

12.    The  judge  could  only  work  with  the  material  before  him.  His
conclusion that Professor Lingham's report  is  "incomplete"  is  clearly  a
finding of fact which the  Judge  was  in  a  position  to  make.  Professor
Lingham does not engage with SIBP despite reminding himself of the dicta  in
KV. Professor  Lingham  offers  an  ambiguous  opinion,  before  reaching  a
conclusion which dwells on concerns  about  the  appellant's  mental  health
rather than offering a  conclusion  about  the  likely  cause  of  scarring.
Before reaching his own conclusion, the Judge correctly sought guidance  and
direction from the case of KV.

13.   It is argued that the judge should not have assessed  the  appellant's
credibility before separately turning to the medical evidence  produced.  In
HE  [2004]  UKIAT  00321  the  Tribunal  said  that  "where  the  report  is
specifically relied on as a factor relevant to credibility, the  adjudicator
should deal with it as an integral part  of  the  findings  on  credibility,
rather than just as an add on, which does not undermine the  conclusions  to
which he would otherwise come".  However, the Tribunal also said that  where
the report simply recounts a history which  the  Adjudicator  is  minded  to
reject and contains nothing which does not depend  on  the  truthfulness  of
the appellant, the part which it can play in the assessment  of  credibility
is negligible.  In S v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 the Court  of  Appeal  said
that an error of law only arose in this type of situation  where  there  was
artificial separation amounting to  a  structural  failing,  and  not  where
there was a mere error of appreciation of  the  medical  evidence.   Mibanga
[2005] EWCA Civ 367 was distinguished.  In that case  the  medical  evidence
had been so powerful and  extraordinary  that  it  took  the  case  into  an
exceptional area.  The Court of Appeal said that HE [2004] UKIAT  00321  was
relevant to the case in so far as, where medical evidence  merely  confirmed
that a person's physical  condition  was  consistent  with  his  claim,  the
effect of the evidence was only not to negate the claim.  It did  not  offer
significant separate support for the claim.  The Court of Appeal  said  that
Mibanga was not to be regarded as laying down a rule of law as to the  order
in which judicial fact finders were to approach evidential  material  before
them.  In this case an explanation as to why the medical  evidence  did  not
carry weight had been given by the Judge.

14.   There is nothing wrong with the Judge's approach.  He  carefully  sets
out the evidence of the appellant and his witnesses, before  analysing  that
evidence and drawing his own conclusions on credibility and reliability.  He
separately considers the medical evidence. He does not  reject  the  medical
and expert evidence solely because he did  not  find  the  appellant  to  be
credible or reliable. At [57]  and  [58]  he  rejects  Dr  Persaud's  report
because he finds that it is inconsistent  with  other  strands  of  evidence
before him and because it contains internal inconsistencies.

15.   The  remaining  grounds  of  appeal  amount  to  little  more  than  a
complaint about the Judge's findings of fact and  his  inability  to  accept
the appellant or his sister as credible or reliable  witnesses.  Credibility
is a matter for the Judge at first instance. At  [42]  the  Judge  correctly
takes guidance form GJ (post civil  war  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  [2013]  and
reminds himself of the  risk  categories.  He  manifestly  had  the  correct
guidance on risk categories at the forefront of his  mind  when  considering
this case.

16.   In SS (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]
EWCA Civ 155 the  Claimant  submitted  psychiatric  medical  evidence  at  a
reconsideration  opining  that  she  suffered  from  complex  post-traumatic
stress disorder, major depressive illness  and  suicidal  ideation.  In  the
psychiatrist's  opinion,  the  Claimant  would  have  difficulty  in  giving
evidence and understanding questions at any hearing.  The  Court  of  Appeal
upheld the Judge's decision to reject the medical evidence,  as  the  weight
to be given to it was for the Judge so long as it was  considered  carefully
and reasons were given (and there were reasons given) - there were  material
differences between the history given by the Claimant  to  the  psychiatrist
and the facts as found by the Judge;  there  had  been  no  mention  in  the
Judge's determination of any difficulty which the  Claimant  had  in  giving
evidence; there was no evidence that the Claimant had consulted her  general
practitioner in response to a suggested treatment/medication plan.

17.   The Judge's Article 3 assessment is brief and contained  at  [61].  It
is argued that "the Judge failed to adequately assess the real risk  to  the
appellant under article 3 of the ECHR in consequence of poor  mental  health
risk of suicide." The flaw with that argument is that  the  Judge  can  only
make findings of fact based on the evidence placed before him.  It  is  true
that in his report Dr  Persaud  provides  the  opinion  that  the  appellant
suffers from depression & PTSD and is  at  elevated  risk  of  suicide,  but
neither the appellant nor his sister's witness statement give  any  specific
mention of mental disorders nor of the effect that return would have on  the
appellant's mental health.

18.   In N v UK Application 26565/05 the Grand Chamber upheld  the  decision
of the House of Lords and said that in medical cases Article 3 only  applied
in very exceptional circumstances particularly as the suffering was not  the
result of an intentional act or omission of a State or non-State body.   The
European court of Human Rights said that Article 3 could not  be  relied  on
to address the disparity in medical care between Contracting States and  the
applicant's state of origin.  The  fact  that  the  person's  circumstances,
including his or her life expectancy, would  be  significantly  reduced  was
not sufficient in itself to give rise to a breach of Article 3.  Those  same
principles had  to  apply  in  relation  to  the  expulsion  of  any  person
afflicted with any serious, naturally occurring physical or  mental  illness
which might cause suffering pain or reduced  life  expectancy  and  required
specialist medical treatment that might not be readily  available  or  which
might only be available at considerable cost.  Notably the court  held  that
no separate issues arose under Article 8(2) in that case and so it  was  not
even necessary to consider the  Claimant's  submission  that  would  removal
would engage her right to respect for private life.

19.   I take full account of the case of GS and EO and GS  (India),  but  in
reality, the argument is about the quality of life  for  the  appellant  and
the services which are available to him. The  argument,  in  reality,  is  a
comparison of the psychiatric, psychological and support services  available
in Sri Lanka. The background materials make it quite clear that the  quality
of such services in the UK is better than the services  in  Sri  Lanka,  but
that is not the test for an Article 3 consideration.

20.   In Nacic and Others v Sweden (Application no. 16567/10)  ECtHR  (Fifth
Section) 2012 it was held that aliens who were subject  to  expulsion  could
not, in principle, claim any entitlement to remain in  the  territory  of  a
Contracting State in order to continue to benefit from  medical,  social  or
other forms of assistance and services provided by the expelling State.  The
fact that an  applicant's  circumstances,  including  his  life  expectancy,
would  be  significantly  reduced  if  he  were  to  be  removed  from   the
Contracting State was not sufficient in itself to give rise to a  breach  of
Article 3. The decision to remove an alien who was suffering from a  serious
mental or physical illness  to  a  country  where  the  facilities  for  the
treatment  of  that  illness  were  inferior  to  those  available  in   the
Contracting State may raise an issue under Article 3, but  only  in  a  very
exceptional case, where the humanitarian grounds against  the  removal  were
compelling.  (As I have already indicated, in N v  UK  Application  26565/05
the European court of Human Rights said that Article 3 could not  be  relied
on to address the disparity in medical care between Contracting  States  and
the applicant's state of origin).

21.   In KN (Iran) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ 1430  the  Appellant  claimed  the
Tribunal had failed to consider the risk  that  the  claimant  might  commit
suicide on return to Iran.  The Court of Appeal said that the threshold  for
an Article 3 claim based on the risk of suicide was not reached by  reliance
on the single line of a doctor's report. In GS  (India)  and  Others  [2015]
EWCA Civ 40 Lord Justice Laws said at paragraph  46  that  "the  case  of  a
person whose life will be drastically shortened by the progress  of  natural
disease if he is removed  to  his  home  state  does  not  fall  within  the
paradigm of Article 3. Cases such as those before the  court  can  therefore
only succeed under that Article to the extent that it falls to  be  enlarged
beyond the paradigms" Lord Justice Laws went on to refer to D  v  UK  [1997]
24 EHRR 423, which he said at paragraph 66 was confined to  deathbed  cases,
as one such example, and to another line of cases such as MSS v Belgium  and
Greece [2011] 54 EHRR 2 where States had taken  on  certain  obligations  to
asylum seekers under EU  Directives.  At  paragraph  67  Lord  Justice  Laws
endorsed the views in N v UK that  "aliens  who  are  subject  to  expulsion
order cannot in principle claim any entitlement to remain in  the  territory
of a contracting state in order to continue to benefit from medical,  social
or other forms of assistance and services provided by the expelling  State".


22.   Case-law indicates  that  the  appellant's  mental  disorders  do  not
approach the elevated threshold to engage article 3. In any event, I  cannot
see that these were arguments advanced before the Judge. He  should  not  be
faulted for failing to consider matters which were not placed before him.

23.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (inter alia) the Upper Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

24.   In this case the Judge has reached  a  decision  which  the  appellant
does not like, but the decision does not contain a material  error  of  law.
The appellant's criticisms of the fact-finding process  are  not  made  out.
Careful analysis of the evidence  is  contained  within  the  decision,  the
correct burden and standard of proof have been applied and  that  the  Judge
directed himself correctly in law.  The  Judge  quite  clearly  weighed  all
factors in carrying out a full and careful  assessment.  Overall  the  fact-
finding exercise cannot be criticised,  the  decision  does  not  contain  a
misdirection in law.

25.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

27.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 2 January 2016

