
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04035/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th August 2015                  |On 14th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                           mrs Furthermore shipton
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sachav
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 8th December 1961 is a citizen of Zimbabwe.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Sachav.  The Respondent
    was represented by Miss Johnstone, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum and that application  had
    been refused by the Respondent on 22nd May 2014 and removal  directions
    had been issued.  The Appellant had  appealed  that  decision  and  her
    appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  De  Haney  sitting  at
    Manchester on 16th July 2014.  The judge had  allowed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on both asylum grounds and under the Human Rights Act.

 3. The Respondent had made application for permission to  appeal  on  23rd
    July 2014.   Permission  to  appeal  had  been  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Saffer on 4th August 2014.  The judge found  that  there
    were arguable grounds as set out in the application.   In  summary  the
    Respondent had asserted that the judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons as to why the Appellant would be at risk as  a  result  of  her
    surname and the fact that she had married a white Englishman.   It  was
    also asserted that the judge had failed to resolve an  issue  regarding
    the reliability of the expert report and had  failed  to  consider  the
    country guidance cases of EM CG [2011] UKUT 98 and CM  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    and NN CG [2013] UKUT 00198.  Directions  were  issued  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal first to consider whether an error of law  had  been  made  in
    this case and the matter comes  before  me  in  accordance  with  those
    Directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. Miss Johnstone relied upon the detailed grounds  contained  within  the
    Respondent's application in particular the  failure  of  the  judge  to
    provide adequate reasons in respect of findings made.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 5. I was referred to a skeleton argument.  It was submitted that the judge
    had found the Appellant and witnesses credible and had looked at all of
    the evidence.  It was further stated that the judge  had  followed  the
    principle in Devaseelan and it was submitted that no error of  law  had
    been made.

 6. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision to consider
    the documents and submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. There were two central issues for the judge to resolve  in  this  case.
    Firstly, did the Appellant face a real risk of persecution if  returned
    to Zimbabwe and secondly was the Appellant in  a  genuine  relationship
    (marriage) to Mr Shipton such that Article 8 of the ECHR was engaged.

 8. The judge  in  deciding  those  issues  was  greatly  assisted  by  two
    features.  Firstly as  he  correctly  identified  at  paragraph  29  he
    followed the principles of Devaseelan by taking as his  starting  point
    the findings on fact and credibility as  set  out  by  a  judge  at  an
    earlier appeal hearing on 15th August  2013.   The  judge  had  further
    noted at paragraph 29 that the decision had been upheld  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 9. Secondly as the judge himself noted at paragraph 27 "This  appeal  once
    again highlights the importance of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  being
    able to see and hear witnesses deliver evidence".   In  this  case  the
    judge had heard  oral  evidence  from  seventeen  witnesses  (noted  at
    paragraph 11) and statements from  three  others  who  were  unable  to
    attend.

10. In respect of the asylum claim the judge had within the  documents  the
    previous First-tier Tribunal decision referred to above.  The judge  at
    that hearing had found the Appellant truthful and her evidence  cogent.
    He had accepted that she was an MDC member with an MDC profile and  had
    suffered physical abuse by Zanu-PF as recently  as  2011.   He  further
    accepted that her husband had also been  a  member  of  MDC,  had  been
    beaten and  forced  to  leave  the  country.   The  judge  however  had
    concluded that she would not face a real risk of harm by  Zanu-PF  now,
    given the passage of time and could in any event reasonably relocate to
    Matabeleland North where her father still resided.

11. The judge clearly had in mind the  findings  of  the  earlier  Tribunal
    decision and summarised them at paragraph  32.   He  however  concluded
    that there had been significant changes  to  the  position  since  2013
    namely that she had married a white Englishman and had taken and  would
    use his name (Shipton).  The judge was entitled to  conclude  following
    HJ Iran that given her religious beliefs she  would  seek  to  use  her
    married name if returned to Zimbabwe (paragraph 33).  The judge had  in
    part relied upon the expert report produced to conclude that she  would
    be at heightened risk as a result of using a name identifiable as  that
    of a white Englishman.

12. The judge was clearly alive to the criticisms of this particular expert
    and referred in detail to those points raised by the Presenting Officer
    at paragraph 17.  At paragraph 34 the  judge  noted  that  despite  the
    shortcomings pointed out by the Presenting Officer he found the  report
    useful and that the issue of risk through the name "sustainable".

13. The judge had, as he was entitled to do, taken the earlier findings  on
    fact and credibility attaching to  the  Appellant  and  had  thereafter
    found additional risks  emanating  from  the  changes  related  to  her
    marriage, change of name, further length of time in the UK and had also
    noted at paragraph 35 the continued antipathy from the  regime  towards
    the UK.

14. It could be argued that the judge perhaps should have given rather more
    reasons for deciding that the expert report in this  particular  regard
    was useful bearing in mind the criticisms levelled against that  expert
    as noted by the judge in his decision.  It could also  be  argued  that
    the judge gave no real reasons behind his finding  that  the  Appellant
    would now be at risk in all parts of Zimbabwe given the findings of the
    judge at the earlier decision that she  could  reasonably  relocate  to
    Matabeleland North.  It was perhaps incumbent upon the  judge  to  have
    provided rather more reasoning as  to  why  her  marriage  to  a  white
    Englishman and the use of his name would lead to a reasonable  risk  of
    persecution in that particular area.  However that is not to  say  that
    those potential shortcomings amounted to a material error of law.

15. Separately the judge had found the Appellant was in a genuine  marriage
    and given the circumstances of her  husband,  in  particular  his  age,
    health and the fact that he was a white Englishman, had concluded  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect him to relocate to Zimbabwe.   The
    judge had therefore concluded that the Appellant was entitled to remain
    under the terms of Article 8 of the ECHR.  Those findings made  by  the
    judge were clearly based on the significant volume of evidence that  he
    had received both from the Appellant  and  the  substantial  number  of
    witnesses and other material  that  he  had  considered.   The  judge's
    conclusions upon Article 8 were therefore based upon properly  reasoned
    facts based on a substantial body of evidence and the  conclusion  that
    he reached was a conclusion that was both open to him  and  reasonable.
    It  is  further  noteworthy  that  the  Respondent's  application   for
    permission to appeal does not seek to criticise the judge's findings on
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

16. Accordingly whilst there may be some merit in  the  potential  lack  of
    reasoning referred to above, even if it was concluded that  that  could
    amount to a material error of law, it would leave unchanged the judge's
    findings on Article 8.  That  would  mean  that  any  remaking  of  the
    decision on the  asylum  issue  alone  would  be  largely  an  academic
    exercise and would not materially affect the fact  that  the  Appellant
    had been allowed to remain within the United Kingdom and  it  does  not
    seem to be an appropriate use of public money nor in the  interests  of
    justice to perpetuate this case on a largely academic basis  only  that
    does not materially affect the outcome.

Decision

17. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
