
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/04935/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard and decided at Field House 6 July 2016 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Corrected transcript signed 12 July          |On 13 July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                            UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                John FREEMAN

                                   Between
                                    [M A]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Gemma Loughran (counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan)
For the respondent:    Miss Julie Isherwood

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal by a citizen of Somalia, who conventionally gives his
    date of birth as [ ] 1978, against a decision of  Judge  Mohammed  Asif
    Khan, sitting at Hatton Cross on 4 April 2016,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of asylum.  The grounds challenge  the  judge's  asylum
    decision on various points.  The point on which  permission  was  given
    concerns the judge's failure to deal with a country expert report which
    was put before him; but it seemed to me,  and  neither  side  dissented
    when I put it to them, that, before that point  was  considered,  those
    relating to the appellant's personal credibility  needed  to  be  dealt
    with.
 2. The judge's credibility findings appear at paragraphs 36 to 39  of  his
    decision.  At paragraph 36 the judge sums up the  appellant's  case  as
    follows

         "He fears return to Somalia because Al Shabaab threatened him  due
         to the fact that he sold goods from  his  shop  to  the  government
         forces.  Al Shabaab man came to his shop and told him that  he  was
         an enemy of God.  His family had been displaced and he states  that
         his mother and  wife  were  killed.   The  appellant's  father  and
         siblings are still in Somalia he  has  been  in  contact  with  his
         father.  He fears returning to Somalia as Al Shabaab will find  him
         and kill him."

 3. That is a very basic summary of the appellant's case; but  it  was  set
    out at considerably greater length in a witness  statement  before  the
    judge, signed 13 August 2015.  Looking  at  that  statement  (paragraph
    21), the appellant's dealings with Al  Shabaab  began  on  28  December
    2013, when two masked men from that  organisation  came  and  told  the
    appellant and his cousin that they must not sell goods  from  the  shop
    they ran to government troops.   They  were  given  no  opportunity  to
    object to that, and it was made clear to them  their  only  alternative
    was simply to close the shop.  However the shop  formed  the  appellant
    and his cousin's only source of income; so, despite the obvious  risks,
    they went on doing business as before.

 4. Going on to paragraph 23 of the statement the appellant said this.

         "On 3 January 2014 an Al Shabaab member came to the shop and  said
         that now we know you are our enemies.  We knew that he was a member
         of Al Shabaab because he used the phrase 'enemy of  God'  which  is
         the phrase that they use to describe people who they consider to be
         against them.  This was mid-afternoon.  We did not get  the  chance
         to say anything to him he just said this and walked  out.   In  the
         shop at the time there were just a few other people. The Al Shabaab
         person came to the window and spoke so that no one else noticed."


 5. The appellant and his cousin  agreed  to  discuss  later  whether  they
    should close the shop  or  not.   However  as  can  be  seen  from  the
    appellant's paragraph 24, they were just re-opening it later that  day,
    after evening prayer, when two masked men appeared. One drew  a  pistol
    and shot the appellant's cousin in the face, killing him instantly,  at
    which point the appellant fled.

 6. There was then a further incident very much later  when  the  appellant
    was already in this country which is  dealt  with  in  the  appellant's
    statement at paragraph 39 where he refers to something that happened in
    November 2014. A man called [AM], who he had met in this  country,  and
    who  had  since  been  back  to  Somalia,  received  a  call  from  the
    appellant's father. [AM] arranged to ring back, so that  the  appellant
    could speak to his father himself.

 7. The appellant's father told him that, after he had fled,  people  would
    come looking for him and, when it  was  explained  he  was  not  there,
    someone  had  thrown  a  bomb  into  the  family  house,  killing   the
    appellant's mother and injuring his father.  The appellant's father was
    calling from hospital, and told him it was not safe to communicate with
    him again and he would not call again.  The  appellant  describes  this
    news as devastating for him.

 8. Whether those further details of the appellant's case were true or not,
    it is quite clear that the judge needed to deal with them.  So  far  as
    the points which the judge did deal with are concerned he rejected  the
    appellant's evidence about the second visit of Al Shabaab on 3  January
    2014 on the basis that "On the one hand he stated that the man came  to
    the shop.  He then stated that the man told him that he was an enemy of
    God from outside the shop window."  While there is  nothing  apparently
    inconsistent in the appellant's version, so stated, it is fairly  clear
    that what the judge  was  referring  to  was  an  apparent  discrepancy
    between the appellant's evidence at interview, and what he said  before
    the judge, to the effect that this conversation had taken place through
    the shop window.

 9. The discrepancy arose in this way as a result of the passage  from  the
    witness statement (see 4) at paragraph 23.   The  original  version  of
    that statement has the appellant saying "On 3 January 2014 one of  them
    came to the shop" and relates the conversation and  goes  on  "he  just
    said this  and  walked  out."   However  in  the  consolidated  witness
    statement which I read out, the appellant's evidence about that passage
    begins in that way; but it goes on "In the shop at that time were  just
    a few other people.  The Al Shabaab person came to the window and spoke
    so that no one else noticed."

10. It is quite clear, certainly for a native English-speaker, and probably
    for anyone else, that the expression 'walked out' means that the person
    concerned had been inside the shop, rather  than  talking  through  the
    window.  However, dealing with the final  version  of  the  appellant's
    witness statement, he is still using that  expression,  but  making  it
    clear that, on that occasion, the man  from  Al  Shabaab  came  to  the
    window; so, even on the most favourable reading of the judge's findings
    at paragraph 37, it does not seem to me that the final version  of  the
    appellant's evidence supported them.  If what the appellant had said in
    his original statement were to be  relied  on,  then  that  would  have
    needed to be brought up at the hearing.

11. The judge went on at paragraph 38 to say this

         "The appellant stated that his mother was killed and  he  attended
         her funeral which was held in an area held by Al Shabaab.  He  said
         that he had not come to any harm because his  maternal  uncle  took
         him there and  then  brought  him  back.   I  find  that  once  the
         appellant had closed the shop due to the threats  from  Al  Shabaab
         then what would be the reason left for Al Shabaab  to  still  cause
         him any harm.  The cause for the threats is  no  longer  there.   I
         therefore do not accept the appellant's claim that Al  Shabaab  are
         still interested in him."


    It seems to me that, dealing with further risk from Al Shabaab, that is
    a conclusion to which, other things being equal, the judge was entitled
    to come.


12. The only way in which Miss Loughran  was  able  to  suggest  that  this
    conclusion was the basis for the judge's general  credibility  findings
    comes from the judge's paragraph 41, which he began "For all the  above
    mentioned reasons I do not find the appellant to be  a  credible  or  a
    consistent witness."  It does not seem to me that that  can  fairly  be
    read as making what the judge said at paragraph  38  into  one  of  his
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's evidence about the  threats  made
    on 3 January.
13. However the judge then went  on  at  paragraph  39  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's evidence,  coincidentally  also  at  paragraph  39  of  the
    supplementary statement, about the telephone call from his father.  The
    judge rejected that evidence on this basis "I  do  not  find  that  the
    appellant's evidence credible or  consistent  that  having  established
    contact with his father he has not managed to maintain  it."   It  does
    not seem to me that that was  a  conclusion  to  which  the  judge  was
    entitled to come, without dealing with the appellant's  clear  evidence
    in his final witness statement to the effect that his father  had  told
    him in terms not to communicate with him, because it was not  safe;  so
    that credibility finding cannot stand either, and the judge's treatment
    of the news the appellant said he had had from  his  father  cannot  be
    upheld.

14. Besides that, there is the point about the judge  not  dealing  at  all
    with the shooting of the appellant's cousin, which is a further  reason
    for setting aside his decision.  Clearly there will have to  be  a  re-
    hearing, which will take place in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  a
    different judge.

Appeal allowed: first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge MA Khan

                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                                13 July 2016

