
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04983/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 February 2016                      |On 14 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                    H M A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel, instructed by Warnapala and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A J Parker (the  judge),  promulgated  on  21  September
    2015, in which he dismissed the Appellant's  appeal.  That  appeal  was
    against the Respondent's decision of 6 March  2015,  refusing  to  vary
    leave to remain and to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom  by
    way of directions under section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Sudan. He arrived in this country  as  a
    minor  and  claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was  first  rejected  by  the
    Respondent on 12 December 2013, but he was granted Discretionary  Leave
    to Remain in  line  with  the  policy  on  unaccompanied  child  asylum
    applicants. At this stage the Respondent accepted that the  Appellant's
    family had been killed by the Janjaweed. However, it was said that  the
    Appellant, as a member of an Arab tribe from the Darfur  region,  could
    relocate to Khartoum.

 3. An application for further leave to remain was  made  on  15  September
    2014, based in essence upon a claimed  risk  on  return  to  Sudan.  In
    rejecting the claim  once  more,  the  Respondent  concluded  that  the
    Appellant could relocate. In addition, it was said that the Appellant's
    Article 8 claim failed.



The hearing before the judge

 4. There was no dispute as to the Appellant's claim that  his  family  had
    been killed (as had been conceded by the Respondent previously). It  is
    at least implicit in the judge's decision that there would be a risk of
    persecution in the Appellant's area. There has never been a  suggestion
    by the Respondent to the contrary. Both representatives had been agreed
    that the focus for the judge  was  the  issue  of  internal  relocation
    (paragraph 21).

 5. The judge correctly directed himself to the leading cases of AH (Sudan)
    [2007] UKHL 49 and Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5.  He  then  finds  that  the
    Appellant would not be specifically targeted by the Janjaweed elsewhere
    in the country (paragraph 24). The country guidance decisions  of  HGMO
    (relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 00062 and  AA  (non-Arab
    Dafuris - relocation) Sudan CG [2009]  UKAIT  00056  are  discussed  at
    paragraphs 25 to 28. Paragraph 29 contains consideration of a number of
    factors related to internal relocation, including  linguistic  ability,
    health, age, education, and the Appellant's actual  ethnicity.  In  the
    next paragraph the judge concludes that there was  a  lack  of  country
    evidence showing that members of the Appellant's tribe were targeted in
    Khartoum. In dealing with the expert report of Dr Samuel Bekalo and the
    submissions made thereon, the  judge  finds  the  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant would be risk in Khartoum as a person  of  dark  skin  colour
    from the Mesiri tribe to be unsubstantiated and weak (paragraphs 31 and
    34). In conclusion, the judge finds that the Appellant could reasonably
    relocate to Khartoum (paragraph 33).

 6. The Article 8 claim is rejected in brief terms at paragraphs 44 to 46.





The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The core issue in the grounds is that the judge  failed  to  adequately
    deal with the evidence and submission that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk in Khartoum because of his skin colour and the perception  created
    as a result. Related to this, it is said that there  is  a  failure  to
    address the expert report. Two additional points assert that the  judge
    conflated a risk in Khartoum with the question of  reasonableness,  and
    that there was an error in the application of relevant country guidance
    cases. The findings on risk from the Janjaweed and the Article 8  claim
    are not challenged.

 8. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill  on  12  November  2015.  In  a  detailed
    decision, Judge Gill sets out very clearly the somewhat tentative basis
    upon which permission was being  granted.  In  respect  of  the  expert
    report (upon which the core ground of appeal rests in large part),  she
    indicates a number of points that the Appellant would have  to  address
    at the error of law  hearing.  These  include:  identification  of  the
    expert's conclusion that any black Arab Darfuri is reasonably likely to
    be perceived as a non-Arab Darfuri; whether the  expert  had  seen  the
    Appellant; whether he knew that the Appellant spoke Arabic; whether  he
    knew if the Appellant spoke non-Arab Darfuri languages.



The hearing before me

 9. Ms Allen submitted that the issue of skin colour went both to risk  and
    internal relocation in Khartoum. She accepted that the expert  had  not
    been instructed to consider skin colour, but the  point  arose  in  the
    report and so the submission was made to the judge by  the  Appellant's
    representative (not Ms  Allen).  She  submitted  that  the  factors  in
    paragraph 29 were not assessed as part of  a  proper  consideration  of
    internal relocation. It was apparent from the decision  that  risk  and
    reasonableness had been conflated. Two factors relevant  to  relocation
    had been left out of account in any event: the Appellant's age when  he
    left Sudan, and the time he had  spent  away  from  that  country.  The
    expert had said that the Appellant's tribe may be seen  as  sympathetic
    to the non-Arab Darfuris, and it would  not  be  right  to  expect  the
    Appellant to explain that he was Mesiri.  In  respect  of  the  judge's
    rejection of the expert report, paragraph 34 was inadequate.  In  terms
    of sources in the report, Ms Allen submitted that the references at the
    top of page 5  related  to  the  previous  sections  of  the  document,
    including (I  presume)  those  dealing  with  skin  colour  and  ethnic
    perceptions. It was accepted  that  that  was  no  country  information
    before the judge relating to skin colour and the Mesiri tribe.



10. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the  judge  dealt  with  the  expert
    report adequately. It was a fact that the Appellant was from the Mesiri
    tribe. The factors in paragraph 29 were all relevant, and the judge was
    aware of the Appellant's past movements.



Decision on error of law

11. Having given a good deal of thought to this appeal, I find  that  there
    are no material errors of law in the judge's decision. My  reasons  foe
    this are as follows.



The expert report

12. The expert report was clearly the central evidential plank  upon  which
    the Appellant's case before the judge was  founded.  The  existence  of
    risk or other relevant discrimination/prejudice in Khartoum could  only
    have been potentially established on the back of the report, given that
    there was no country information available and the case-law was clearly
    against the Appellant.

13. The judge rejects the two  arguments  predicated  upon  the  report  in
    fairly short terms. In paragraph 31 it is said  that,  "the  conclusion
    that because he [the Appellant] is an Arab he would be at risk  is  not
    supported in my view with any credible evidence." At paragraph 34 it is
    said that, "the expert report as to why an  Arab  Mesiri  tribe  member
    would be at risk in  Khartoum  is  weak  and  unsupported  by  credible
    evidence." Is this adequate when the evidence and decision are taken as
    a whole? In my view the answer is Yes.

14. First, the expert was not in fact asked to address  the  points  relied
    upon by the Appellant in submissions to the judge. In fairness  to  the
    expert, it is perhaps unsurprising therefore that his report is not  as
    clear or thorough as it otherwise might have been. Whilst not fatal  to
    the  evidential  value  of  the  report,  the  limited  scope  of   the
    instructions was always going to be problematic.

15. Second, whilst the judge refers to the Appellant's  membership  of  the
    Mesiri tribe at several points, it is clear enough that he also had  in
    mind the issue of skin  colour  (see  paragraph  31).  Thus,  when  the
    findings and conclusions are read in the round, the  judge  appreciated
    the way in which the Appellant's case was being put.

16. Third, there was and is no dispute that the  Appellant's  tribe  is  of
    Arab designation. It was obviously going  to  require  clear,  properly
    sourced expert opinion to show (even on the lower standard)  that  this
    Appellant would be perceived in a materially negative way by virtue  of
    skin colour and/or tribal membership. Yet what is said  in  the  report
    about skin colour is, with respect, less than clear:

                 "With regard to physical  features,  the  tribes  that  are
                 categorised as Arabs tended or consider themselves to  have
                 a relatively lighter complexions, while the non-Arabs  were
                 described as 'black'...Although describing  people  by  the
                 colour of their skin is locally common, it sounds to me  to
                 have some tribal racial connotation that aggravate tensions
                 in the socio-dynamic."

17. In addition to the lack of clarity, nothing is said about  whether  the
    Appellant's tribe are generally of dark skin  colour  and  whether,  if
    they are, this had any effect on their perception  by  the  authorities
    for this reason. There is no indication that  the  expert  had  seen  a
    picture of the Appellant. There is nothing in the report  or  elsewhere
    to suggest that the Appellant speaks a non-Arab Darfuri language.  Even
    leaving  aside  the  question  of  sources,  there  were   considerable
    deficiencies in the evidence.

18. Turning to the second limb of the  argument  (namely  that  the  entire
    Mesiri tribe may be perceived adversely), the report states:

                 " More recently, the Darfur and  wider  Sudanese  conflicts
                 appear to force other minority  non-Arabs  as  Arab  tribes
                 (e.g. Ben Hussine, Meseria) to be  scaked  [sic]  into  the
                 growing widespread conflict. This has been particularly the
                 case in the past five years or so."

19. As has been mentioned previously,  there  was  no  country  information
    before the judge to support this contention. The most  recent  case  on
    Sudan from the Upper Tribunal says  nothing  about  Arab  tribes  being
    targeted or otherwise adversely perceived (see  MM  [2015]  UKUT  00010
    (IAC)). In light of this, any tribunal of fact  can  reasonably  expect
    the author of a report in which opinions of the kind  cited  above  are
    made to provide at least some sources upon which the opinions are based
    (or to explain why opinions are unsourced).

20. Ms Allen and the  grounds  of  appeal  have  both  suggested  that  the
    opinions are properly sourced. I have checked (as I am entitled to) all
    the sources cited at the top of page 5 of the report. There is  nothing
    in any of them even begin to suggest that skin colour and/or membership
    of the Mesiri tribe have led to risks, adverse  perception,  or  indeed
    any other relevant outcome. It is right that there are continuing human
    rights abuses in Sudan, but that was never going to  be  sufficient  to
    make out the Appellant's case as put to the judge.

21. I also note that in the section of the report on  internal  relocation,
    nothing is said about skin colour or membership of the Mesiri tribe.

22. Taking all of the above into account, the judge was entitled to  reject
    the expert opinion in the manner that he did.

23. In turn, the question of whether the Appellant would  have  to  explain
    his ethnic origins to others simply did not arise as a material issue.



The risk/internal relocation issue

24. I acknowledge that it appears in certain passages of the decision  that
    the judge has conflated the issues of  risk  and  internal  relocation.
    Clearly, they are not one and the same. However, taking the decision in
    the round and having regard to my conclusions  on  the  expert  report,
    above, there is no material error here.

25. It seems to me as though the claimed  inability  of  the  Appellant  to
    relocate to Khartoum was based primarily upon the expert report:  there
    was a risk in the capital because of skin colour and or  membership  of
    the Mesiri tribe. The secondary argument would  have  been  (I  assume)
    that internal relocation was unreasonable largely for the same reasons,
    albeit that actual risk did not have to be shown. Given that the  judge
    was entitled to reject the expert evidence, the central  plank  of  the
    Appellant's arguments therefore fell away. In my  view,  this  explains
    the judge's apparent conflation of risk and internal relocation in  the
    first sentence of paragraph 33. In effect he is saying  that  once  the
    skin colour/tribal  membership  issue  fails  (as  he  found  it  did),
    relocation was otherwise reasonable.

26. My view on this is supported by three additional points. First,  it  is
    clear that the judge  had  in  mind  the  relevant  cases  on  internal
    relocation, including  the  material  parts  of  the  country  guidance
    decisions (AH (Sudan), Januzi, HGMO, and AA).  Second,  the  judge  was
    cognisant of the fact  that  country  guidance  did  not  suggest  that
    generally speaking, relocation to Khartoum was  unreasonable  for  Arab
    Darfuris. Third, the various factors set out in paragraph 29  were  all
    clearly relevant to the relocation issue.

27. Ms Allen submits that two factors relevant to relocation  were  omitted
    by the judge: the age the Appellant left Sudan  and  the  time  he  had
    spent away. It is right that these two  matters  are  not  specifically
    mentioned in paragraph 29. Notwithstanding this, obstacles exist in the
    Appellant's path. First, the point is not  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal. Second, the judge was aware of the Appellant's  past  movements
    (paragraph 9). Third, having looked at the surviving guidance  in  HGMO
    and what is said in AA and MM,  there  is  nothing  in  the  Tribunal's
    conclusions to indicate that  time  away  or  return  from  the  United
    Kingdom would, in themselves, present material problems in relation  to
    the reasonableness of relocation. Fourth, as far as I can see there was
    no country evidence before the judge indicating material problems as  a
    result of these factors (for example, whether a  lack  of  family  ties
    would cause difficulties, and such like). Fifth, I have not  been  told
    about any submissions made to the judge on how the  two  factors  would
    have had a material impact on relocation.

28. The judge did not err. Even if he did, this was  not  material,  taking
    all the circumstances of the case into account.

Misapplication of country guidance

29. It is asserted in the grounds that the judge erred in  his  application
    of HGMO. This is misconceived. I cannot see in what  way  any  material
    misapplication has occurred. Nothing more was said about  this  at  the
    hearing before me. There is no error here.

Summary

30. The Appellant's appeal fails on all grounds. It was open to  the  judge
    to reach the decision he did, and for the reasons provided.



Anonymity

31. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                       Date:  3 March 2016


H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  3 March 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
