
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04620/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 8 October 2013                             |On 15 October 2013           |
|Prepared 8 October 2013                       |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                               manjinder singh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol of Messrs Maalik & Company
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of India born on 5  June  1985  appeals,  with
    permission, against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rowlands who in a determination promulgated on 1 August 2013  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  to
    refuse him leave to remain in the United Kingdom under paragraph 336 of
    HJC 395 (as amended).

2.   The appellant had entered Britain in December 2009 as  a  student  with
    his wife, Harpreet Kaur.  Their  marriage  broke  down  and  they  were
    divorced in June 2012.  In April 2013  the  appellant  claimed  asylum.
    When claiming asylum he stated that he had a girlfriend, Sandra Plewik,
    an EEA national.

3.   The Secretary of  State  refused  the  appellant's  application  giving
    reasons in a detailed letter of 10 May 2013.  The letter is lengthy and
    after giving reasons for refusing the appellant's claim to  asylum  and
    also refusing his claim  under  Articles  2  and  3  of  the  ECHR.  In
    paragraphs  81  onwards  the  letter  the  issue  of  the   appellant's
    relationship with Ms Plewik was  considered  under  the  terms  of  the
    Citizens Directive and the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.   The
    writer of the letter   referred  to  the  terms  of  Regulation  8  and
    Regulation 17 before concluding that not only was it not accepted  that
    Ms Plewik could be classified as an individual exercising Treaty rights
    in Britain but that it was not  accepted  that  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Plewik were in a durable relationship.

4.   When dealing in detail with the issue of whether or not  the  appellant
    was in a durable relationship with Ms Plewik reference was made to  the
    determination of the Tribunal in the case of YB (EEA reg 17(4) - proper
    approach) Ivory Coast [2008] UKAIT  00062  which  indicated  that  when
    assessing whether or not the appellant was in  a  durable  relationship
    the terms of paragraph  295  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  HC  395,  as
    amended, should be taken into account.  That  Rule  sets  out  in  some
    detail the various factors to be  taken  into  account  when  assessing
    whether or not an individual was in a durable relationship.

5.   It was concluded, applying those factors that it was not  accepted  the
    appellant was in a durable relationship.

6.   The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Oliver and dismissed on asylum grounds.  However it was not  considered
    that he had dealt correctly with the issue of  the  appellant's  rights
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  and,  permission  having
    been granted, Upper Tribunal Judge McKee remitted  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal so that that issue could be dealt with.  It was  in
    these circumstances that the issue of the appellant's rights under  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 came  before  Judge  Rowlands.   The
    issue of the appellant's claim to asylum was no longer live before him.



7.   Having noticed  the  terms  of  the  witness  statements  of  both  the
    appellant and Ms Plewik and their oral evidence the judge set  out  his
    conclusions in paragraphs 19 to 22 of the determination as follows:

         "19.  There  is  little  doubt  in  my  mind  that  there  is  some
             relationship between the Appellant and Ms Plewik, the issue is
             whether it is durable or not.  It is obvious that she has gone
             to some lengths to try and show her commitment.  However, I do
             not believe that in themselves tattoos are sufficient evidence
             to satisfy me that their relationship is durable.  Neither are
             the visits that she has made  to  him  before  and  since  his
             appeal.  They are certainly signs of  affection  but  no  more
             than that.


         20.  It is, in  my  view,  to  look  at  the  durability  of  their
             relationship in the context of their past history.  Neither of
             them  has  any  history  of  durability  in   their   previous
             marriages.  Ms Plewik was married for  one  week  only  before
             leaving her husband to take up with  the  Appellant.   He  was
             married in 2009 and divorced in 2012 so clearly  the  marriage
             had  effectively  ended  earlier.   They  both  entered  their
             relationship  within  a  relatively  short  time  after  their
             marriage  break-ups.   They   are   from   totally   different
             backgrounds and although I accept that that is not necessarily
             a bar to relationships forming I still believe that looking at
             the evidence as a whole they have failed to  show  that  their
             relationship is a durable one at this stage.


         21.  I have taken into account  the  evidence  of  the  joint  bank
             account but do not believe that that is anything more than  an
             attempt by them, at an early stage, to put  together  evidence
             which might assist him in remaining  in  the  United  Kingdom.
             Neither of them could give me any real explanation as  to  why
             they bothered having a joint account.  He said it was  because
             she wanted to share everything with him and she similarly said
             it was because she trusted him.  However,  at  the  time  that
             they did this they had only been in the  relationship  for  an
             extremely short period of time and in fact they had nothing to
             share.  She had a penny in her account and no job  and  I  can
             reach only one conclusion and that is that this joint  account
             was in some way an agreement reached by  them  from  the  very
             outset to try and be able to  show  to  the  authorities  that
             their relationship was more durable than it actually  was.   I
             believe that not only the existence of the  bank  account  not
             confirm the durability of  the  relationship  if  anything  it
             casts doubt on the durability of it at all.


         22.  Ms Plewik has said that if he is returned and removed to India
             that she would follow him.  I have no doubt that if  that  was
             the case and she spent some time with him in  India  it  might
             become perfectly  clear  that  their  relationship  really  is
             durable and that a later  application,  should  they  wish  to
             return to an EEA country might succeed.   At  this  moment  in
             time I am not satisfied that theirs is a durable  relationship
             and accordingly I dismiss his appeal."

8.   A further application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  was
    then made it being argued that the judge had erred by placing the issue
    of the durability  of  the  relationship  within  the  context  of  the
    appellant's and Ms Plewik's past history. That application was  granted
    and the  appeal then  came before me to decide whether or not there was
     material error of law in the determination.

9.   At the hearing of the appeal Mr Makol stated that he wished to  produce
    further evidence to show that Ms Plewik was working in Britain and that
    she and the appellant were living together.  He argued that  the  judge
    had been wrong to focus on the past relationships of the appellant  and
    Ms Plewik rather than look at  their  relationship  in  isolation.   He
    referred to the fact that Judge Oliver had  stated  that  there  was  a
    relationship between them and indicated that that  had  also  been  the
    conclusion of Judge McKee.  He emphasised that the Regulations did  not
    require a couple to be living together for two years before it could be
    concluded that they had a durable relationship.

10.  He emphasised the number of visits which Ms  Plewik  had  made  to  the
    appellant  after  he  had  been  detained  after  the  refusal  of  his
    application for asylum and that they were still  together.   He  stated
    that she had now put in an  application  for  a  residence  card  which
    included the appellant as her partner.  He  stated  that  she  was  not
    divorced from her husband as they had not yet  been  apart  for  twelve
    months but that she would shortly be in a position to initiate  divorce
    proceedings.

11.  In reply Mr Nath referred to the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    stated that that was the context within which the issue  of  a  durable
    relationship should be considered.  He accepted that there was evidence
    of some relationship and stated that that had been  considered  by  the
    judge but that the judge had reached conclusions which were fully  open
    to him.

12.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the Immigration Judge.

13.  I note that when considering the issue  of  the  appellant's  claim  to
    asylum Judge Oliver had stated:-

         "27. The appellant's Article 8 claim is based upon his family  life
             with his new partner.  It is made under the  umbrella  of  his
             asylum claim rather than as a  formal  application  under  the
             Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.   Both
             parties were tested for their answers to questions  concerning
             matters of mutual concern.  There were some answers which were
             inconsistent.  It was never explicitly  suggested  that  their
             relationship was being falsely  portrayed  but  there  was  an
             attempt to lay the groundwork for such  a  suggestion.   There
             was good reason to test the relationship in the light  of  the
             partner's serious involvement with three different men  within
             a matter of months.  I had the benefit of seeing each of  them
             and how they reacted under cross-examination.   While  I  have
             found that the appellant's asylum claim has  been  exaggerated
             to the point of  fabrication  I  find  that  his  evidence  in
             respect of his partner is generally credible.  I come to  this
             conclusion  because  I  formed  a  favourable  view   of   the
             reliability  of  her  account  of  their   relationship.    In
             particular her body language was appropriate  to  the  claimed
             relationship and her reaction  in  cross-examination  when  an
             apparent inconsistency was put to her caused me to accept  her
             evidence.   The  judgment  I  have  formed  is  that  the  few
             inconsistencies that were elicited between  their  answers  on
             mutual matters were those that would be expected of two people
             sharing a close relationship but one which was still at a very
             early stage.  Had the matter fallen  for  consideration  under
             the EEA Regulations I would have held  that  it  had  not  yet
             reached the point of durability.  It has, after all,  not  yet
             been tested."

14.  Judge Oliver went on to conclude that notwithstanding the  relationship
    between the appellant and Ms Plewik he considered that it would not  be
    a disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR for him to be removed to India.

15.  I note therefore that it was the conclusion of Judge  Oliver  that  the
    appellant was not in a durable relationship such that he could  benefit
    from the provisions of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

16.  I would add that Judge McKee made no finding himself on  the  issue  of
    the relationship but merely found an error of  law  in  Judge  Oliver's
    determination.

17.  In determining the appeal before  him  Judge  Rowlands  did  take  into
    account the visits made by Ms Plewik to the appellant while he  was  in
    detention, the fact that she bore a tattoo with his name and  the  fact
    that she had attended a number of hearings and indeed set out  at  some
    length both her and the  appellant's  statements.   He  concluded  that
    there was "some relationship" between the appellant and Ms  Plewik  but
    found that they had not proved that that relationship was durable.

18.  The issue of whether or not two people are in  a  durable  relationship
    is a difficult and complex  one.   Clearly  the  judge  endeavoured  to
    grapple with all the evidence before him and I consider that he made no
    error of law in considering the issue holistically, taking into account
    the fact that neither Ms Plewik nor the appellant had  any  history  of
    durability in their previous marriages and that Ms Plewik  was  married
    for one week only before leaving  her  husband  to  take  up  with  the
    appellant.  The factors to which the judge  referred  in  paragraph  20
    were relevant.  It is not the case that  he  stated  that  because  the
    appellant and Ms Plewik's past relationships had been short-lived  that
    he did not find that the  relationship  was  durable.   Rather,  having
    taken all relevant factors into account he concluded that the appellant
     had not discharged the burden of proof upon him.  He was  entitled  to
    take into account the length of their past relationships and indeed  in
    particular the fact that Ms Plewik had only been married for  one  week
    before leaving her husband  (and  indeed,  of  course,  she  was  still
    married to her husband) before concluding that the appellant could  not
    benefit from the provisions of Regulation 8 of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.

19.  As stated above I have concluded that that  was  a  decision  that  was
    open to him on the evidence.

20.  I therefore find that the determination of the Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal shall stand and I re-make the decision, again dismissing  this
    appeal. I would add, however, that, taking into  account  all  relevant
    matters and in particular the visitors' log of visits by Ms  Plewik  to
    the appellant while he was detained,   should  she  and  the  appellant
    marry I consider that it would be difficult for the Secretary of  State
    to conclude that the marriage was one of convenience.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


