
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04356/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th August 2013                             |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Ramin Ramezani
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Harrison, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Alis  made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 6th June 2013.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Iran  born  on  20th  August  1984.   He
    arrived in the UK on 26th March 2013 and claimed asylum.  He said  that
    he worked for an agency firm and was subcontracted to  work  at  Kavian
    Petrochemical as a technical officer from 24th May 2009.

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he attended a demonstration in Shiraz  on
    18th June 2009 following which he was detained  and  subsequently  ill-
    treated for two months.  He was released after signing  an  undertaking
    not to file a complaint with the courts or talk to the  media  or  take
    photographs of his injuries, and returned to his previous work.

 4. He began to gather information about corruption and to take photographs
    of cargo  connected  to  the  nuclear  program  which  he  felt  to  be
    suspicious. On 22nd July 2012 his home was raided and the following day
    he was told that the security officer had  removed  his  work  computer
    which stored all the photographs and other incriminating evidence.   He
    went into hiding until he managed to  leave  Iran  illegally  in  March
    2013.

 5. The judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant, who was  represented,
    and considered the documentary evidence which included a medical report
    from Dr Lord.

 6. The judge made a number of findings in the Appellant's favour.  He  was
    prepared to accept that  the  Appellant  attended  a  demonstration  in
    Shiraz as claimed and considered that a couple of points raised by  the
    Respondent lacked merit, for example the fact that  the  Appellant  was
    unaware of the location of  his  detention.  He  did  not  consider  an
    apparent discrepancy in his account of abuse between that which he gave
    to Dr Lord and that which he gave at interview to be  significant.   He
    considered Dr Lord's report to be potentially supportive.

 7. The judge, however, did not consider  it  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Appellant would be engaged by a firm with  strong  connections  to  the
    government  in  circumstances  where  he  had  been  detained  by   the
    authorities.  He had given an inconsistent account of what was  in  the
    cargo and whether it was guarded, and he did not consider  it  credible
    that he would have been able to take daily photographs of the cargo  at
    will.  He concluded that his claim that he stored the  photographs  and
    other incriminating material on his work computer for  safety  to  lack
    credibility, especially as the firm in question was by that time  under
    the control of Sepah.  There was also inconsistent evidence in relation
    to his parents and whether they were alive.

 8. Having considered all of the evidence he concluded  that  his  injuries
    were not caused as claimed and he dismissed the appeal.





The Grounds of Application

 9. Although the Appellant was represented at the hearing, he  drafted  the
    grounds of appeal himself.  He said that the  judge  had  misunderstood
    his evidence when he said that the  Kavian  Petrochemical  Company  was
    under the control of Sepah  from  2009  because  he  had  said  in  his
    interview that the company was Fater Kosaran Janoob.  Taking employment
    in a  private  company  was  different  from  taking  employment  in  a
    government company, and being employed as a technical civil  expert  in
    the organisation would not have made him appear to be a threat.

10. He made a number of comments about his incarceration and said that  his
    evidence appeared to be inconsistent because he had a  troubled  memory
    of a very traumatic situation.   He  would  be  able  to  collect  more
    evidence in relation to his parents and  his  university  education  if
    given more time.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  Judge  Taylor  on  27th
    June 2013.  He said that it  was  highly  regrettable  that  the  judge
    appeared not to have kept any record  of  the  evidence  given  by  the
    Appellant and not to have indicated in  the  determination  whether  he
    gave oral evidence or  was  cross-examined.   The  official  Record  of
    Proceedings  was  blank.   For  that  reason  alone  the  grounds  were
    arguable.

12. On 22nd August  2013  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

13. Ms Harrison, who was  not  the  representative  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, relied on some of the grounds as  drafted  by  the  Appellant
    although not ones seeking to adduce post-decision evidence.

14. She said that the judge had misunderstood the Appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to his work and had wrongly stated  at  paragraph  23  of  the
    determination that Sepah took control of Kavian Petrochemical,  whereas
    in fact  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  that  he  was  working  as  a
    contractor for that company and was employed by  Fater  Kosaran  Janoob
    and it was Fater which was taken over by Sepah and not Kavian.

15. Although she accepted that she had not made any application to  amplify
    her grounds, she submitted that the judge had erred in his treatment of
    the expert evidence and had not mentioned the fact  that  Dr  Lord  had
    said that the Appellant was  suffering  from  PTSD  and  had  been  the
    subject of sexual abuse.

16. The judge had accepted that the Appellant had attended a  demonstration
    in 2009 but had not considered whether, on that account, he would be at
    risk  as  someone  who  was  perceived  to  be  in  opposition  to  the
    government.

17. Ms Petterson defended the determination and said that whilst the  judge
    may not have been entirely  accurate  in  his  consideration  of  which
    company had been taken over by Sepah it was clear  that  he  was  aware
    that it was the Appellant's case that he was a subcontractor and  there
    was therefore no misapprehension by him of the  facts.   She  submitted
    that the judge had  dealt  with  the  medical  evidence  properly,  and
    observed that Dr Lord had recounted the Appellant as saying  there  had
    been attempted sexual abuse rather than actual abuse.

18. So far as the grant of permission was concerned, she said it was  clear
    that oral evidence had been taken and indeed the judge  made  reference
    to it at paragraph 49 when he said that he had taken the oral  evidence
    into account, and at paragraphs 60 and 62 when he  referred  to  cross-
    examination.

Findings and Conclusions

19. There is no error of law in this determination.

20. With respect to the slip in paragraph 23 in relation to  which  company
    had been taken over by Sepah, the mistake is immaterial because  it  is
    clear that the judge was fully aware that it was the  Appellant's  case
    that he was subcontracted  to  that  firm  and  not  employed  by  them
    directly.   He  specifically  refers  to  him  being  employed   as   a
    subcontractor at paragraph 61.

21. Neither is  there  any  error  in  his  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence.   He  accepted  that  the  doctor  found  two  scars  on  the
    Appellant's right arm to be diagnostic of incised wounds, but  observed
    that they could not  be  dated  and  the  doctor  could  not  rule  out
    accidental injury even though she found it less likely.   The  chip  on
    the tooth could also have been the result of an accident.  He  properly
    considered the medical evidence  in  the  context  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence as a whole and was  entitled  to  conclude  that  it  did  not
    establish that the injuries had been caused as claimed.

22. The fact that he did not  refer  to  any  sexual  abuse  is  immaterial
    because there was none. On the Appellant's evidence, although the guard
    had attempted  to  rape  him  on  one  occasion,  he  had  successfully
    resisted.

23. There is nothing  in  the  point  in  relation  to  attendance  at  the
    demonstration.  The judge made a clear finding that the  Appellant  was
    not arrested or detained as a consequence and therefore there would  be
    no reason for the authorities to be aware of his attendance.

24. Finally, with respect to the Record of Proceedings, the fact  that  the
    judge's notes are not in the file does not show that he kept no record.
     This is a very experienced judge who has been sitting for many  years.
    It is inconceivable that  he  would  not  have  taken  a  note  of  the
    evidence.  The file itself is split into two and it would be  easy  for
    the notes to have fallen out.

Decision

The decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.
Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
