
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04413/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th  March 2016                           |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               MR HUSBAN AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Muman of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer

              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

1.   The appellant applied for entry clearance to the UK  for  the  purposes
    of marrying an EEA national.  His application was granted on 5 November
    2013 and he entered the UK, he claims, on  30  November  2013.   On  11
    March 2014, shortly before his leave to enter was  due  to  expire,  he
    made a claim for asylum.

2.   The basis for the appellant's claim was that he was  an  Ahmadi  Muslim
    from Pakistan.  His date of birth was 28 February  1991.   Although  he
    had a Pakistani passport and valid entry clearance to join his wife,  I
    N Rana, he nevertheless claimed that as an Ahmadi Muslim  Pakistan  was
    not a safe country for him to live in.  the appellant claimed  that  he
    was a member of an elite squad within the Pakistani police, and that he
    had been singled out for blame  for  an  incident  involving  a  fellow
    officer for which he was not responsible.

3.   The respondent, having considered the background  and  the  appellant's
    immigration history, including his failure to claim asylum on  arrival,
    decided that the appellant had failed to meet the  conditions  required
    for such a claim.   His  claim  was  essentially  unsubstantiated.   In
    particular, the respondent did not  accept  that  his  dispute  with  a
    fellow officer, Khurram Saeed, was indicative of his  being  persecuted
    as an Ahmadi Muslim.  The  respondent  had  regard  to  the  case  law,
    including the leading case of CG NN [2012] UKUT 00389, which  suggested
    that legislation restricted the ability of Ahmadis to  openly  practise
    their faith but it has long been possible for Ahmadis to  do  so  on  a
    restricted basis either in private or in community with other  Ahmadis.
    The appellant had not established that he would wish to  take  part  in
    any activities  which  would  give  rise  to  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood of persecution, inhuman  treatment  or  treatment  requiring
    international humanitarian  protection.   Accordingly,  the  respondent
    refused to vary his leave to enter or remain in the UK and  decided  to
    remove him pursuant to directions under  Section  47  (Removal:  Person
    with  Statutorily  Extended  Leave)  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The appellant was advised of his right to appeal
    this decision.  He duly did so.

4.   The  grounds  state  that  the  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules and as such should at least  be
    granted humanitarian protection.  The decision of  the  respondent  was
    unreasonable and harsh.  Absolutely  no  detail  is  provided  in  form
    ICD1041 (IAFT-1).

5.   The appeal against the respondent's  decisions  came  before  Judge  of
    First-tier Tribunal R A O'Hagan  (the  Immigration  Judge)  sitting  at
    Sheldon Court, Birmingham  on  3  June  2015.   The  Immigration  Judge
    decided that the appellant accepted that his  liability  to  arrest  on
    return to  Pakistan  was  created  by  his  failure  to  follow  police
    discipline by going absent without leave.  The appellant had also given
    a "highly  exaggerated"  account  and  whilst,  the  Immigration  Judge
    accepted, the appellant had been subject to  "persecutory  acts"  these
    did not establish to the requisite standard an insufficiency  of  state
    protection within Pakistan.  He rejected the account and dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.  No anonymity direction  was  made  and  no  fee
    award was payable and there was therefore no fee award.




The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

6.   An application was made to the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal (the UT).  It was  suggested  that  the  Immigration
    Judge's finding that Mr Saeed deliberately shot himself in the hope  of
    implicating the  appellant  was  perverse.   The  suggestion  that  the
    appellant's superiors would have protected the appellant because he was
    an Ahmadi was against  the  weight  of  the  evidence.   In  fact,  the
    Immigration Judge ought to have found that  Mr  Saeed  mistakenly  shot
    himself but attempted to blame the appellant to cover his own  mistake.
    The Immigration Judge had been wrong to conclude that  the  appellant's
    credibility was harmed.

7.   These grounds received favourable consideration by Designated Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Appleyard on 24  July  2015.   Judge  Appleyard
    considered  that  the  judge's  findings  on  the  "totality   of   the
    credibility assessment" needed to be considered again and he found that
    there was an arguable error of law.

The Hearing

8.   At the hearing I was able to hear submissions by  both  representatives
    and come to a decision with full reasons reserved.

9.   Mr Muman took me to the guidance case  of  CG,  pointing  out  that  an
    Ahmadi is in general not  at  risk  on  return  to  Pakistan  but  that
    judicial fact-finders may in certain circumstances conclude that he  is
    reasonably likely  to  be  targeted  by  non-state  actors.   Mr  Muman
    submitted at length that  Mr  Saeed  was  a  non-state  actor  who  had
    targeted the appellant for his faith.  Nevertheless, this had not  come
    to the attention of the authorities.  When the disciplinary proceedings
    against Mr Saeed were considered (at Section (d)  of  the  respondent's
    bundle before the FTT) it transpired that no reference was made to  the
    appellant's religion.   Mr  Saeed  (at  D6)  had  complained  that  the
    appellant had discharged an SMG gun.  No  reference  was  made  to  the
    appellant's faith.  I was taken in detail through the various stages of
    the investigation and the conclusions reached  by  those  investigating
    the matter.  Mr Muman submitted that the  Immigration  Judge  seems  to
    have concluded that the appellant's Ahmadi faith must have come to  the
    attention of those  investigating  the  incident  involving  Mr  Saeed.
    Therefore, the Immigration Judge  had  mistakenly  concluded  that  the
    decision not to blame the appellant for the incident was indicative  of
    the fact that adequate protection  was  available  to  him.   This  was
    plainly wrong.  The real situation revealed by the  investigation  into
    the Saeed incident showed that Mr Saeed had discharged  his  rifle  and
    blamed the appellant but the investigation had then  revealed  that  Mr
    Saeed was entirely to blame.  Mr Saeed's  witness  statement  explained
    why he had acted as he did.  Mr Saeed's real motivation was that he was
    a rival of the appellant and wished to blame him for anything he could.



10.  Mr Muman then turned to the  Immigration  Judge's  findings.   He  said
    that paragraph  47  had  contained  an  unwarranted  finding  over  the
    appellant's superior's desire to protect the appellant as a  member  of
    the Ahmadi community.  In fact, there was no evidence that the decision
    of the appellant's superiors to absolve the appellant for any blame for
    the Saeed incident was not motivated by his Ahmadi faith.

11.  The Immigration Judge went on  in  paragraph  48  of  his  decision  to
    explain that the appellant's superiors did not know that the  appellant
    was a member of the Ahmadi community when he  joined  the  force  which
    makes the assertion in the previous paragraph plainly  erroneous.   The
    Immigration Judge appears to have gone  on  to  assume  that  when  the
    appellant became a member of an "elite police force" his superiors must
    have acquired knowledge of his Ahmadi faith.  Certainly, there  was  no
    evidence that his Ahmadi faith had come out in the Saeed investigation.

12.  Mr Muman went on to describe the suspension of Mr Saeed and  the  order
    made against the appellant (at D28-29).  However, as I pointed  out  to
    Mr Muman, the suspension from the force came about as a result  of  the
    appellant making himself absent without leave and  was  nothing  to  do
    with the incident involving Mr Saeed or the appellant's  Ahmadi  faith.
    Nevertheless, Mr Muman submitted that there would be a heightened  risk
    to the appellant arising out of his "absence without leave,"  the  fact
    that the authorities were, by the date of the  hearing,  aware  of  his
    faith as well as his post "arrival activities."  The combined effect of
    these things would be to  put  the  appellant  at  risk  on  return  to
    Pakistan.

13.  Mr Muman then referred me to  paragraph  19  of  his  client's  witness
    statement dated 24 April 2014  (at  B6  in  the  respondent's  bundle).
    There, the appellant expresses a fear that if his "pursuers" found  out
    about his long-term departure from Pakistan he would be at risk  there.
    It appears from that paragraph that his marriage to an EEA national was
    a sham in order to enable him to leave the  country.   He  claims  that
    subsequently his wife "treated me badly" and they are no longer  living
    together.

14.  Finally, Mr Muman accepted that a  concession  had  been  made  by  his
    predecessor, Mr Madanhi  at  the  hearing  before  the  FTT,  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk of persecution by virtue of  his  likely
    arrest for being absent without leave.  If  such  concession  had  been
    made, it had been wrong in Mr Muman's view.   He  therefore  wished  to
    withdraw it.

15.  The respondent submitted that the  decision  was  sound  and  that  the
    criticisms were wholly  unjustified.   It  was  quite  clear  from  the
    context that the reference to the words "persecutory acts" in paragraph
    58 of the decision was an error.  Given that the complaint by Saeed was
    nothing to do  with  the  appellant's  religion,  had  been  thoroughly
    investigated and the  appellant  exonerated  there  was  no  basis  for
    concluding that  he  was  subject  even  to  discrimination  yet  alone
    persecution.  The harassment from Mr Saeed was down to the  appellant's
    religion, according to the Immigration Judge, and  therefore  if  Saeed
    knew about the appellant's religion  the  appellant's  superiors  would
    have known.  The appellant's own witness  statement  (at  B4-5  of  the
    respondent's bundle)  states  in  paragraph  10  that  the  appellant's
    colleagues enquired about his religious beliefs as early as  2010.   It
    was  therefore  perfectly  reasonable  for  the  Immigration  Judge  to
    conclude (as he did at paragraphs  46-47  of  his  decision)  that  the
    persecutory acts at the hands of Saeed must have been motivated by  the
    appellant's religion but that the appellant's  superiors  had  accepted
    the appellant's side of the story.

16.  However, the key point was that the appellant had been exonerated as  a
    result of the investigation.  That investigation had been exemplary.

17.  The Immigration Judge also dealt with an incident in 2013 in which  the
    appellant claims that whilst on his way home from work a combination of
    Mr Saeed, members of the Khatme Nabuwat and colleagues from  the  elite
    police force ambushed him.  This was dealt with at paragraph 51 of  the
    decision.  It was described as "highly  exaggerated."   In  any  event,
    this was two years after the incident involving  Mr  Saeed,  which  had
    been in 2011.

18.  The appellant had been able to stay in Pakistan for many  months  after
    the incidents and had not experienced problems.  He had  not  explained
    adequately why he took so long to leave Pakistan or why he took so long
    to claim asylum in the UK.  It was a "text book" case, in Mr  Wilding's
    submission, of Section 8 of the Asylum (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc.)
    2004 being correctly relied on by the respondent.

19.  The Immigration Judge had been right to refuse to attach weight to  the
    fact that the appellant's mother  and  sister  had  claimed  asylum  in
    Germany.

20.  As far as the  "concession"  was  concerned,  given  that  this  was  a
    concession of fact rather than law it was perfectly proper to allow  it
    to stand.  But in any event it would  not  make  a  difference  to  the
    outcome.

21.   In  conclusion,  Mr  Wilding  said  that  the  judge  may  have   used
    infelicitous language but  he  had  clearly  found  nothing  more  than
    discrimination had occurred.  The decision and findings were sound.  Mr
    Wilding also submitted that there were no "sur place" activities of any
    relevance since the appellant's departure from Pakistan.

22.  At this point in  the  proceedings,  when  I  called  on  Mr  Muman  to
    respond, he said that he was intent on making an application under Rule
    15(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  take  into   account
    additional evidence.  He also said that the persecutory  acts  referred
    to by the judge  at  paragraph  58  of  his  decision  related  to  the
    allegation by Mr Saeed and the incident of 22 June 2013.  Based on  the
    appellant's case  Mr  Saeed  had  been  motivated  by  the  appellant's
    religion.  The appellant had not told his employers that he was Ahmadi,
    however.  The evidence suggested that the authorities were not aware of
    his Ahmadi faith but Mr Saeed was.  Mr Saeed, a  non-state  actor,  was
    capable of persecutory acts which did bring the  appellant  within  the
    Refugee Convention.  The Immigration Judge had failed to  grapple  with
    the essential characteristics of the case.

23.  At the end of the hearing in order to assist the  parties  I  announced
    that my decision was that there had been  no  material  error  of  law.
    This is for the reasons which follow.

Discussion

24.  The Ahmadis are a  persecuted  group  within  Pakistan.   However,  the
    country guidance and objective evidence  indicates  that  the  Pakistan
    state does not persecute those who practise  or  manifest  their  faith
    discreetly, the sanctions imposed by  the  relevant  Penal  Code  being
    reserved for those who do so openly and in disregard of  the  religious
    traditions of the wider community.  An Ahmadi may be targeted  by  non-
    state actors but this tends to be where  the  person  concerned  has  a
    prominent social or business profile. An Ahmadi who is found not to  be
    reasonably likely to engage in, or wish to engage in, behaviour of  the
    type which would attract attention from the authorities would  only  be
    targeted where it is also found that the person concerned would  engage
    in that behaviour on his return.

25.  Mr Muman's principal submission at the hearing was that  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant's exoneration following  the  investigation
    into the Saeed incident was motivated by his religion.  This, Mr  Muman
    submitted, was indicative of an unsupported finding that the  appellant
    would not be at  risk  on  return.   The  argument  runs  that  if  the
    appellant's religion had not come to the attention of his superiors the
    appellant's superiors would not wish to protect him by reason of  their
    common religion. It seems to be quite a leap from  that  to  say  that,
    because the appellant's  superiors  were  unaware  of  the  appellant's
    Ahmadi faith they would, on learning of that  faith,  inevitably  adopt
    the views of his  persecutors,  but  that  seems  to  be  the  argument
    advanced.

26.  As I pointed out to Mr Muman at the hearing,  I  did  not  accept  this
    submission.  There is no evidence that the appellant's superiors  would
    have acted any differently whether  or  not  they  were  aware  of  the
    appellant's  religious  beliefs.   The  investigation  into  the  Saeed
    incident was conspicuously fair and not in any way motivated in  favour
    or against the appellant or Mr Saeed.  The appellant had been  promoted
    to an elite branch  of  the  police  force  and  the  response  of  the
    authorities  to  his  going   absent   without   leave   was   entirely
    understandable and also nothing to do with his religion.

27.  The decision clearly contains infelicitous language  and  there  are  a
    number of errors, for example:

    (1)  the finding at paragraph 48 that his superiors were motivated by a
         desire to exonerate the appellant because of his religion  was,  as
         Mr Muman submitted, not supported by the investigation itself;


    (2)  the finding at paragraph 51 of the decision that the appellant had
         given a "highly exaggerated" account of the incident in  June  2013
         appeared to be inconsistent with a finding later that the appellant
         had "experienced persecutory acts from non-state actors."

28.  Nevertheless, when the decision is read as a whole  it  is  clear  that
    when the  Immigration  Judge  speaks  of  "persecutory  acts"  what  he
    actually means is that there was a possible religious motivation to  Mr
    Saeed's actions in blaming the appellant for the discharge of a  rifle.
    It is important to note, however, that the Immigration Judge goes on to
    find, (in paragraph  52  of  his  decision)  that  "whatever  religious
    motivation there  may  have  been  for  his  original  dislike  of  the
    appellant, it is  likely  to  have  been  superseded  by  (Mr  Saeed's)
    personal dislike  following  his  dismissal  from  the  police  force."



29.  It seems to the UT  that  a  finding  that  the  appellant's  superiors
    probably did become aware of his Ahmadi  faith  between  2010  when  he
    joined the police force and 2011 when the incident involving  Mr  Saeed
    occurred seems to be in accordance with common sense.  Even if there is
    no reference to the appellant's religion in the  investigatory  process
    it does appear to be reasonably likely that the  appellant's  superiors
    were aware of his religious beliefs by the date  of  the  investigation
    into the Saeed incident.  It seems that these findings were open to the
    Immigration Judge on  the  evidence,  including,  the  appellant's  own
    evidence as to the extent to which he had "problems" after starting  in
    the police force.  It is, this Tribunal finds, reasonably  likely  that
    his superiors would have been aware of his Ahmadi faith.  However, this
    is not essential to the Immigration Judge's decision since there is  no
    evidence that the appellant's superiors treated him any differently  as
    a consequence.  There  was  every  indication  that  they  treated  the
    appellant fairly.

30.   I  have  no  doubt  that  when  the  Immigration  Judge  referred   to
    "persecutory acts" he used inappropriate  terminology.   The  principal
    motivation for Saeed appears to have been personal dislike  or  rivalry
    (see paragraph 52).  There is no adequate basis for concluding that the
    appellant experienced persecutory acts from either non-state actors  or
    state actors.  In any event, where a claim based on persecution by non-
    state actors is asserted it is incumbent upon  the  applicant  to  show
    that no adequate protection would be provided for the appellant  within
    the principle of Horvath v Secretary of State [2001] 1AC 489.  It seems
    in this case that the appellant would  have  been  protected  from  any
    false allegations by the likes of Mr Saeed by virtue of his success  in
    the police force and the strong regard which he  was  held  in  by  his
    superiors.

Conclusions

31.  Whatever infelicities exist the stark  facts  are  that  the  appellant
    progressed to an elite branch of the  police  force  and  there  is  no
    evidence that  prior  to  his  departure  from  Pakistan  he  was  ever
    discriminated against, yet alone persecuted, for his religious beliefs.
     There were  significant  credibility  issues  surrounding  his  claim,
    including the delay between  the  incident  in  2011  and  the  alleged
    incident in 2013 not to mention a significant delay  in  advancing  his
    asylum claim on arrival  into  the  UK.   Additionally,  the  appellant
    submitted a bogus application under the EEA Regulations  to  facilitate
    his entry into the UK.  The Immigration Judge comprehensively  rejected
    the allegation that the appellant had been subject  to  persecution  by
    non-state actors in the form of  a  complaint  by  Mr  Saeed  that  the
    appellant had fired his rifle  at  Mr  Saeed  accidentally.   The  main
    motivation for the actions of Mr Saeed, based on the judge's  findings,
    was personal dislike.  The Immigration Judge  comprehensively  rejected
    the account of any incident on 22 June 2013.  These findings were  open
    to the Immigration Judge who dealt comprehensively with the  facts  and
    the evidence.  He unfortunately expressed himself  inappropriately  but
    his decision contains no error of law material to the  outcome  of  the
    case.

My Decision

The appeal against the decision of the FTT is dismissed.   The  decision  of
the respondent to remove the appellant stands.

No anonymity direction and no fee  award  was  made  by  the  FTT  and  both
decisions stand.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was made by the FTT and that decision is maintained.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

