
IAC-FH-AR-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04112/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2015                     |On 26 May 2015                       |
|Prepared 29 April 2015               |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               MOHAMMAD IFRAN
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss F Allen, Counsel, instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh, date of  birth  13  May  1989,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 17 June 2014, to make
    removal directions pursuant to Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum
    Act 1999, an asylum/human rights based claim having been refused, and a
    notice under Form IS151A having been served on 17 May 2014.  The appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge J D L Edwards who, on 29  January
    2015, promulgated his decision in which the  appeal  was  dismissed  on
    asylum, Humanitarian Protection and human rights grounds.

2.   Before the judge the Appellant  was  represented  by  Miss  C  Physsas,
    Counsel, and the Respondent by  Mr  A  Bassi,  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

3.   Permission to appeal against the judge's decision was given  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge P J G White on 26 February 2015 and the  Respondent
    made a Rule 24 response on 11 March 2015.

4.   In representing the Appellant today Miss Allen provided  a  copy  of  a
    witness statement from Counsel,  Miss  Clare  Physsas,  concerning  her
    attendance note, notes of  hearing  and  recollection  of  the  hearing
    before the judge.

5.   The gravamen of the evidence provided is that essentially Miss  Physsas
    endeavoured to deal with a number of procedural points.  It is said the
    judge did not permit procedural fairness to take place  to  the  extent
    that the hearing was unfair and/or the conduct of the hearing gave rise
    to the appearance of bias.  It is plain from Miss Physsas's  note  that
    she  raised  a  number  of  points  at  the  hearing  which  were   not
    sympathetically received by the judge.  In particular she  sought  time
    to take instructions, had to deal with late production of documents  by
    the Presenting Officer, and at some point the judge was  shown  by  the
    Presenting Officer a Home Office document or documents which  were  not
    disclosed to Miss Physsas but in part something  of  the  document  was
    referred to in the judge's determination.

6.   It also appears, although it seems to be of a more  minor  point,  that
    Miss Physsas,  because  of  the  late  arrival  of  witnesses  for  the
    Appellant, did not have the opportunity to introduce herself  to  those
    witnesses and whilst that  of  itself  might  not  be  significant,  it
    appears to be part of an unfortunate process of the particular hearing,
    of which the judge seems to have allowed that to happen.

7.   It is clear  that  the  judge  reached  trenchant  adverse  credibility
    findings for a number of reasons and at this stage I  do  not  consider
    whether or not those adverse findings really bear examination.  What is
    complained of at its heart is that the hearing was not a fair one  with
    a proper opportunity  to  take  instructions  and  deal  with  evidence
    arising.  Whether or not the outcome of those matters being dealt  with
    as Miss Physsas sought would have made a difference to the  hearing,  I
    express absolutely no view.

8.   It is of concern that  the  judge's  reasoning  also  in  dealing  with
    witnesses who gave evidence, is really so thin. For example, the  judge
    at paragraph 30(h) says:

         "The evidence  of  the  witness  Mr  Tudafor  and  Mr  Hossain  was
         lamentable in its quality, to such an extent that no weight can  be
         attached on it for the reasons set out above.  That  the  Appellant
         chose to call such witnesses shows in my judgement a  wish  on  his
         part to bolster a weak claim by dubious evidence."

9.   The difficulty is that one cannot discern in what  respect  the  reason
    or what were  the  reasons  set  out  which  the  judge  felt  properly
    explained the finding rejecting the totality of  the  evidence  of  two
    witnesses who had provided  witness  statements  and/or  rejecting  the
    Appellant's claim.

10.  It is unfortunate that  this  should  have  happened  but  I  am  fully
    satisfied that the judge's refusal to provide Miss Physsas with time to
    take instructions and to properly present the appeal let alone, even if
    it is not significant, not to show her documents he was receiving  from
    the Presenting Officer, Mr Bassi, demonstrated  procedural  unfairness.
    On that basis alone I would have found the  Original  Tribunal  made  a
    material error of law and set the decision aside.

11.  The judge has not seen the criticisms made of his general  conduct  nor
    has he seen what it is said  gave  the  appearance  of  bias.   I  have
    considered whether or not it was necessary for the judge to  see  those
    remarks and make comments.   However  because  of  the  point  made  in
    paragraph 8 above the lack of adequate and sufficient reasons means the
    decision can not stand and will have to be remade.

12.  For my purposes today it  is  unnecessary  to  reach  a  conclusion  on
    whether there was the appearance of bias and  whatever  views  I  might
    have do not necessarily need to do so.

13.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that the matter is remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be made by a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
    than Judge J D L Edwards nor Judge P J G White.

Directions

    (1)  Time estimate: 2 hours

    (2)  Bengali interpreter

    (3)   Any  further  statements  or  documents  relied  upon  by  either
         Appellant or Respondent to be served 21  days  before  the  further
         hearing unless further directions at a CMR are given.

    (4)  Please  relist  if  possible  with  reference  to  Miss  Physsas's
         availability : 0207 406 7552.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey   9 May 2015

