
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04712/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 10 December 2015                          |   On 12 January 2016          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              JOYCE MANYANDURE
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Tapfumaneyi, PT Law & Associates

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ferguson who allowed Ms  Manyandure's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  asylum.   The
    appeal was allowed under Article 8 ECHR.


 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to Miss  Manyandure  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. At the hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives.   I
    reserved my decision which I set out below with my reasons.



Submissions


 4. Ms Sreeraman submitted that the assessment of proportionality  under  a
    freestanding Article 8 assessment was erroneous.  Undue weight had been
    given to irrelevant and immaterial factors.  She referred to  paragraph
    [25] where the judge states that little weight should be given  to  the
    Appellant's private  life,  and  points  to  negative  factors  in  the
    Appellant's case.  However in paragraphs [28] and [29] the  judge  sets
    out two factors which shift the balance.


 5. In relation to historical deprivation of entitlement to citizenship, it
    was submitted that the judge  was  fully  aware  that  the  Appellant's
    husband had died in 1996, fifteen years prior to this application,  and
    she had never taken the opportunity to claim citizenship.  There was no
    evidence before the judge that she would have been  entitled  to  apply
    for entry clearance as the widow of a British national.


 6. In relation to family life, the judge had failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons why the ties between the Appellant and her  children  exhibited
    anything more than the normal emotional ties to be found between  adult
    relatives.  I was referred to paragraph [13] of the decision where  the
    judge found that the Appellant had adult children in both countries and
    grandchildren in both countries.   In  conclusion  she  submitted  that
    undue weight had been given  to  immaterial  factors  and  the  balance
    weighed in favour of her removal.  The errors of law were material.


 7. In response Mr. Tapfumaneyi referred to the case of Dube (ss.117A-117D)
    [2015] UKUT 90.  He submitted that there was no a la  carte  menu,  and
    the factors set out in section 117 were not exhaustive.  The judge  was
    entitled to consider factors which were  relevant  to  the  Appellant's
    case including  her  previous  marriage  to  a  British  citizen.   Her
    children had made applications to come to the United Kingdom  and  they
    had all qualified.  Regarding the finding of family  life  between  the
    Appellant and her children, he submitted that the judge was aware of it
    and had made mention of it.  I was referred to paragraphs [14] and [15]
    of the decision where the judge refers to SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387.  The children had come to the United Kingdom lawfully and they had
    also suffered harassment.


 8. He submitted that the evidence of the Appellant and  her  children  had
    been accepted.  She was living with her children.  Paragraphs [20]  and
    [30] contained the findings.  At paragraph [28] the  judge  established
    that she had family life as  she  lived  with  her  children  who  were
    entitled to remain.

 9. In relation to the finding of future  harassment,  I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs [20] onwards, in particular paragraphs [25] and  [28].    At
    paragraph [18] of the reasons for refusal  letter  the  Respondent  had
    accepted that the Appellant had been targeted and it was submitted that
    there was no basis to infer that such  targeting  would  not  continue,
    even if the judge had not specifically stated  it.   The  circumstances
    which led the Respondent to accept that she had been harassed continued
    as she was still the widow of a white British man.


10. In response Ms Sreeraman submitted that, even if it was  accepted  that
    there was a finding of family life, the decision was materially  flawed
    as the judge had failed  to  engage  with  any  evidence  which  showed
    anything other than normal emotional ties between the Appellant and her
    adult children, which ties she had maintained previously from Zimbabwe.
     I was referred to the case of Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  There  was
    no question of  her  being  deprived  of  the  way  in  which  she  had
    maintained contact with her children by returning her to Zimbabwe.


Error of law decision


11. The judge's findings  in  relation  to  Article  8  are  set  out  from
    paragraph [23] onwards.  The judge refers to family life  in  paragraph
    [23] in the context of stating that the Appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM.  Paragraph [25] states:


    "Little weight should be given  to  her  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom because it was established entirely  at  a  time  when  it  was
    precarious, and for most of the time when it was unlawful."


    The judge then goes on to consider  in  paragraphs  [26]  to  [30]  the
    proportionality assessment.


12. Paragraph [28] states:


    "There is a significant breach of family life  in  the  fact  that  her
    adult children are entitled to settle in the United Kingdom because  of
    their father but she is denied the ability to reside here with them  as
    his widow."


    However there has been no finding prior to this that the Appellant  has
    a family life in the United Kingdom sufficient to engage the  operation
    of Article 8, which finding must be  made  prior  to  consideration  of
    whether there is interference in this family life, and if  so,  whether
    it is proportionate.  There is no analysis of the relationship  between
    the Appellant and her adult children to lead to a finding that the ties
    between them go above and beyond the normal emotional ties to be  found
    between parents and adult children.  The judge finds that  there  is  a
    breach of family life without giving reasons  for  why  he  found  that
    Article 8 was engaged.  Mr. Tapfumaneyi pointed to paragraph  [28]  for
    the finding that the Appellant had established family  life,  but  this
    only contains a finding that she lives with her  adult  children.   Mr.
    Tapfumaneyi accepted at the hearing that the fact that she  lived  with
    her children did not equate  to  a  finding  of  family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8.  I find that the decision  does  not  contain  a
    finding that the Appellant has a family life with her children.


13. It was also submitted that the evidence of  the  grandchildren  in  the
    United Kingdom pointed to the fact that she  had  a  family  life  with
    them.  However, although the judge had considered the evidence from the
    Appellant and her family, the decision contains  no  finding  that  the
    Appellant has a  relationship  with  the  grandchildren  sufficient  to
    amount to a family life for the purposes of Article 8, as a  result  of
    consideration of this evidence.


14. I find that there has been a failure to make a  finding  as  to  family
    life, and a failure to consider the nature of the relationship  between
    the Appellant and her adult children.


15. Despite having made no finding of family life, the judge proceeds to  a
    proportionality assessment, and finds that there has been a  breach  of
    family life.  In doing so, the judge gives weight to the fact that  the
    Appellant is the widow of a British national.  However,  there  was  no
    evidence before the judge that the Appellant had  tried  to  apply  for
    entry to the United Kingdom on the basis of her husband's  nationality.
    In paragraph [20] the judge finds that her husband died  in  1996,  but
    she made no application to come to the United Kingdom until she came as
    a visitor to see her children.  There was no evidence before the  judge
    that she ever chose to apply for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom
    on the basis of her marriage to a British citizen.  The judge considers
    this in paragraph [28] and finds that the Appellant  "would  have  been
    eligible to apply to enter" but also states that this would be "subject
    to meeting the details of the requirements of the  immigration  rules".
    There was no evidence before him that she would have met these details.
      At the end of paragraph [28] it states that the  Appellant  has  been
    "denied the ability to reside here" with her children as her  husband's
    widow, but there is no evidence that she had ever  tried  to  apply  to
    come to live here.


16. I have found that the judge did not make a reasoned finding that  there
    was family life between the Appellant and her children.   I  find  that
    even so, he proceeded to a proportionality assessment.  I find that  in
    carrying this out,  undue  weight  was  given  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant may have been able to apply to come to the United Kingdom  in
    the past.  I find that these errors are material.


17. In relation to the  finding  of  future  harassment,  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter accepts that the Appellant has  suffered  harassment  in
    the past based on the Country  of  Origin  Information  Report.   Given
    this, and given that the Appellant's status as the widow of  a  British
    citizen has not changed, I find that it was open to the judge  to  come
    to this finding [30].


Notice of Decision

20.  The decision involved the making of a material error  of  law.   I  set
    aside the findings and decision in relation to Article 8.   The  appeal
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade on Article 8.

21.  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 8 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
