
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA047632015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th February 2016 and 4th May 2016        |On 26th May 2016              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     MHP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     (On 10.05.2016) Mr Worthington, Parker Rhodes
                  Hickmotts Solicitors
     (On 4.5.2016) Mr O Ryan, Parker Rhodes Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    (On 10.5.2016) Mrs R Pettersen, HOPO
     (On 4.5.2016) Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 12th August 2015.





The History of these Proceedings

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.   He  claimed  asylum  on  4th
    November 2011 and was refused on 26th  March  2012.   His  appeal  came
    before Judge Hemingway on 11th June 2012 and was dismissed.   A  number
    of further submissions were made and ultimately, on 5th March 2015  the
    Secretary of State considered the submissions under  paragraph  353  of
    the Immigration Rules refusing them by letter of 5 March  2015.   Judge
    Saffer dismissed the appeal on 14th August 2015.

 3. The appellant suffers from psychiatric difficulties and was  unable  to
    give evidence but the judge did hear from his wife and from  two  other
    witnesses.  He relied on the previous  determination  and  the  adverse
    findings of the previous judge. He dismissed the appeal on the  grounds
    that there were a number of inconsistencies and  discrepancies  in  the
    evidence, and he did not  accept  that  his  wife  had  been  raped  as
    claimed.

The Grounds of Application

 4.  The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  five  grounds,  in
    particular that the judge had erred in  his  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence, had failed  to  consider  relevant  evidence,  in  particular
    relating to his  mental  health,  had  reached  flawed  conclusions  in
    respect of the claimed rape, had failed to  consider  relevant  country
    evidence postdating GJ and had generally erred in his consideration  of
    the appellant's mental health.

 5. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Verity on 9th September 2015 but subsequently granted by Upper
    Tribunal Judge Eshun on 8th October 2015.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law

 6. Mr Worthington submitted that the medical evidence, set  out  in  great
    detail by the judge at paragraph 18, deserved more  consideration  than
    was given in his conclusions at paragraph 32.

 7. He wrote as follows:

         "I note the findings made in his previous appeal.  It was  accepted
         that he may have been ill-treated in the recent past.  Dr  Eisner's
         report confirms that.  The issue was and is not what had  happened.
         It was who was reasonably likely to have done it, why they did  it,
         what the family's reason for coming here was, and whether there was
         any real risk to them from the authorities on their return,  or  in
         the alternative from someone other than the authorities  but  where
         there was no effective protection or  internal  relocation  option.
         Dr Eisner is unable to help on those issues."

 8. The judge set out the medical evidence at paragraph 18 from Dr  Eisner,
    a GP from the Medical Foundation  for  the  Victims  of  Torture.   The
    report is much more detailed than that which was  before  the  original
    judge who determined the appeal. He  also  considered  the  psychiatric
    evidence from Dr Cowan and from his GP.

 9. In the ordinary course of events  that  would  have  been  a  perfectly
    reasonable way to deal with the medical evidence, to consider it in the
    round, and put it against the discrepancies outlined by  the  judge  in
    the determination.

10.  However in this case the medical evidence is absolutely compelling and
    required  significant  engagement  since  the  injuries  described  are
    extensive.  Dr Eisner  sets  out  forensically  the  individual  scars,
    evidence of male rape, evidence of having toenails pulled out, evidence
    of beating, and evidence of being kept in insanitary conditions  for  a
    prolonged period.

11. In these circumstances it was not sufficient to merely state  that  the
    doctor was unable to help on the issue of how the injuries were  caused
    when it is hard to imagine how they could be caused otherwise  than  by
    deliberate act.

12. This is an appellant who  was  too  mentally  disturbed  to  give  oral
    evidence.  Furthermore, the judge acknowledges at paragraph 45 that  he
    has a subjective fear of a return to Sri Lanka.  In placing  weight  on
    the discrepancies in the account, the judge did not  properly  bear  in
    mind the fact that the appellant was unfit to attend court  because  of
    his mental health and his inability to  give  an  accurate  account  of
    events.  There was also evidence  that  his  memory  difficulties  were
    characteristic of trauma survivors and that an imperfect  chronological
    memory may account for his difficulty in sequencing events.

13. There is also merit in the criticism of the judge's  dismissal  of  the
    wife's claim of rape mainly on the grounds that she did not disclose it
    at screening or at the earlier hearing when there was evidence  of  the
    impact of the late disclosure on the appellant himself by a  friend  of
    the family as set out in the psychiatrist's report.

14. Although Mrs Pettersen initially sought to defend the determination and
    relied upon her Rule 24 response, having heard the submissions from  Mr
    Worthington she did not seek to argue that the  judge's  reasoning  was
    adequate.

15. Accordingly the decision is set aside.

The resumed hearing

The appellant's case

16. MHP is Sinhalese.  He worked as a branch manager for a company, Browns,
    which dealt in both motors, tractors and electrical goods.  One of  his
    friends, M, assisted him in selling boat  engines  to  Tamil  customers
    from an area up the west coast called Udappu.  He sold goods, including
    both motors, to Tamils from Udappu who had been introduced to him by  M
    who got a 1% commission on sales.

17. On 3rd May 2009 he visited India on a trip financed by M who had  asked
    him to pass some money to a man named Moorthy.  Moorthy  asked  him  to
    bring back a bag of clothes and a bundle of documents for M.

18. Shortly after returning to Sri Lanka he was  arrested  and  accused  of
    supplying goods to the LTTE; he was told that M was linked to them.  He
    was severely tortured.

19. Three days later his wife was arrested and mistreated.

20. On 16th September 2009, the appellant's father arranged for his release
    by payment of a bribe on a condition  that  he  report  fortnightly  at
    Negambo Police Station.

21. After his release the authorities went to his home on two occasions  to
    see where he was living, although he did not actually stay in the  same
    place after his release.  On 15th November 2009 he went  to  India,  on
    the advice of his friend S who said that it would be preferable to  see
    whether he was on a watch list by himself rather than risking the whole
    family.

22. On 15th December 2009 the appellant, his wife  and  child  applied  for
    entry clearance as Tier 4 Students  and  dependants  and  were  granted
    entry clearance on 5th January 2010.  They arrived in the  UK  on  13th
    January 2010.

23. Since his arrival here the authorities visited the  appellant's  family
    home several times and in August and  September  2011  his  father  was
    mistreated and his mother had a heart attack.  The visits prompted  the
    appellant to claim asylum on 4th November 2011.

24. In January 2012 the appellant's father was assaulted  again.   In  July
    2012 members of the Sri Lankan Army approached his mother at  her  home
    and broke her arm.  Since then  she  has  moved  away  and  stays  with
    relatives.  In January 2015 she noticed that stones had been thrown  at
    the house and damage done to the walls.  His wife's mother was taken to
    hospital after the authorities came to her home  and  attacked  her  in
    April 2015.

25. On 16th May 2012  the  appellant's  wife  disclosed  to  her  community
    development worker that she had been  raped  in  Sri  Lanka  whilst  in
    custody.  She  subsequently  received  counselling  from  the  Barnsley
    Sexual Abuse and Rape Crisis Service but did not feel able to  disclose
    the full extent of what had happened either to her husband  or  to  the
    solicitor acting on her behalf.

26. After the appellant's appeal had been dismissed for a second  time  the
    appellant asked his father to prepare a statement  confirming  his  ill
    treatment by the Sri Lankan authorities.  An envelope arrived from  his
    father but it only contained blank sheets of paper and appeared to have
    been opened.  The appellant's father said that he had included a signed
    document and not blank pages.  He had been arrested  and  detained  for
    two days and questioned.  In March 2016 his father went to his  MP  who
    reported  to  him  that  there  would  be  an  investigation  into  the
    appellant's escape from Sri Lanka and he advised that his father  ought
    to leave the country, which he is planning to do.

The respondent's case

27. The respondent's position, as set out in the reasons for refusal letter
    dated 5 March 2015, is that there is no truth in the appellant's claim,
    that he does not fall within any of the risk categories set out in  the
    current country guidance case law of GJ  and  Others  (post  civil  war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319, that  the  medical  evidence
    now relied upon by the appellant is not wholly objective, and  that  he
    has not established a well-founded fear of persecution  on  return  and
    would be provided with support on return by his family.

The oral evidence

28. The appellant was too unwell to give evidence.  His wife,  CA,  adopted
    her witness statements to stand as  her  evidence-in-chief.   The  only
    questions which she was asked by the  Presenting  Officer  concern  the
    letter said to have been sent by her husband's father in November 2015.
     Initially Mr Diwnycz considered that  the  blank  pages  contained  an
    imprint of the address, suggesting that the appellant's father had  put
    them in himself.  However, upon closer examination, he  accepted  that,
    from the indentations, that this was not the  case  and  conceded  that
    when the envelope was addressed and stamped the blank sheets  were  not
    inside.

The documentary evidence

29. Since Judge Hemingway's determination there has been further  extensive
    medical evidence, specifically a report  from  the  Medical  Foundation
    dated 14th June 2013 from Dr Maggie Eisner, a  report  from  Dr  Cowan,
    Consultant Psychiatrist dated 2nd July 2015, letters from the  Barnsley
    Sexual Abuse and Rape Crisis Services, from  Mind  and  Homestart,  and
    letters from Solace who are treating the appellant  and  his  wife  for
    their mental health problems. There are also  letters  from  Mr  Lorenz
    Fernando  confirming  the  appellant's  account  of  arrest  and   ill-
    treatment.

30. The appellant also relies on  background  evidence  from  a  number  of
    different sources relating to illegal detention in  Sri  Lanka  and  an
    expert report from Dr Chris Smith.

The medical evidence

31. Dr Eisner recorded that the appellant often repeated himself and  often
    digressed when re-telling his story.  He also  became  extremely  upset
    and on a number of occasions was tearful.

32. The doctor recorded a very detailed account of the ill-treatment  which
    the appellant says he received  during  his  detention  in  2009.   She
    recounted a number of physical assaults  including  being  stabbed  and
    slashed with a knife,  being  beaten  with  batons,  having  his  right
    toenail pulled out, and being sexually assaulted.  He was made to kneel
    on a rough concrete floor and men would stand on the backs of his lower
    legs to prevent him moving.  She concluded as follows at paragraph 136:

         "The overall pattern of all his scars and other injuries,  assessed
         in accordance with this paragraph, is typical of  the  sequelae  of
         sustained, repeated physical assault by a variety of methods.

         There are a variety of injuries, each  at  least  consistent,  some
         highly consistent and some typical, with his  attribution  of  ill-
         treatment.  Other causes  of  such  a  picture,  such  as  multiple
         assaults unrelated to ill-treatment,  or  multiple  accidents,  are
         unlikely.  I have considered the  possibility  of  self-infliction,
         but the variety and pattern of the  injuries,  some  of  which  are
         inaccessible positions   make  this  unlikely.   The  psychological
         findings further support  the  overall  clinical  picture  of  ill-
         treatment.

         The summary of the injuries making up the  overall  picture  is  as
         follows:

         a.   eight scars consistent with blunt trauma from objects such  as
             gun butts, batons and motorcycle chains;

         b.   six scars consistent with injuries from a knife;

         c.   one area of dark lickenified skin on  each  knee,  typical  of
             injury from grazes when forced to kneel repeatedly on a  rough
             surface;

         d.   ten areas of hypo pigmentation  consistent  with  injury  from
             superficial grazes when the skin was forced into contact  with
             a rough surface for short periods;

         e.   physical findings  highly  consistent  with  the  sequelae  of
             repeated beatings on the soles of the feet;

         f.   physical findings consistent with  having  his  great  toenail
             pulled out;

         g.   physical findings with x-ray and MRI confirmation of  a  right
             clavicular fracture with associated injuries, consistent  with
             injury from a gun butt;

         h.   physical findings with x-ray  confirmation  of  a  left  elbow
             fracture  consistent  with  injury  from  deliberate  forcible
             twisting of the arm;

         i.   deformities of both his little fingers consistent with  having
             his hands hit with batons;

         j.   physical findings of  a  soft  tissue  injury  to  his  ankle,
             consistent with injury from a blow from a motorcycle chain;

         k.   physical findings of a chronic skin infection, consistent with
             prolonged detention in insanitary conditions."

33. Dr  Eisner  also  agreed  with  the  diagnosis  made  by  a  consultant
    psychiatrist of post traumatic stress  disorder  and  depression.   She
    said that he had memory difficulties characteristic of trauma survivors
    and his imperfect chronological memory as well as the effect  of  being
    interviewed in different settings could account for his  difficulty  in
    sequencing his account of events.

34. Her overall conclusion was that her physical and psychological findings
    were consistent with his account of alleged ill-treatment and there was
    nothing in the clinical picture to suggest a false allegation  of  ill-
    treatment.

35. Dr Eisner has received specific training from  the  Medical  Foundation
    who have responded specifically to the criticisms made of Dr Eisner  in
    a letter dated 29th May 2015.  The letter  confirms  that  the  medico-
    legal report referred to is expert evidence signed by a doctor with  an
    understanding of their duty  to  provide  their  expert  objective  and
    impartial opinions.  The Foundation is accepted by the Home  Office  as
    having  recognised   expertise   in   the   assessment   of   physical,
    psychological psychiatric and social effects  of  torture.   Clinicians
    from the Foundation are objective and unbiased.  Doctors do not  accept
    a patient's history at face value but  routinely  assess  a  number  of
    different  factors  before  making  findings  on  fabrication,  and  Dr
    Eisher's findings do not in any way demonstrate a lack  of  objectivity
    but a correct application  of  the  Istanbul  Protocol  principles  and
    relevant case law.

36. Dr Cowan lists in her report the frequency of the appellant's visits to
    his GP and his contact with Mental Health Services which are extensive.
     She concludes that the  appellant's  account  was  plausible  and  the
    emotions he displayed were consistent with the events he  related.   In
    particular his emotional response to his account of hearing  about  his
    wife's rape and his reaction to it came across  as  totally  authentic.
    He felt deep guilt and shame that somehow he had inflicted it upon  his
    wife.  It was her opinion that the appellant's fear of a return to  Sri
    Lankan was genuine and that he was at real risk of suicide

Conclusions on the Appellant's account of events in 2009

37. The starting point for  my  determination  is  the  decision  of  Judge
    Hemingway, since the decision of Judge Saffer has been set  aside,  and
    he concluded that, whilst he could accept that the appellants  were  of
    Sinhalese ethnicity and from Sri Lanka, none of the rest of their story
    was true.  Judge  Hemingway  recorded  that  there  were  a  number  of
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, specifically  in  relation
    to when his father was in hiding in Sri Lanka and he  stated  that  his
    evidence lacked clarity as to whether  the  father  was  in  hiding  or
    whether he was living with his wife.

38. Judge Hemingway also said that  the  first  appellant  was  seeking  to
    understate the work he did in the UK, and there was evidence that there
    had been manipulation in order to satisfy the financial requirements of
    the student entry clearance Rules.  He concluded that there  had  never
    been a genuine intention that the second appellant would study and this
    was simply a device to gain admission to the UK.

39. Judge Hemingway did not accept the appellant's account of  why  he  had
    undertaken the trip to India and concluded that he had returned to  Sri
    Lanka in November 2009 because he had no genuine fear  of  persecution.
    He also held it against the appellant  that  there  was  a  significant
    delay between his arrival in the UK in January 2010 and claiming asylum
    in November 2011.

40. The delay in claiming asylum is a matter which potentially falls within
    the scope of Section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004  and  is  potentially  damaging   to   the
    appellant's credibility.  A variety of explanations have been given  at
    an earlier stage none of which were accepted by Judge Hemingway.

41. I  also  agree  that  there  are  a  number  of  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's account.

42. On the other hand I have the clear diagnosis of PTSD  and  two  medical
    reports,  one  from  a  consultant  psychiatrist  agreeing  with   that
    diagnosis.  Dr Eisner provided a clear explanation for the  appellant's
    difficulties in accurately recording traumatic events and there  is  no
    reason not to rely on her evidence.

43. Indeed there is absolutely no basis for impugning the objectivity of Dr
    Eisner.   She  has  impressive  academic  qualifications  and   is   an
    experienced general practitioner in a practice which cares  for  asylum
    seekers from many countries. I accept that the level of detail which is
    recorded in the report is supportive of  the  appellant's  story.   For
    example, at paragraph 27 Dr Eisner records that  the  authorities  told
    him that they knew he had sold equipment to the LTTE because they could
    compare the serial numbers of items they had seized with the records in
    the shop he had managed.  His description of the cell he was kept in at
    paragraph 29, is graphic.  He described seeing what he took to be  drug
    taking paraphernalia.  Mr Diwncyz made  no  reference  to  the  medical
    evidence in his submissions. I accept Mr O'Ryan's submissions that  her
    report needs to be given considerable weight.

44. It is plausible that, as a Sinhalese suspected of supporting the  LTTE,
    the appellant would have been seen as a traitor which could account for
    the level of ill-treatment.  The appellant's explanation of his  return
    to Sri Lanka in November 2009 is that he wanted to see whether  he  was
    on a watch list and did not want to put his family at  risk.   That  is
    not in itself unreasonable.

45.  Accordingly  I  conclude  that,  whilst  there  is   no   satisfactory
    explanation for the delay in  claiming  asylum,  the  strength  of  the
    medical evidence is such that the only reasonable inference is that the
    appellant was tortured as claimed by the authorities in 2009.

46. I also accept that his wife was raped, that she disclosed the  rape  in
    2012 to her community development worker, and that  she  did  not  feel
    able to tell her husband or the  solicitor  until  relatively  recently
    before the hearing in 2015.

Assessment of risk on return

47. Mr O'Ryan's submission that the appellant is at risk on  return  relies
    on his being able to bring himself within  paragraph  7A  of  GJ  which
    states that:

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to  postconflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  Diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka."

48. He accepted that the appellant had had no role in  the  UK  but  argued
    that because of his former significant role, as a  Sinhalese,  involved
    in the supply of boat engines to the LTTE he had a significant previous
    role which explained the continued interest in him.  He did not dispute
    that the appellant had been released after detention but said that  his
    explanation, given in his asylum interview, was that still intended  to
    kill him and make it look like an accident. Moreover, the visits to the
    family home showed a continued interest in him.

49. Alternatively, he submitted that GJ was out of date and  had  presented
    an overly optimistic view of the situation in Sri Lanka.  He relied  on
    reports from 2013 of Tamils being raped and tortured in Sri Lanka  from
    Human Rights Watch and from Amnesty  International.   There  were  more
    recent reports from 2014 of ongoing human rights abuses and a more  up-
    to-date report from the Secretary of State General of the UN  in  March
    2015 of an increase in sexual violence against Tamil women and girls in
    the context of the ongoing militarisation of their areas of  residence.
    He cited a report from the Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
    which reports that a non-Tamil supporter of the LTTE would very  likely
    face harassment and use of force and would be shown  no  mercy  by  the
    government.  The most recent reports continue to disclose human  rights
    abuses of a person suspected of involvement with the LTTE.

50. He relied particularly on the report of Dr Smith who  states  that  the
    authorities have increased their surveillance of the Tamil Diaspora  to
    acquire intelligence. but as the appellant has not been  active  within
    the Tamil Diaspora the appellant is not reasonably likely to be at risk
    on that account.  Dr Smith says:

      i) "It is certainly impossible to say without equivocation whether the
         appellant or any other person of adverse interest is on the  wanted
         list.  However, I have made clear in this report that the appellant
         has been and will continue to be of adverse interest on account  of
         his claims and that he is known to the authorities.  As such he may
         have been placed on the stop list since leaving Sri Lanka.

51. Dr Smith believes that the appellant would continue to  be  of  adverse
    interest because of his past connection with the LTTE and he says  that
    even if the detainee  was  released  without  charge  the  system  will
    identify him on return.  If the entry includes  mention  of  an  arrest
    warrant they will be placed on the stop list and detained  immediately.



52. GJ referred to two lists accessible at the airport.  Any  person  whose
    name appears on a computerised stop list accessible at the airport will
    be handed over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities.  It is a list
    of those against whom there is an extant order or arrest warrant.   The
    authorities also maintain a computerised intelligence-led  watch  list.
    A person whose name appears on that is  not  reasonably  likely  to  be
    detained but will be monitored by the security services  after  his  or
    her return.  If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person is
    a Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or
    revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in question  is  not
    in general reasonably likely to be detained  by  the  security  forces.
    That will be a question of fact in each case dependent on any  Diaspora
    activities carried out by such an individual.

53. GJ remains the present country guidance case  and  should  be  applied.
    There is nothing in the objective evidence to suggest that it is out of
    date.  There is no specific challenge to the conclusions in GJ  in  the
    report relied upon by Dr Smith and indeed he refers to its conclusions.

54. The appellant has produced evidence of continued interest in  him.   It
    is said that his father was beaten  up  in  2011  which  triggered  the
    asylum claim and that his  mother-in-law's  arm  was  broken  in  2012.
    However there  is  no  reason  why  the  authorities  would  break  the
    appellant's mother-in-law's arm or why the army would throw  stones  at
    his parents' window.  The  appellant's  wife  in  her  later  statement
    refers to visits by the authorities to her sister's house in  2014  and
    again there would appear to be absolutely no reason why  these  attacks
    should be taking place.  It is the appellant's own evidence that he  is
    not an LTTE supporter but only supplied the equipment in the course  of
    his work unwittingly.  He was released from detention and then left Sri
    Lanka on two occasions without being stopped by the  authorities,  once
    to India and the second time to the UK.  I can reach no conclusions  on
    the evidence of a letter having been opened by the  authorities  but  I
    cannot see why they would go to the trouble of  inserting  blank  pages
    into the airmail envelope rather than simply disposing of the  contents
    if they did not wish them to reach the appellant.  His father  put  his
    own address on the back.  If he was being harassed and had been  forced
    to leave his home and was now planning to leave illegally by  boat,  it
    seems unlikely that he would have done so.

55. I do not  accept  that  there  has  been  continuing  interest  in  the
    appellant and his wife's family. The incidents described are  sporadic,
    random in nature and unreasoned.

56. Since the events of 2009 the appellant has been able to leave Sri Lanka
    on two occasions without being stopped, and re-entered  once.   If  the
    authorities had any interest in him on a return  from  India  it  would
    have been manifest  at  that  point.   There  is  no  suggestion  of  a
    subsequent  arrest  warrant.  Neither  have  there  been  any  diaspora
    activities.

57. In conclusion, whilst I accept that there is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the appellant was detained and severely ill-treated  in
    2009, and that his wife was also severely abused, the appellant  cannot
    bring himself within the risk categories set out in GJ because  he  has
    neither had a  significant  role  in  relation  to  postconflict  Tamil
    separatism within the Diaspora nor could be perceived to have had since
    he has been entirely inactive.

58. I accept Dr Smith's view that it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  the
    appellant is on a wanted list or not, but I have to  apply  the  proper
    standard of proof in this case and in order to allow the appeal have to
    be satisfied that there is a reasonable degree of likelihood that he is
    on such a list.  I am not so satisfied, for the reasons given above.

59. Mr O'Ryan did not seek to argue that the appellant  should  be  allowed
    leave to remain on  any  other  grounds,  specifically  Article  3  and
    accepted that he could provide no evidence to show that  there  are  no
    psychiatric services in Sri Lanka which could be put in place to reduce
    the risk.

Decision

60. The decision by Judge Saffer has been  set  aside.   It  is  remade  as
    follows.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 26th May 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
