
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04933/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 January 2016                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     MKH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock, counsel instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Bell,  promulgated  on  14
    July 2015, in which she dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse to grant her asylum.

Background


 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  during  2001  and  thereafter
    remained in the United Kingdom without leave. On 29 October  2012,  she
    applied for asylum on the basis that she would be persecuted in Jamaica
    as a lesbian and on account of her poor mental health. The Secretary of
    State refused the appellant's asylum application on  the  grounds  that
    she was not a lesbian and therefore was not  previously  persecuted  in
    Jamaica and would not be at risk if removed there now.  The  respondent
    accepted that the appellant had attempted suicide  and  been  diagnosed
    with PTSD and depression, but considered  that  medical  treatment  was
    available in Jamaica and did not accept  that  there  would  not  be  a
    support  network  available  there.  It  was  not  accepted  that   the
    appellant's suicidal ideation met the relevant legal tests. With regard
    to Article 8 ECHR, it was not accepted that the appellant had a partner
    in the United Kingdom or that she had no ties to Jamaica.

 3. During the course of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    FTTJ heard only submissions from the representatives.  The  appellant's
    Community Psychiatric Nurse wrote to say that  the  appellant  was  too
    mentally unwell to attend. Psychiatric reports were  submitted  on  the
    appellant's behalf, however there was no witness  statement  from  her.
    The FTTJ dismissed the appeal  on  credibility  grounds;  rejected  the
    claim that she was at real risk of suicide as well as  concluding  that
    none of the requirements of the Rules, in relation to  the  appellant's
    private and family life, had been met.

Error of law


 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that
    it was  arguable  that  the  FTTJ's  approach  to  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim was irrational; that the wrong standard of proof  was
    applied to the risk of Article 3 ill-treatment and that the FTTJ failed
    to carry out an Article 8 assessment outside the Immigration Rules,  to
    make  a  proportionality  assessment  or  or  to  apply  the   relevant
    Immigration Rules. A query was also raised as to whether the FTTJ had a
    complete copy of a psychiatric report on the appellant, which  included
    the psychiatrist's opinion and recommendations.

 5. The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  granting  permission  did  so  on  all
    grounds; particularly noting  the  "importance  of  ground  2  and  the
    irreversible harm that may follow as it is arguable  that  the  correct
    standard was not applied."

 6. The Secretary of State's response of 9 October 2015 opposed the appeal,
    arguing  that  the  FTTJ  directed  herself  appropriately   and   made
    reasonable, sustainable, findings. It was  asserted  that  the  medical
    evidence confirmed that the appellant was  not  actively  suicidal  and
    therefore the FTTJ's findings on the  risk  of  suicide  were  properly
    made.

The hearing


 7. At the outset, Mr Melvin  submitted  an  expanded  Rule  24  reply.  Mr
    Bundock had no  objection.  I  advised  the  representatives  that  the
    psychiatric report before the FTTJ was  indeed  missing  several  pages
    including the doctor's opinion and recommendations.

 8. Mr Bundock began his submissions on what he  considered  his  strongest
    point, that of the FTTJ's self-direction in relation to the standard of
    proof for the appellant's Article 3 claim. In essence, the  FTTJ  twice
    referred to the need for the appellant to establish  on  "the  clearest
    possible evidence" the existence of a real risk of suicide.  There  was
    also a failure by the FTTJ to follow binding case law in  her  approach
    to assessing the appellant's risk of suicide.

 9. Moving on the first ground, he argued that the FTTJ had  done  no  more
    than pay lip service to the medical evidence before her and had  failed
    to take that evidence into consideration  when  assessing  the  various
    credibility issues. With regard to  the  third  and  final  ground,  Mr
    Bundock said that the FTTJ  had  failed  to  consider  the  appellant's
    Article 8 claim either within or outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    argued that paragraph 276ADE(vi) applied.

10. Mr Melvin argued that the FTTJ assessed the medical evidence, which was
    before her and credibility was a matter for the judge. The  FTTJ  heard
    no oral evidence from appellant; took into account  interview  records;
    that the appellant had not produced any evidence and  that  the  person
    whom the appellant claimed to be in a relationship  with  had  obtained
    her status on the basis of a  heterosexual  relationship  with  an  EEA
    national.  He argued that the challenge was no more than a disagreement
    with the findings of the judge. A medical complaint did not  excuse  an
    appellant of discrepancies or "outright lies."  He  asserted  that  the
    appellant was wishing to hide behind her medical  condition;  that  the
    credibility findings were sustainable and the core of the appeal had no
    merit.

11. With regard to the second ground, Mr  Melvin  conceded  that  the  FTTJ
    failed to note the case law in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629; Y and Z  v
    SSHD[2009] EWCA Civ 362 or KH (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA Civ 1354  EWCA,
    however he asked me to find that  the  judge  addressed  the  necessary
    issues and the FTTJ noted that treatment was available in Jamaica.   As
    regards the appellant's subjective fear of ill-treatment in Jamaica, he
    asked me to note that her circumstances were very different  from  that
    of the complainants in Y and Z. Mr Melvin argued that there did need to
    be the clearest possible evidence and that was the same as a real risk.



12. In relation to the third ground, Mr Melvin argued that the FTTJ did not
    need to make reference to the case law as  long  as  a  proportionality
    assessment was carried out. There  was  no  evidence  of  a  family  or
    private life and it was hard to see that any other  judge  would  allow
    the appeal on this basis.  The  FTTJ  had  considered  the  appellant's
    physical and moral integrity. Her failure to refer to  Razgar  was  not
    material to the outcome.

13. With regard to paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Rules, Mr Melvin argued that
    the appellant did not meet the suitability  requirements  at  276ADE(i)
    therefore did not get to (vi).

14. At this juncture, I note that it was never  part  of  the  respondent's
    case hitherto  that  the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the  suitability
    requirements of the Rules. Indeed there is no such  allegation  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter before me.

15. In reply, Mr Bundock argued that the appellant has a  claim  under  and
    outside Rules and that the route under the Rules, of  very  significant
    obstacles, was not considered by the FTTJ. There  was  also  a  private
    life claim outside the Rules based on 12 years unlawful  residence  and
    longstanding treatment and care for mental health issues.

16. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the FTTJ had made  material
    errors of law and set aside her decision in its  entirety.  My  reasons
    are as follows.

17. The  FTTJ  at  [36]  noted  that  the  appellant's  mental  health  was
    deteriorating at the time of her asylum claim and  interview.  At  [54]
    the FTTJ says, "there  may  well  be  events  in  her  past  that  have
    triggered her mental health problems." However, the  FTTJ  rejects  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim from [38] to [48] of the  decision
    and reasons, mainly relying on issues identified by the  respondent  in
    the reasons for refusal letter. Other than saying,  three  times,  that
    the discrepancies cannot be adequately  explained  by  the  appellant's
    mental health issues, the FTTJ did not engage with the medical evidence
    as to the extent of the appellant's mental ill-health when  interviewed
    in Yarl's Wood IRC, at length, regarding her asylum  claim.  There  was
    also a failure to truly take into account the appellant's admission  to
    hospital and suicide attempts. The FTTJ did not genuinely  engage  with
    the impact the appellant's mental health may have had on her ability to
    provide a clear, consistent  account.  The  FTTJ  also  refers  to  the
    appellant's  replies  in  interview  as  "vague"  but   there   is   no
    consideration that this might have been as a result of her illness. For
    the foregoing reasons, I find that the FTTJ's credibility findings were
    unsound.

18. The FTTJ also erred in relation to the test she employed when assessing
    the risk of suicide in this case. It is trite law  that  the  test  she
    ought to have employed is that of a "real  risk."  Instead,  as  stated
    above, the FTTJ twice used the phrase, at [51] and [55],  of  "clearest
    possible evidence." This is not the test. Furthermore, the FTTJ did not
    cite or apply the six-stage test in J or the modification to the  fifth
    principle in J, which emerged from Y and  Z.  The  fifth  principle  is
    particularly  important  in  the  appellant's  case  where  there  may,
    ultimately, be no objective foundation to the  source  of  the  suicide
    risk. The  FTTJ  made  no  specific  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
    subjective  fear  despite  accepting  that   she   was   very   unwell,
    historically  suffered  from  psychosis,  had  made  previous   suicide
    attempts and had ongoing psychotic symptoms.

19. While it was  the  responsibility  of  the  appellant's  solicitors  to
    furnish the FTTJ with a complete report, it is obvious that the copy in
    the appellant's bundle  was  incomplete  and  lacking  an  opinion  and
    recommendations. The complete psychiatric report refers to the doctor's
    opinion that removal to Jamaica was likely to increase the risk to  the
    appellant by way of further suicide attempts. Therefore while the  FTTJ
    could not be expected to consider evidence not  before  her,  the  full
    content of this report indicates that it is far  from  inevitable  that
    another judge would reach the same conclusion as to Article 3.

20. At the time of the hearing before the FTTJ, paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the
    Rules referred to a test of "very significant obstacles" to integration
    rather than an applicant having "no ties." The FTTJ  did  not  consider
    the appellant's circumstances in relation to  the  relevant  test.  She
    erred  materially  in  this  regard,  given  the  appellant's  accepted
    vulnerability.

21. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of law such
    that the decision be set aside to be remade. None of  the  findings  of
    the FTTJ are to stand.

22. Further directions are set out below.

23. An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. I consider it  appropriate
    for  anonymity  to  be  continued  and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

    Directions


           . This appeal is remitted to be heard de novo by any  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge except FTTJ Bell.

           . The appeal should be listed for a hearing at Birmingham IAC.

           . Time estimate is half a day.


Signed      Date: 17 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
