
IAC-AH-SC-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04861/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Birmingham         |Determination Promulgated            |
|Employment Centre                    |On 25th March 2015                   |
|On 13th March 2015                   |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              mr Juma Gul khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thomas, promulgated on 27th October 2014, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 26th September 2014.  In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Juma  Gul  Khan.   The  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, who was born on  3rd
    April 1995.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, refusing his  application  for  asylum  dated  24th
    September 2009, although he was granted discretionary leave  to  remain
    until 24th September 2012.  The essence of  the  Appellant's  claim  is
    that his father worked for  the Taliban, and the Appellant  was  beaten
    by the police several times because of this,  occasioning  scarring  on
    his head, and that he also fears indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan
    if he was returned there now.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge dismissed the Appellant's claim on the basis that  there  was
    no  independent  evidence  of  scarring,  and  rejected   the   alleged
    mistreatment.  The judge held that the  Appellant's  family  must  have
    funded his journey throughout to come to Western Europe.  With  respect
    to Article 8, the judge held that the Appellant could not  satisfy  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE, and rejected  the  Appellant's  claim
    that he had wider Article 8 rights in relation to his foster family  in
    the UK.

Grounds of Application

 4. The grounds of application state that the judge was wrong to  say  that
    there was no independent evidence of scarring as  she  failed  to  take
    into account the GP's letter at page 364 of  the  Respondent's  bundle.
    The judge failed also to put the issue (at paragraph 26  before  making
    adverse credibility findings against the  Appellant.   The  judge  also
    failed to follow the guidelines  in  Dirshe  and  in  JA  (Afghanistan)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 450.

 5. No consideration was given  by  the  judge  either  to  AA  (unattended
    children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016.   But  in  particular,  the
    judge erred in her assessment of Rule 276ADE given that  the  Appellant
    had spent almost half his life outside Afghanistan, and now spoke  with
    a pronounced West Midlands accent.  The guidance in MM (Lebanon) [2014]
    EWCA Civ 984, regarding the way in  which  proportionality  assessments
    are to be carried out, was also ignored.

 6. On 26th January 2015, permission to appeal was granted.  It was granted
    specifically on the basis that at page 364 of the Respondent's  bundle,
    there was a letter from the Appellant's GP which reads,

         "I can confirm that he does have significant raised  pale  scar  on
         the left side of the top of his scalp towards the front within  his
         hairline.  This is approximately 4cm long and  slightly  curved  at
         its medial end ... it is my  medical  opinion  that  this  scar  is
         perfectly compatible with the explanation given".

    This had been ignored.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on 13th March 2015, Mr David Mills,  appearing
    on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  intercepted  Mr
    Woodhouse's initial submissions by saying that he would have to concede
    that there was an error of law for two reasons.

 8. First, with respect to the asylum issue, the Appellant had claimed that
    because his father was with the Taliban the Appellant  was  mistreated.
    He acquired scarring to his forehead.  For the judge to have found this
    to be lacking in credibility because there was no  cooperation  is  not
    right, but is particularly wrong given that there was medical  evidence
    from the GP.

 9. Second, as far as Article 8 was concerned the judge had referred to the
    Appellant's foster family, in particular from Joanna Robertson, who was
    the Appellant's foster mother, and she had fostered the  Appellant  for
    seven years now, and the evidence was that, "they have a solid and real
    relationship and he is a pleasure to have as a member  of  her  family"
    (paragraph 10).  There was also a special relationship  between  Joanna
    Robertson's son, Joshua, and with the Appellant  (paragraph  10).   The
    judge did not consider the position outside  paragraph  276ADE  in  the
    light of this factual scenario.  It was clear that paragraph 276ADE was
    not a complete code.  It was necessary  to  look  at  wider  Article  8
    jurisprudence.  The failure to do so was in error.  Therefore, Mr Mills
    asked for there to be a remittal back to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. For his part, Mr Woodhouse submitted that he would have to agree.   The
    appropriate course of action, given the extent of  the  flaws  in  this
    determination, was for  there  to  be  a  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007 such that I should  set  aside  the  decision.   I  come  to  this
    conclusion given the concession made by Mr Mills.  Plainly,  the  judge
    was wrong to  have  found  that  the  scarring  required  corroborative
    evidence and to have overlooked the medical evidence from the GP.   The
    judge was also wrong to have failed to consider the wider jurisprudence
    on Article 8 given what she had determined at paragraphs 10 and  11  of
    the determination.

Notice of Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I remake the appeal as follows.   This
    appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal in Birmingham to  be
    decided by a judge other than Judge  Thomas  under  practice  statement
    7.2.

13. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        23rd March 2015
