
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04780/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 17th November 2016                |On 28th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    A H A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bedford, Counsel instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State has appealed against the decision of Judge  S  D
    Lloyd of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT)  promulgated  on  29th  July
    2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Iranian citizen born in June 1998 so he  is  now
    18 years of age.  The Claimant arrived in the UK illegally on 20th July
    2013 and claimed asylum.

 4. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he is a Sunni  Muslim  from
    Iran.  His father was involved  in  the  Green  Movement  and  died  in
    approximately 2009.  The Appellant's mother was also  involved  in  the
    Green Movement.

 5. The Appellant had never been arrested or detained while in Iran and was
    not a member of the Green Movement himself.   He  stated  that  because
    Sunni Muslims are in a minority, he was beaten up by neighbours due  to
    his religion.  This was not reported to the police.  The Appellant also
    claimed that his teacher hit him and insulted him.

 6. The Appellant left Iran because he was advised to do so by his  mother,
    who told him it was too dangerous to remain.

 7. Since arriving in the UK the Appellant has been in touch with his uncle
    in Iran, who stated that his mother went to a police  station  and  has
    not been heard of since.  While in the United Kingdom the Appellant had
    developed a cocaine and cannabis habit.

 8. The Respondent's reasons for refusing the application are set out in  a
    letter dated 4th March 2015.  It was not accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had given a correct date of birth, and the Respondent  relied  upon  an
    age assessment giving the Appellant the date of birth  of  1st  January
    1995.  The Respondent noted that the Appellant had never been  arrested
    or detained and that he had not himself  been  involved  in  the  Green
    Movement.  It was not accepted that he would be at risk because of  his
    Sunni religion.  It was contended  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and a reasonable option of internal relocation available  in
    Iran.  It was not  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  parents  had  been
    arrested or abducted due to their political involvement.

 9. It was not accepted that the Appellant would be at  risk  if  returned,
    and the Respondent contended that his return to Iran would  not  breach
    any of his human rights protected by the 1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

10. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the FTT on 24th June 2015.  The  FTT
    disagreed with the age assessment relied on by the Secretary of  State,
    finding that the Claimant's date of birth is 15th June 1998, making him
    a minor.

11. The FTT found that the Appellant is a Sunni Muslim although this  alone
    would not put him at risk.  The FTT found that the Appellant's  parents
    were involved in the Green Movement  although  the  Appellant  had  not
    engaged in any significant activities to support the Green Movement and
    there was "little or no evidence regarding the risk to  family  members
    of activists in the Green Movement."  The FTT found that the  Appellant
    was not an activist before he left Iran, but he  did  leave  illegally,
    and concluded that the Appellant was entitled to asylum on the basis of
    his religion and imputed political opinion.  No findings were  made  on
    the Appellant's human rights claim.

12. The Respondent applied for and was granted permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

13. On 22nd April 2016 I heard submissions from both parties in relation to
    error of law and concluded that the decision of the  FTT  must  be  set
    aside.  I set out below paragraphs  14  -  20  of  my  decision,  which
    contains my reasons for setting aside the decision of the FTT;

         "14. The FTT erred in failing  to  follow  the  guidance  contained
             within SB regarding risk on return.   The  conclusions  in  SB
             were endorsed in BA Iran CG [2011] UKUT 00036 and  both  cases
             are still country guidance decisions.

         15.  The FTT accepted at paragraph 43 'that illegal exit by  itself
             would not put the Appellant at risk'.

         16.  The FTT found at paragraph 40 that  there  was  little  or  no
             evidence regarding the risk to family members of activists  in
             the Green Movement, and found at paragraph 32 that the Refugee
             Convention would not be engaged  by  reason  of  the  Claimant
             being a Sunni Muslim.

         17.  The FTT found at paragraph 41 that the  Claimant  was  not  an
             activist and there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  he  was
             actively wanted by the authorities before he left Iran.

         18.  There is no reference to SB within the FTT decision, and in my
             view the  FTT  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the  guidance
             contained within that decision.  The  conclusion  of  the  FTT
             that the Claimant would be at risk on  return  conflicts  with
             the findings referred to above in paragraphs 32,  40,  41  and
             43.

         19.  I therefore set aside the decision of the  FTT  because  of  a
             material error of law.  I have considered whether  to  re-make
             the decision without a further hearing  but  on  balance  find
             that this is not appropriate.

         20.  This is because in addition to the asylum claim, the  Claimant
             relied upon human rights, and no findings were made by the FTT
             on the human rights aspect of his claim.  While Articles 2 and
             3 of the 1950 Convention may stand or  fall  with  the  asylum
             claim, Article 8 was also raised as a ground  of  appeal,  and
             therefore it is an error of law not to make findings thereon."

14. There was no challenge at the error of law hearing to findings of  fact
    made by the FTT and the following findings were preserved;

       . The Claimant was born on 15th June 1998 (paragraph 25).

       . The Claimant is a Sunni Muslim  although  he  is  not  a  prominent
         personality within that faith and is not personally devout.  He has
         been subject to low-level mistreatment at the  hands  of  non-state
         actors,  but  that  level  of  persecution  by  itself   would   be
         insufficient to engage the Refugee Convention (paragraph 32).

       . The Claimant had not  engaged  in  any  significant  activities  to
         support the Green Movement and  did  not  claim  to  have  done  so
         (paragraph 36).

       .  The  Claimant's  parents  were  members  of  the  Green   Movement
         (paragraph 37).

       . There is little or no evidence regarding the risk to family members
         of activists in the Green Movement (paragraph 40).

       . The Claimant was not an activist in Iran and there is  no  evidence
         to suggest  that  he  was  actively  wanted  before  he  left  Iran
         (paragraph 41).  The Claimant left Iran illegally (paragraph 43).

Re-Making the Decision

The Law

15. The Claimant is entitled to asylum if he  is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee, as defined in regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on him to prove that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail himself of the protection of the country of his nationality.

16. The Claimant is eligible for humanitarian  protection  under  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules if he does not qualify as a refugee,  but
    establishes substantial grounds for believing that if  he  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom, he would face a real risk of suffering serious
    harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk unwilling to  avail  himself
    of the protection of the country of return.

17. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) it is for the Claimant to  establish
    that if removed from the United Kingdom there is a  real  risk  of  him
    being killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.

18. In relation to Article 8 the  Claimant  must  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules in relation to family life under Appendix  FM,  or  private  life
    with reference to paragraph 276ADE(1).  If the Claimant cannot  succeed
    under the rules, he must show good  reason  why  Article  8  should  be
    considered outside the rules.

19. The burden of proof is on the  Claimant  and  can  be  described  as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood which is  a  lower  standard  than  the
    normal civil standard of the balance of probability.  I  must  look  at
    the circumstances as at the date of hearing.

The Claimant's Oral Evidence

20. The Claimant  gave  evidence  in  farsi  with  the  assistance  of  the
    interpreter and adopted the contents of  his  witness  statement  dated
    23rd June 2016.

21. The Claimant was questioned by both representatives and I have recorded
    all questions and answers in my  Record  of  Proceedings.   It  is  not
    necessary to set out the evidence here, but if  relevant  I  will  make
    reference to the evidence when I set out my conclusions and reasons.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

22. Mr Richards relied upon the reasons for refusal letter dated 4th  March
    2015, together with the preserved findings made by the FTT.

23. Mr Richards pointed out  that  the  Claimant  had  not  undertaken  any
    political activities either in  Iran  or  in  the  UK  which  could  be
    described as being adverse to the Iranian government.  He would not  be
    at risk simply because his parents had been  involved  with  the  Green
    Movement.

24. The Claimant had left Iran illegally but this would not, without  more,
    put him at risk.

25. With reference to Article 8, I was asked to note  the  absence  of  any
    evidence from friends of the Claimant, I was asked to find  that  there
    was no medical report to indicate that he had  any  significant  mental
    health issues, and the evidence submitted indicated  that  he  had  not
    engaged with offers to  attend  for  medical  assessments.   While  the
    Appellant claimed to have a cocaine habit, Mr Richards pointed out that
    his medical notes at page 11 of the Appellant's bundle  indicated  that
    on 16th August 2016 he told his GP that he had  not  used  cocaine  for
    five months.

26. I was asked to find that the Appellant had  not  provided  evidence  to
    indicate that he had either a family or a private life in the UK  which
    would engage Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

The Appellant's Oral Submissions

27. With reference to risk on return Mr Bedford referred to paragraph 18 of
    BA Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) which makes  reference  to  an  amnesty
    report, and refers to  oppression  in  Iran,  and  hundreds  of  people
    remaining detained  for  their  part  in  protests  or  for  expressing
    dissenting views.  There is reference  to  those  with  only  tentative
    links to banned groups as well as family members  of  former  prisoners
    having been "subjected to arbitrary  arrest  in  the  past  year."   Mr
    Bedford submitted that this indicated  that  family  members  of  Green
    Movement activists would be at risk.

28. I was asked to accept that the fact that the Appellant  had  left  Iran
    illegally would trigger an enquiry upon his return and the fact that he
    is  a  drug  addict  would  increase  the  adverse  interest  that  the
    authorities would  have.   Mr  Bedford  therefore  submitted  that  the
    Appellant should succeed with reference to his claim for  international
    protection.

29. Mr Bedford also submitted that the Appellant should succeed in reliance
    upon paragraph 276ADE(vi) on the basis that there are very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration into Iran.  His parents are deceased and
    he is no longer in contact with his  uncle,  and  he  is  Sunni  Muslim
    whereas the majority of Muslims in Iran are Shia.

30. Turning to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules Mr Bedford  referred
    to EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41  contending  that  less  weight  should  be
    attached to  immigration  control  where  the  immigration  system  had
    operated in a dysfunctional manner.  Mr Bedford pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant was a child when he entered the UK but not treated as such by
    the UK government, and the Appellant had been let down by  the  system,
    as he should have been treated as a child but was not.

31. I was asked to note that the Appellant had been referred for specialist
    treatment to investigate his mental health, and the fact  that  he  had
    not attended appointments indicated that he  had  not  had  appropriate
    supervision.  I was asked to conclude that it would be disproportionate
    to return the Appellant to Iran and therefore the Respondent's decision
    breached Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

32. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

33. I have taken into account all the oral and documentary evidence  placed
    before me, and the oral submissions made by both representatives.

34. I have considered the evidence in the round and with anxious  scrutiny.
    I accept that it is important that I view the  Appellant's  account  in
    the context of conditions in Iran and I have  taken  into  account  the
    background evidence, and the country  guidance  decisions  SSH  and  HR
    (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016]  UKUT  00308  (IAC)
    and BA Iran CG.

35. I firstly consider whether the Appellant has  proved  to  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood, that he would be at risk if returned to Iran.  My
    starting point must be the preserved findings of the FTT.

36. The Appellant was never arrested while in Iran and did not come to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities.   I  set  out  below  the  second
    paragraph to the headnote in SSH and HR;

         "(b) An Iranian male in respect of whom  no  adverse  interest  has
             previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not  face
             a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3  rights  on
             return to Iran on account of having left Iran illegally and/or
             being a failed asylum seeker.  No such risk exists at the time
             of questioning on return to Iran nor after the facts (i.e.  of
             illegal exit and being  a  failed  asylum  seeker)  have  been
             established.  In particular, there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
             prosecution leading to imprisonment."


37. It is therefore clear from the above, that illegal  exit  and  being  a
    failed asylum seeker does not without more, put an individual at  risk.
    It is relevant that no adverse interest had been taken by  the  Iranian
    State in the Appellant before he left Iran.

38. I have considered paragraph 18 of BA Iran CG which was  promulgated  in
    February 2011, and paragraph 18 relates to post-June  2009  repression.
    It is the case that it was found that "those with only tentative  links
    to banned groups, as well as family members of former  prisoners,  have
    been subjected  to  arbitrary  arrest  in  past  year."   However,  the
    Appellant is not the family member of a former  prisoner.   His  father
    died in 2009.  The cause of death was unknown.  I do not find that  his
    death was related to any political activities.  The whereabouts of  the
    Appellant's mother is not known.  I do not find that evidence has  been
    submitted to prove that the Appellant's mother is deceased.  I  do  not
    find that paragraph 18 supports the claim that the Appellant  would  in
    2016 be at  risk  because  his  parents  were  involved  in  the  Green
    Movement, his father's involvement ending in 2009.  The Upper  Tribunal
    concluded in BA Iran CG at paragraph 2(a) of the headnote:

         "Iranians returning to Iran are screened on  arrival.   A  returnee
         who meets the profile of an activist may be detained while searches
         of documentation are made.  Students, particularly those  who  have
         known political profiles are likely to be  questioned  as  well  as
         those who have exited illegally."


39. The Appellant is not an activist so he  would  not  be  detained  while
    searches of documentation are made.  He exited illegally, and  although
    he would be questioned, this would not put him at risk.

40. The Appellant has not proved that he would be at risk  if  returned  to
    Iran, by reason of imputed political opinion or religion.  I find  that
    there are no other factors that would put the Appellant at risk.  He is
    therefore not entitled to a grant of asylum or humanitarian protection,
    and I conclude that his removal from the UK would not breach Articles 2
    or 3 of the 1950 Convention.

41. I next consider paragraph 276ADE(vi).  I do not find that the Appellant
    has discharged the burden of proof.  He has not shown that there  would
    be very significant obstacles to his reintegration into Iran.  He would
    be returned to Tehran which is where he lived prior to  his  departure.
    He is an Iranian citizen.  He has lived the majority  of  his  life  in
    Iran, having spent only just over three years in the UK.

42. There would be no language difficulties on  return,  and  the  evidence
    does not indicate that there are any medical issues that could  not  be
    treated in Iran.  I accept that the Appellant uses  both  cannabis  and
    cocaine.  I do not find Mr Bedford's  description  of  him  as  a  drug
    addict completely accurate.  I  accept  that  the  Appellant's  medical
    notes disclosed in August 2016 confirm that he had not used cocaine for
    five months.  I accept that the Appellant was being  truthful  when  he
    made that known to his doctor.

43. There  is  no  medical  report  to  indicate  that  the  Appellant  has
    significant mental  health  issues.   I  find  that  the  evidence  has
    disclosed no reason why the Appellant could not reintegrate into  Iran,
    and find employment and accommodation.  The Appellant was not  at  risk
    when he left Iran, and he would not be at risk when returned.

44. Turning to Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has not established family life.  He has no  close  relatives
    in the UK, he is not in a relationship, and he  has  no  children.   He
    shares a house with other single men.  I accept that he has established
    a private life since his arrival in this country, but I do  not  accept
    the submission that the  Appellant  has  suffered  as  a  result  of  a
    dysfunctional immigration system, although I accept that initially  the
    age assessment relied upon by the Secretary of  State  found  that  the
    Appellant was not a child, whereas the FTT subsequently found  that  he
    was.

45. In considering Article 8 outside the  rules  I  adopt  the  five  stage
    approach advocated in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.   Article 8 is engaged  on
    the basis of the Claimant's private life, the Respondent's decision  is
    in  accordance  with  the  law  and  necessary  in  the  interests   of
    maintaining effective immigration control.  I must decide  whether  the
    Secretary of State's decision is proportionate to the legitimate public
    end sought to be achieved.

46. I must have regard to considerations in section 117B of the  2002  Act.
    Maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest, and it is in the public interest that a person seeking  leave
    to remain can speak English and is financially independent.   I  accept
    that  the  Claimant  can  speak  some  basic  English  but  he  is  not
    financially independent.  In any event financial independence  and  the
    ability to speak English do not, as confirmed in AM Malawi [2015]  UKUT
    0260 (IAC) afford an individual a positive right to a grant of leave to
    remain, whatever the degree of fluency in English or  the  strength  of
    financial resources.

47. The Claimant entered the UK illegally, and has never been granted leave
    to remain.  He has therefore been in this country unlawfully.   Section
    117B(4) confirms that little weight should be given to a  private  life
    established by a person at  a  time  when  the  person  is  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  Section 117B(5) makes  the  same  point  when  a  person's
    immigration status is precarious.

48. I therefore must attach little weight to  the  private  life  that  the
    Claimant has established.  I must attach significant weight to the fact
    that the Claimant is not at risk in Iran, and therefore not entitled to
    asylum or humanitarian protection, and there  would  be  no  breach  of
    Articles 2 or 3 if he was returned to Iran.

49. I find that the weight that must be attached to the  need  to  maintain
    effective immigration control, outweighs the weight to be  attached  to
    the wishes of the Claimant to remain in the UK, and therefore  conclude
    that his removal would not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.





Anonymity

The FTT made an anonymity direction.  This is continued pursuant to rule  14
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  Claimant  or  any
member of his family.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             21st November 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             21st November 2016

