
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 27th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K R
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N S Ahluwala of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and  in
    this determination I shall refer to her as being "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 19th April, 1987.   He
    entered the United Kingdom unlawfully on 31st January, 2013 and claimed
    asylum on 4th February, 2013.  The claimant  refused  the  respondent's
    claim on 6th March, 2015  and  gave  directions  for  the  respondent's
    removal.

3.   The respondent appealed that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    his appeal was heard at Hatton Cross on 18th August, 2015 by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Coutts.

4.   The determination is very brief.  The judge noted a psychiatric  report
    and also noted a report from Dr Martin  detailing  scarring  which  the
    appellant has.  The judge accepted  the  appellant's  account  and  the
    causation of the appellant's injuries.   He  accepted  the  appellant's
    claim that his father is required to report  and  his  family  home  is
    still being regularly visited by the Sri Lankan authorities  in  search
    of  the  appellant  and  he  allowed  the   appellant's   claim.    The
    respondent's challenge suggests that the judge failed to  consider  the
    objective evidence and case law in respect of post civil war Sri  Lanka
    which confirms that the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  are  not  presently
    concerned with low level links to the LTTE.  It suggests that  had  the
    judge considered the country guidance case of GJ and Others (Post  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  he  could  not  have
    concluded that the appellant was at risk on return.

5.   Mr Tufan was at pains to point out that the appellant had  been  a  low
    level member of the LTTE  and  not  one  who  would  have  excited  the
    interest of the authorities such as to come within  the  risk  category
    set out in GJ and Others.  He criticised the medical reports  which  of
    course cannot place a timing on the appellant's scars and suggests that
    the doctor and the judge had merely assumed that the scars were  caused
    during the appellant's second detention rather than  during  his  first
    arrest.

6.   I heard lengthy submissions from  Counsel.   He  submitted  a  Rule  24
    response but unfortunately because it was submitted late it was not  in
    the file when I prepared for the hearing.

7.   The only part of the appellant's account which the Secretary  of  State
    did not find credible related to the payment of the bribe to secure the
    appellant's release from detention.  The appellant  explained  that  he
    did not know who had helped the appellant's uncle to locate  him.   The
    respondent did not believe that the uncle  would  refuse  to  tell  the
    appellant but this supposes  that  the  appellant  actually  asked  his
    uncle.

8.   Criticism is made by the Secretary of State of the  judge  for  failing
    to give adequate reasons for  accepting  the  appellant's  credibility.
    With very great respect a judge is not required to explain why he finds
    an account credible.  In this case the judge's credibility finding  may
    well be considered to be generous, but the same  can  be  said  of  the
    Secretary of  State's  credibility  assessment  too.   However,  having
    carefully read the determination  it  cannot  be  said  that  there  is
    anything perverse (in the common law sense) about the judge's findings,
    the judge has considered GJ and Others.  At paragraph 34 he has set out
    the head note to that case.  Given that  he  accepted  the  appellant's
    account in its totality he was entitled to conclude as he did.

9.   I find that the making of  the  decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge did not involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.   My
    decision is that his determination shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

