
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/04075/2015
                                                               AA/04191/2015
                                                               AA/04193/2015
                                                               AA/04194/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     P M
                                     S K
                                     U S
                                     M E
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr N Garrod, Counsel instructed by Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellants.  The main  appellant,  a  citizen
    of Sri Lanka, made an application for asylum which was refused  by  the
    Secretary of State.  Their appeals were heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Pacey) ("the Tribunal"), who in a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    July 2015, dismissed their appeals on all grounds.

2.    The appellant's claim was that his alleged involvement with  the  LTTE
    took place in 2009 and that this had come to light and  placed  him  at
    risk from in or around 2013.  That  was  the  date  that  his  problems
    started and he claimed that threats had been made to  him.   His  claim
    was that a person known to him as K bore a grudge against  him  and  he
    (the appellant) believed that [K] had given his name to the  police  in
    2013 in connection with the 2009 matters. The Tribunal did not find the
    appellant's claim to be credible.

Grounds for permission

3.    In the grounds applying for permission  the  appellants  contend  that
    the Tribunal erred by  taking  into  account  that  the  appellant  had
    returned to Sri Lanka in 2011 to collect  his  son,  which  caused  the
    Tribunal to doubt that he was in fear of persecution.

4.    The second ground was that the Tribunal failed to place weight  on  an
    arrest warrant and had taken into account factors as to how it  was  or
    was not obtained and/or rather the lack of information about how it was
    obtained.  Accordingly it found that the appellant did not come  within
    the risk categories in the country guidance of  GJ.   It  is  contended
    that if  there  is  an  arrest  warrant  then  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that the person would then appear on a "stop" list.

5.    The third ground was that the Tribunal failed  to  take  into  account
    the appellant's evidence in cross-examination where  he  explained  why
    there were two different dates on the arrest warrant; an original  date
    of issue and a further date for re-issue.

Permission to appeal

6.    Permission to appeal was granted on  renewal  to  the  Upper  Tier  by
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia,  who  looked  at  the  Record  of
    Proceedings from the First-tier Tribunal.  Those records confirmed that
    the appellant had explained why the  arrest  warrant  had  carried  two
    dates.  It appeared therefore that the  Tribunal  had  not  taken  this
    evidence into account.  It was accepted that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    make any finding on the genuineness of the arrest warrant which was  at
    the heart of the  appellant's  claim.   The  permitting  judge  further
    observed that the Tribunal had made a number  of  negative  credibility
    findings and also commented that ultimately the grounds may amount to a
    disagreement with the decision.

First-tier decision

7.    In the  Decision  and  Reasons  the  Tribunal  found  the  appellant's
    account to be lacking in  credibility  and  additionally  the  Tribunal
    relied on points made in the refusal  letter.   At  [34]  the  Tribunal
    found that it was not credible that the  appellant  was  in  fear  from
    events in October 2009 because he returned to Sri Lanka for  four  days
    in 2011 and there was no evidence that the  authorities  had  shown  no
    adverse interest in him.  At [35] the  Tribunal  found  it  lacking  in
    credibility that the appellant did not enquire as to how his mother had
    obtained a copy of the arrest warrant issued in his name.  At [36]  the
    Tribunal found that there was no  documentation  from  the  Sri  Lankan
    lawyer to support how he came to obtain the relevant documents.

8.    At [37] the Tribunal found that the appellant failed  to  explain  why
    the arrest warrant should show two dates.  [It  is  accepted  that  the
    appellant did explain this in cross examination.]  At [38] the Tribunal
    found it lacking in credibility that K would  harbour  a  grudge  after
    eleven years.  The  appellant  himself  had  provided  no  evidence  to
    substantiate his claim to have reported that individual to  the  police
    or how he knew he was in Cyprus in 2011 [38 and 39] and in general  the
    Tribunal  found  the  evidence  about  that  individual  to  be  vague,
    particularly in light of its centrality to the appellant's claim.   The
    Tribunal found it lacking in credibility that the appellant  would  not
    have made enquiries as to whether or not that person was in Sri Lanka.

9.    There was no evidence that the individual was well-connected  so  that
    he could engage the authorities' help if the appellant returned  [41  &
    42].  The appellant provided few details  about  his  asylum  claim  in
    Cyprus.  The Tribunal found it lacking in credibility that he would not
    have been given reasons for the refusal of that claim in  writing.   At
    [42] the Tribunal found it lacking in credibility  that  the  appellant
    delayed making his UK asylum claim until July  2013.   Those  were  the
    main points  taken  into  account  by  the  Tribunal  in  reaching  its
    decision.

Discussion and decision

10.   I heard submissions from both representatives that I have  taken  into
    account. I also rely on the Rule 24 response prepared by Mr Melvin.  As
    submitted by Mr Melvin this morning, implicit in the findings  made  by
    the Tribunal, in particular that the arrest warrant was a copy, is  the
    inference that it  was  not  a  reliable  document.   I  agree.  Whilst
    accepting that the Tribunal did not  specifically  make  a  finding  in
    terms as to the  genuineness  or  not  of  the  arrest  warrant,  I  am
    satisfied the Tribunal's main focus was on the  fact  that  the  arrest
    warrant itself was in fact a copy.  The  Tribunal  was  concerned  with
    that the document was not reliable as evidence. There was therefore  no
    need for the Tribunal to consider the matter further and  no  error  is
    disclosed.

11.   I am satisfied that the Tribunal erred in failing  take  into  account
    the explanation given by the appellant in cross-examination as  to  the
    two dates shown on the warrant. However, I do not find  this  to  be  a
    material error of law. First of all the document was itself a copy  and
    secondly,  given  the  other  concerns  raised  and  in  light  of  the
    Tribunal's overall credibility findings, and further because there  was
    no other evidence to support the appellant's explanation.

12.   As to the criticism of the chronology I find no material error of  law
    there.  The Tribunal has taken into account  all  relevant  matters  in
    that regard. There is  no  evidence  to  support  the  claim  that  the
    Tribunal misunderstood the chronology of events which  is  clearly  set
    out in the summary of the appellant's claim at [6 -20] of the decision.
     The Tribunal had in mind that the authorities found  explosives  at  a
    property in 2009 and found that that fact did not deter  the  appellant
    from returning to Sri Lanka in 2011 and did not come to  the  attention
    of the authorities.  The arrest warrant apparently was not issued until
    December 2013, yet the appellant made his claim on 29 July 2013.

13.   Overall I find the appellant's grounds to be a disagreement  with  the
    findings made none of which are material to the decision,  particularly
    given the  significant  negative   credibility  findings  made  by  the
    Tribunal (Shizad (sufficiency of reasons : set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85
    (IAC)).

Notice of Decision

Accordingly I dismiss the appeal and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date 30.11.2015

GA BLACK
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date 30.11.2015

GA BLACK
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
