



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: AA045982015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 5th April 2016                     |On: 23rd May 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                 Fayaz Khan
                        (No anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms P. Heidar, AA Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:          Mr S. Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born in 1984. On the 28th  July
    2015 he was granted permission[1] to appeal against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moan) to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decisions to refuse to vary his leave and  to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006. Those  decisions  followed  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's claim for asylum.








    Background

 2. The Appellant claimed to have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
    Pakistan for reasons of his imputed political opinion. He is  from  the
    Swat Valley and he claimed to be at risk there from the Tehrik Taliban-
    Swat (TTP) because he and  his  father  spoke  out  against  them.  The
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant was from Swat, that  his  father
    was a member of the 'village defence committee' (VDC) but not that  the
    Appellant was at any  risk  from  the  TTP.  The  claim  was  primarily
    rejected on credibility grounds but the Respondent went on to refuse it
    on the basis that the Appellant could safely relocate within  Pakistan,
    and that there was in general a sufficiency of protection  afforded  by
    the Pakistani state.

 3. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant's  father
    was a member of the VDC, that the Appellant had been injured in a  bomb
    blast on the 17th July 2008 in an attack likely aimed  at  his  father,
    that the Appellant had given an anonymous interview to the press  about
    being a civilian "caught between the Taliban and the army". His  claims
    to have been directly threatened by the Taliban, to have twice  escaped
    an armed encounter with them and still to be at risk, are rejected. The
    Tribunal  found  the  evidence  in  respect  of  these  matters  to  be
    implausible and contrary to the country background  material.   Between
    paragraphs 200 and 204 the determination deals with internal relocation
    and protection. It is noted that the  Appellant's  wife,  children  and
    father all remain in Swat, that the Appellant himself lived in Peshawar
    throughout the historical period covered by  the  claim,  that  he  has
    twice returned to Pakistan since coming to the United Kingdom and  that
    he only lodged his claim for asylum three  days  before  his  leave  to
    remain as a student was about to expire. The Tribunal found no  current
    risk and the appeal was dismissed.




    Error of Law


 4. In the application for permission to appeal the Appellant relied on the
    following grounds:


        i) The determination contains errors of fact/fails to  have  regard
           to material evidence.


           a) At paragraphs 176 and 222 the determination records that  the
           Appellant failed to give details of the  TV  programme  that  he
           claims to have been interviewed on, whereas such details can  in
           fact be found in his interview record at Q44.


           b) At paragraph 195 the determination records that  no  evidence
           was given as to how threatening letters were  delivered  and  to
           whom, whereas the Appellant explained in his  witness  statement
           that they were delivered to the mosque which passed them  on  to
           his father.


       ii) The determination contains contradictory findings.


           a)  The Judge  does  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  the
           intended target of the bomb  blast  [219]  because  he  did  not
           accept that the Appellant had  undertaken  sufficient  political
           activities at that point to have drawn himself to the  Taliban's
           attention. This is arguably contradicted  at  221  where  it  is
           accepted that he had given an interview to an online  news  site
           prior to that.


           b) The Tribunal accepts [at 226] that the Appellant's father may
           be at risk as the member of a VDC but  not  that  the  Appellant
           would face the same risk - this is contradicted by the  evidence
           that the Appellant stood with his father in his condemnation  of
           the TTP, attended meetings with him etc.


      iii) Failure to make material findings


           It is submitted that the determination does  not  contain  clear
           findings on the threatening letters that were  submitted,  which
           specifically name the Appellant. These letters were  crucial  to
           the Appellant's case but no findings are made on them.

 5. I heard further submissions on 'error of law' at a hearing on  the  2nd
    November 2015. In oral submissions Ms Heidar argued  that  all  of  the
    above went to the matter of the Appellant's individual  profile,  which
    in turn went to "reach": whether the Taliban were willing and  able  to
    harm the Appellant  wherever  he  lived  in  Pakistan.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's brief conclusions on  internal  flight  and  protection  had
    flowed from its  conclusions  that  the  Appellant  had  no  individual
    political profile that would place him at risk. Thus  the  entirety  of
    the decision was infected by the errors in approach to credibility.  Ms
    Heidar relied on AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31
    (IAC) to submit that the availability of protection in Pakistan depends
    very much on the determination of the agents  of  persecution.  If  the
    Appellant's case that he had received two direct death threats from the
    TTP had been accepted it should  have  been  accepted  that  they  were
    serious about killing him. She further relied on the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in KU (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 107 in which  a  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal was upheld where it had found  that  there  was
    not an internal flight alternative for someone  fleeing  the  Pakistani
    Taliban; she submitted that this  case  had  a  very  familiar  factual
    matrix to KU.

 6. The Respondent was represented at the 'error of law' hearing by  by  Mr
    P. Avery.  He relied on the Respondent's Rule  24  response  dated  6th
    August 2015 and submitted that the inconsistencies cited in the grounds
    are not inconsistencies at  all.  The  evidence  all  had  to  be  read
    together. For instance in respect of the TV  interview  the  Judge  had
    accepted at paragraph 175 that the Appellant gave the name of the show.
    Paragraph 176 must be read in context  of  the  decision  overall.  The
    Tribunal did not overlook evidence.   As to the threatening letters  Mr
    Avery submitted that there was a deficit of supporting evidence  as  to
    where they came from - the Tribunal was entitled to take that  omission
    into account. There was for  instance  no  evidence  from  any  of  the
    Appellant's family members confirming that they  received  the  letters
    from the local mosque.  As to the alleged failure to make findings,  Mr
    Avery submitted that it is inherent in the decision  overall  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not accept the letters to  be  authentic.   The
    Secretary of State maintains that  there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the Appellant and that he would be  able  to  internally
    relocate if he considered it necessary to do so.


 7. In a written decision dated 6th November 2015 I decided that the First-
    tier Tribunal had made errors of law such  that  the  decision,  or  at
    least material parts of it, should be set aside.  My findings were  set
    out at paragraphs 8-18 of my decision:

         "8. The First-tier Tribunal's determination is not to be  commended
         for its structure; the findings are found in two separate sections,
         and in using phrases such  as  "I  find  it  hard  to  accept"  the
         Tribunal exposes itself to charges of unclear findings.  That  said
         the Upper Tribunal cannot overturn the decision of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal because its structure is difficult to follow; nor can  the
         decision be overturned because it contains an error of fact or law.
         I can only interfere with the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
         if I find that the error is such that the decision  should  be  set
         aside.

         9. This was at first blush  an  unpromising  appeal.  Whatever  the
         merits  or  otherwise  of  Ms  Heidar's  submissions  as   to   the
         credibility findings, the  Appellant  is  left  with  the  imposing
         obstacles of internal flight (where on  his  own  evidence  he  had
         lived unmolested in Peshawar for much of the relevant period)   and
         sufficiency of protection (his father remains in Swat today, albeit
         with the benefit of a  bodyguard).   That  said,  I  am  satisfied,
         having reviewed  the  case-law,  determination  and  evidence  with
         anxious scrutiny, that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must
         be set aside, albeit with some findings preserved.


         10. I start with the decision in KU. This concerned a man who  fled
         his village in the FATA  in  fear  of  the  Pakistani  Taliban.  He
         expressed a fear of internal relocation on  the  grounds  that  the
         Taliban, determined  to  find  him,  would  do  so,  and  that  the
         Pakistani state would be neither able nor willing to protect him in
         those circumstances. The Court of Appeal held that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal had been entitled, on the evidence before it, to find that
         in KU's particular circumstances there  was  a  risk  to  his  life
         throughout Pakistan. Those particular  circumstances  included  the
         fact that he had received  two  letters  directly  threatening  his
         life. This finding was consistent with the approach  taken  by  the
         Upper Tribunal in AW. The Court of Appeal held that although  there
         may be,  in  general,  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  men  in
         Pakistan, there may be cases in which the nature of the  threat  is
         likely to outweigh the available protection.    Ms Heidar relies on
         these two cases as authority for her submission that crucial to the
         proper disposal of this matter was a sustainable finding about  the
         Appellant's own political profile, and the continued intentions  of
         the TTP towards him. I accept her submission that if mistakes  have
         been made in respect of those matters, then they must be  material,
         since they go to the likelihood of whether the Taliban are going to
         hunt this Appellant down, no matter  where  he  goes  in  Pakistan.
         Against that background, I consider each of the grounds  of  appeal
         in turn.




         The TV Interview


         11. The Appellant had sought to distinguish the risk he faced  from
         that faced by his father on the basis that his public  condemnation
         of the TTP  was  not  confined  to  local  opposition  and  village
         meetings.   Central  to  this  argument  was  the  claim  that  the
         Appellant had given an emotional television interview where he  had
         spoken  out  against  the  Taliban.  At  paragraph   176   of   the
         determination Judge Moan writes:  "I have been given no details  of
         that TV program or what the Appellant may have said that  may  have
         offended the TTP  or  Taliban".  At  paragraph  222  the  point  is
         reiterated:


         "the Appellant was consistent about being involved in an interview,
         the TV program and the channel. However there  was  no  information
         about how he came to be  invited  or  what  he  said.  Taking  into
         account that the article Scarred in Swat was less  than  derogatory
         of the TTP I cannot be satisfied that the content of the TV program
         was offensive to the TTP or critical of them to encourage  them  to
         target the Appellant"


         12. I am satisfied that in making these findings the  Tribunal  has
         failed to have regard to the Appellant's  evidence  at  the  asylum
         interview, recorded in response to Q44, "what television show  were
         you [on]?":


         "It was AVT Khyber. We had a  debate  about  peace  and  education.
         There was some people for and against.  There  was  people  arguing
         that the Taliban brought peace. I argued against the Taliban. I was
         emotional and spoke about  two  specific  people  Muller  Fazullah,
         Mangdal Bagh. I said they are like animals, they are not  educated.
         I don't have records"


         13. I do not understand it to be in issue  that  the  reference  to
         'Muller Fazullah' is a reference to Maulana  Qazi  Fazlullah,  then
         leader of the TTP in Swat, now the leader of the Pakistani  Taliban
         overall.   I am satisfied that the Appellant gave evidence that  he
         had publicly condemned Maulana  Fazlullah  as  an  "animal";  I  am
         further satisfied that this would have been  reasonably  likely  to
         have been perceived as a criticism by the Taliban.  The failure  to
         take this evidence into account was a material error of law.




         The Letters


         14. At paragraphs 188 to 196 the First-tier Tribunal deals with two
         letters, purportedly delivered to the  Appellant  by  the  Taliban,
         threatening his life.    The Tribunal notes that the Respondent has
         not explicitly alleged these documents to be forgeries, but directs
         itself to the country background material  indicating  that  forged
         documents are readily available in Pakistan. The  Tribunal  further
         finds no legal obligation on the  Respondent  to  verify  that  the
         documents are genuine cf. Singh v Belgium  (33210/11).   Ms  Heidar
         quite properly challenged neither of these  points.    Her  initial
         complaint was that the central reason given for not placing  weight
         on the letters is flawed, for  a  failure  to  take  evidence  into
         account. At paragraph 195  the  determination  states  "I  have  no
         evidence as to how and when these  letters  were  delivered  or  to
         whom". Read in isolation this is clearly an error  of  fact,  since
         the Appellant sets out at paragraph 14 of his witness statement how
         he came to have the letters:  they were left at the mosque  in  his
         home village, whereupon they were passed to  his  father.   However
         the same  paragraph  of  the  determination  then  continues:  "The
         Appellant did not receive the letters  directly.  The  family  have
         been able to supply the news clipping and so I would have  expected
         them to provide some evidence in support especially as regards  the
         letters as it is they were received them". Mr  Avery  submits  that
         when the paragraph is read as a whole it is plain that the Tribunal
         intended to say "I have no  evidence  other  than  the  Appellant's
         own". Mr Avery submitted that had the Appellant produced a  witness
         statement, for instance from his father, the  Tribunal  would  have
         been able to attach rather more weight to  the  documents  than  it
         did.  To this Ms Heider responded by modifying her submissions:  if
         that was what the Tribunal intended (and it is by  no  means  clear
         that this is so) then this too is an error since it is trite asylum
         law  that  accounts  cannot  be  rejected  simply   for   lack   of
         corroboration.


         15. I have not  found  this  an  easy  issue  to  untangle.   I  am
         satisfied that there is  a  contradiction  between  the  apparently
         clear finding at 195 "I have no evidence..." with the rest of  that
         paragraph which suggests that what the Tribunal in  fact  meant  to
         say was that there was no corroboration of the  Appellant's  claims
         about how he came to receive the  threats.   The  Tribunal  may  be
         perfectly entitled to look for corroboration  where  such  evidence
         would be straightforward to obtain:  ST  (Corroboration  -  Kasolo)
         Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT  00119.  The  point  made  at  paragraph  195
         appears to be that the Appellant  is  clearly  in  touch  with  his
         family, so he could have obtained such a statement.  I note however
         that at paragraph 167 the Tribunal appears to decline to place  any
         weight on the Appellant's  evidence  about  the  first  threatening
         letter because of a lack of evidence from  other  people  allegedly
         threatened:


         "I am aware from the evidence that a number of people were named in
         this letter but I have not heard any evidence about the contents of
         the letter from them or anyone else who saw this letter"


         That, it seems to me,  is  setting  the  bar  too  high.  That  the
         Appellant has not managed to obtain witness statements  from  other
         individuals threatened by the Taliban in a letter in 2007 is not  a
         matter that can rationally be held against him in the context of an
         asylum appeal.  I am satisfied that there has  been  a  failure  to
         make clear findings on the weight to be attached to the threatening
         letters.




         A target of the Taliban?


         16. Although the First-tier Tribunal accepted  that  the  Appellant
         had been  injured  in  a  bomb  blast  it  expressly  rejected  the
         suggestion that the Appellant was the primary target of the attack.
         One of the reasons given for that finding was  that  the  Appellant
         had,  at  that  point,  done  nothing  to  attract  their   adverse
         attention. Ms Heidar submits that  in  reaching  that  finding  the
         Tribunal failed to give weight to its own finding [at 222] that the
         Appellant had given an interview to a newspaper  about  life  under
         the Taliban.  I  find  no  contradiction  in  these  findings.  The
         newspaper article was anonymous, and the Tribunal  did  not  accept
         that it contained any  commentary  by  the  Appellant  which  would
         attract the adverse attention of the TTP.


         17. I am however satisfied that in light of the lower  standard  of
         proof  applicable  in  asylum  appeals,  and  the   definition   of
         persecution, the Tribunal does  appear  to  have  placed  too  much
         weight on its own finding  that  it  was  the  Appellant's  father,
         rather than the Appellant himself, who was the principle target. If
         both men were blown up by a Taliban bomb they might be forgiven for
         being unconcerned about who the main  target  was.   It  was  still
         serious harm caused  to  the  Appellant  in  a  directed  political
         attack.




         Conclusions


         18. This was a finely balanced case but I am satisfied  that  taken
         cumulatively, the errors in the approach to  credibility  are  such
         that the decision should be set aside, at least in respect of those
         matters. Mr Avery pointed to other negative credibility findings to
         submit that any errors identified in the grounds  were  immaterial;
         the difficulty with that submission, in this case, was  that  there
         were also a number of fundamental findings made in the  Appellant's
         favour. Those findings have not been challenged and are  preserved.
         They are as follows:


      a) The Appellant is from Swat and attended university in Peshawar;


      b) The Appellant's father is a member of the VDC in his home  area  of
         Khwaza Khela and may, for that reason, be at risk;


      c) The Appellant and his  father  were  both  injured  in  a  targeted
         Taliban bomb attack in July 2008;


      d) The Appellant gave an anonymous interview to the press in  February
         2009;

      In addition the following findings, unchallenged in the  grounds,  are
      also preserved:

      e) The Appellant has not demonstrated that he  was,  on  two  separate
         occasions,  threatened at gunpoint by a Talib;


      f) The Appellant returned to Pakistan in 2013 and managed to  stay  in
         his village  for  5  days  without  incident,  then  to  travel  to
         Islamabad with his family;

      g) The Appellant's family (his mother, father, wife and children)  all
         remain in Swat today.




    The Re-Made Decision


 8. The hearing was adjourned on  the  5th  November  2015  to  enable  the
    Appellant to give evidence (an interpreter had not been booked on  that
    day). The hearing was  reconvened  on  the  5th  April  2016  when  the
    Respondent was represented by Mr Walker and the Appellant again  by  Ms
    Heider.


 9. The Appellant gave oral evidence. He told me that he had  been  one  of
    the first people in Swat to raise his voice against  the  Taliban.  His
    name had appeared on a list of opponents of the Taliban  rule  in  Swat
    that the Taliban had issued  in  April  2007.  His  appearance  on  the
    television show had been consistent with the beliefs he  had  held  all
    along.   It was on Khyber News which is a cable channel. It is aired in
    65 countries.  His father still has protection to this  day.  He  can't
    move around freely. If he goes out the bodyguard comes with  him  -  he
    sits in the back whilst another man  drives.   This  man  is  a  police
    officer who was specially trained for this work. He is only attached to
    the Appellant's father and  would  not,  for  instance,  accompany  the
    Appellant if he went out unless his father was with him.

10. The Appellant told me that he could  not  go  and  live  in  Islamabad.
    Although he can speak Urdu people there can easily tell he is from Swat
    because of his accent and his light skin.  He said that people will not
    welcome him. There are Taliban sympathisers everywhere in Islamabad  so
    it would not be safe for him.


11. In response to Mr Walker's questions the Appellant  confirmed  that  he
    had come to the UK in order to study. He did a  MA  in  Management  and
    Human Resources. His plan at the time was to complete his Masters, then
    get some work experience in the UK. This would count for a  lot  if  he
    applied for jobs in the Middle East or Pakistan.  He planned to  return
    to Pakistan but not to home village - he would have  gone  wherever  he
    could have got a good job.  There are not jobs like that  in  his  home
    village. Everyone who wants to do well, moves. His own  family  are  an
    example: he has one brother in Islamabad, one in Dubai and the youngest
    has just returned home after studying near Mingora.

12. The Appellant relied on a report prepared by Dr Antonio  Giustozzi.  Dr
    Giustozzi  is  an  academic  based  at  Kings  College  London  who  is
    recognised for his work on Afghanistan, Pakistan and  the  Taliban.  Mr
    Walker did not challenge his objectivity or expertise.    Dr  Giustozzi
    confirms that the VDCs were encouraged by the  Pakistan  government  as
    part of their effort against the  Taliban  and  related  militias.   In
    retaliation the Taliban have targeted elders who were involved  in  the
    initiative.  Attacks  have  included   suicide   bombings   of   tribal
    gatherings, kidnapping, murder and  intimidation.  These  attacks  have
    included  actions  against  the  relatives  of  VDC  members,  sons  in
    particular. The anti-VDC campaign  continues,  with  two  people  being
    murdered in Swat in  January  2016.  Dr  Giustozzi  confirms  that  the
    Pakistani Taliban have adopted the use of 'night  letters'  from  their
    Afghan counterparts. These are used as a part of a  systematic  process
    of intimidation.  The general pattern is that  an  individual  receives
    two warnings to desist his activity, following which the  Taliban  will
    "sentence" him if he does not do so.  Once the 'sentence' is issued, it
    must be carried out, regardless  of  whether  the  individual  has  now
    complied with their demands: this is because the  Taliban  want  to  be
    seen as a 'shadow' government.


13. Dr Giustozzi believes that the number  of  fighters  in  the  Pakistani
    Taliban today stands at approximately  27,000.   Their  main  areas  of
    presence are Momand, Khyber, Dara-e Adamkhel, North  Waziristan,  South
    Waziristan, Bajaur and Balochistan.   It is estimated  that  there  are
    almost  4000  members  distributed  amongst  major   Pakistani   cities
    including Peshawar and Islamabad. In September  2014  the  organisation
    split, with one group, the Jamiat Ul Ahrar, favouring negotiations with
    the Pakistani government. What is left of the TTP has  been   "drifting
    towards  more  extreme  positions"  with  several  commanders  aligning
    themselves with Islamic State.  In March  2015  several  groups  united
    behind Fazlullah.

14. Dr Giustozzi states that "the safest place in Pakistan  is  Islamabad".
    There have however been a number of incidents involving the Taliban  in
    the city: the report lists 11 that have  taken  place  between  January
    2014 and February 2016.  One involved a plot to assassinate a Pakistani
    Army officer.   Most of the incidents listed  involve  the  arrests  of
    militants.  Those  successes  notwithstanding  Dr  Giustozzi  expresses
    concern about the corruption in the Pakistani police force, regarded as
    the most corrupt branch of  government  in  Pakistan.   A  Transparency
    International research project in 2013 found that  31%  of  respondents
    said that they had successfully bribed the police  in  order  to  avoid
    charges.  The report concludes by pointing out that Islamabad  is  more
    expensive to live in that other parts of Pakistan.


15. I was also referred to an article downloaded from the  website  www.the
    fridaytimes.com.  This  was  concerned  with  a  series   of   targeted
    assassinations that occurred in Swat in mid  2015.  It  details  how  a
    local political leader had been gunned down in July of that  year,  and
    how  this  was  part  of  a  campaign  being  waged  by  the   Taliban,
    notwithstanding their military defeat at the  hands  of  the  Pakistani
    Army in 2009.  Other victims included members of the VDC: at  least  26
    members of the VDCs were killed in Swat in 2014 alone. In June 2015 one
    of the men murdered was the son  of  a  VDC  member,  and  another  VDC
    activist reported members of his  family  having  been  killed  in  two
    failed attempts on his life.   This man, named Idrees, reports that the
    government had offered protection to the VDCs but it  had  been  turned
    down by elders who believed that this would make them more  conspicuous
    targets.  Some of the militants  suspected  of  the  murders  had  been
    arrested and were facing trial in military courts.


    Findings


16. I remind myself of the accepted facts.  The Appellant is from Swat, and
    his home town Khwaza Khela was taken over  by  the  TTP  in  2007.  The
    Appellant's father was one of many elders who  opposed  them,  and  who
    took steps to defend themselves by forming 'village defence committees'
    with the support of the Pakistani authorities. In  2008  the  Appellant
    and his father were injured in a bomb blast outside their  home.  After
    this incident the Appellant went to live in Peshawar. His  family  left
    the village and went to live in Abbotabad.  The Appellant continued  to
    oppose the TTP.  He  articulated  his  objections  to  the  press,  for
    instance giving an anonymous interview to a  journalist  in  2009.  The
    Pakistani Amry have now largely regained control of Swat  although  the
    Taliban continue to  operate  there.     The  Appellant's  family  have
    returned to the valley. The police have provided the Appellant's father
    with a bodyguard.  This specially trained officer is assigned  only  to
    guard his father, and is not tasked with providing  any  protection  to
    other members of the family. The Appellant himself returned to Swat for
    a few days in 2013 without incident. The Appellant's wife and  children
    continue to live with his father in Khwaza Khela.


17. Having had regard to the written and oral evidence of the  Appellant  I
    am further  satisfied,  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  that  the
    following events took place:

         . In January 2009 TTP militants arrested a man with the same  name
           as the Appellant whom they had stopped at a checkpoint


         . The Appellant appeared on a television discussion show in  April
           2009 in which he openly insulted the leaders of the Taliban  and
           criticised their regime in Swat


         . The Taliban in the Khwaza Khela  area  have  continued  to  make
           threats against the Appellant and his father. The most recent of
           these was in November 2014 when they sent a  'night  letter'  to
           his father via the local Mosque

18. I am satisfied that if the Appellant went back to live in Khwaza  Khela
    today it is reasonably likely that this information would become  known
    to the Taliban. Unlike his father he does not have  the  benefit  of  a
    bodyguard and in those circumstances he would  be  more  vulnerable  to
    attack. Having had regard to  the  country  background  material  I  am
    satisfied  that  the  Taliban  have  attacked  family  members  of  VDC
    activists.  It may be that this is because they are 'soft' targets, not
    having the special protection afforded to VDC elders.  Whilst I  accept
    that the Pakistani government (or rather the  local  administration  of
    the Khyber Pukhtunkwa/NWFP) is officially in control, and that they  do
    in general provide a sufficiency of protection to  the  public  against
    crime or terrorist attack, I find that such protection is likely to  be
    limited in cases  where  individuals  are  specifically  targeted.  The
    greater the determination of militants to carry out assassinations, the
    less able the security services are  to  prevent  them.  This  much  is
    evidenced by the numbers of VDC members or associates killed in  recent
    years: since the army ostensibly regained control  in  2009  the  death
    toll appears to be averaging 2 per month.  Having had regard to all  of
    these factors I am satisfied that there would be a real risk of serious
    harm to the Appellant should be return to live in Khwaza Khela.

19. I do not accept that there is a real risk of harm to the  Appellant  in
    Islamabad.  Whilst it is clear that the Appellant may  be  at  risk  of
    attack whilst in  Swat,  where  his  association  with  his  father  is
    obvious, and where local Taliban fighters may recall him as having been
    a critic in the past, the risk in Islamabad is far  more  remote.   The
    Appellant  is  not  a  high  profile  target,  nor  does  the  evidence
    demonstrate that he is someone whom the Taliban would be interested  in
    pursuing outside of Swat.   It has not been shown, for  instance,  that
    there were any incidents whilst he was studying in  Peshawar,   a  city
    far more vulnerable to  Taliban  infiltration  than  the  capital.    I
    accept that the TTP have conducted operations in Islamabad in the past,
    for instance against the army, and that they may continue to do  so  in
    the future. There is however no  evidence  before  me  of  the  Taliban
    pursuing individuals associated with the VDCs into the city. I consider
    the likelihood of it happening in this case to  be  extremely  low.  It
    would make no sense for them to risk detection on  such  an  operation.
    The risks to the militants of entering Islamabad are high. It is a well
    protected modern city with a substantial police and army presence.  The
    purpose of threatening the VDC is to prevent  them  operating.  If  the
    Appellant is not in Swat he is not a  threat  to  them.  If  they  have
    driven him out of the area, they have accomplished their mission. I  am
    not therefore satisfied that it is reasonably likely that the TTP would
    be interested in harming the Appellant to the extent that they would be
    prepared to track him down and mount an assassination  attempt  against
    him in Islamabad.   There is no objective evidential  support  for  the
    Appellant's assertion that there are "Taliban sympathisers  everywhere"
    in the city.


20. I am therefore satisfied that  there  is  not  a  real  risk  that  the
    Appellant would be targeted in Islamabad. I am further  satisfied  that
    even if there were such an attempt there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in Islamabad. Unlike the forces stationed in the small towns
    of Swat the security services  are  present  in  large  number  in  the
    capital city. Their ability and willingness to prevent terrorist attack
    is reflected in Dr Giustozzi's assessment that Islamabad is the  safest
    place to live in Pakistan.  It is striking that  of  the  11  incidents
    listed in Dr Giustozzi's  report,   only  2  are  actual  attacks,  one
    against an army vehicle and one  against  a  Mosque.  The  remaining  9
    matters all relate to successful operations by the  Pakistani  security
    forces:  seizing guns and explosives, arresting militants  and  members
    of banned organisations,  and  foiling  plots.   Whilst  these  arrests
    support Dr Giustozzi's conclusion that the TTP have  entered  the  city
    and intend to mount operations there, they are also evidence  that  the
    Pakistani authorities are operating a very effective  barrier  to  them
    doing so.  The incidents do  not,  with  respect,  indicate  that  this
    Appellant would be at risk. The fact that the authorities foiled a plan
    to assassinate an Army Officer does not demonstrate that there would be
    a real risk to a man who publicly spoke out  against  the  organisation
    some eight years ago.


21.  I am not therefore satisfied that  there  would  be  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm to the Appellant in Islamabad.  I  must  however  consider
    whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the  Appellant  to  relocate
    there. The test is whether his living conditions would be such that  it
    would be "unduly harsh" for him to have to move. In  his  evidence  the
    Appellant told me that he could not live in Islamabad  because  he  has
    pale skin and a Pushto accent.  I  reject  that  as  untrue.  There  is
    absolutely no evidential foundation for the assertion that Pathans, who
    make up approximately 15% of the population of Pakistan, are unable  to
    enter or live in the capital city, which lies not far from the boundary
    of the NWFP. I accept that the Appellant will be identifiable as  being
    from the NWFP but there is no  satisfactory  evidence  before  me  that
    would support his suggestion that this would make his life in  any  way
    difficult. Ms Heider relied on the decision KU (Pakistan)  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 107 in which the Court of Appeal found no reason to interfere  with
    the factual  finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  a  man  from
    Waziristan would be identified as such in Pakistan proper and  that  he
    would be at risk from the Taliban who would be able to find  him.  That
    case turned on its facts,  and  it  would  appear  from  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision that the Tribunal  had  been  given,  in  that  case,
    evidence to show that internal flight was not an option.  There  is  no
    such  evidence  before  me.    Many  Pathans  manage  to  live  without
    difficulty in Islamabad (and indeed  other  major  Pakistani  cities  -
    according to the COIR  there  are  as  many  as  7  million  living  in
    Karachi). It was the Appellant's  evidence  that  his  own  brother  is
    currently  living  there.  I  have  heard  no  evidence  that  he   has
    experienced any difficulties.  In those circumstances  I  do  not  find
    that the  Appellant's  light  skinned  appearance  or  accent  will  be
    obstacles to him managing to establish himself in the city.


22. The second reason advanced as to why it would be difficult for  him  is
    that undeniable fact that as the capital city, Islamabad is not  cheap.
    Dr Giustozzi estimates that it could cost up to $300 per month to  rent
    a flat there. Presumably the  cost  of  accommodation  depends  on  the
    neighbourhood. I am not at all satisfied that this would prove  a  real
    obstacle to the Appellant. As I  have  already  noted  his  brother  is
    living there at present. He has managed to finance post-graduate  study
    in the UK and his rent in the UK will have been at  or  above  the  sum
    mentioned by Dr Giustozzi.  The Appellant has family living in Pakistan
    including in Islamabad itself, and  another  brother  in  Dubai.  I  am
    satisfied that if he needed help in establishing a  new  household,  he
    would get it.  Accordingly I find that it would not be unduly harsh for
    the Appellant to live elsewhere in Pakistan, for instance in Islamabad.



    Decisions


23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
    is set aside to the extent identified above.


24. The appeal is dismissed.











                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                10th May 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on the 28th July 2015

