
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04493/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th April 2016                        |On 14th September 2016            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               Miss Helen [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Andrew Alexander (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    V Jones, promulgated on 7th July 2015 following a hearing at Birmingham
    on 12th July 2015.  In  the  determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant applied for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of Eritrea (claimed) and was  born
    on 5th January 1991.  She has two children, [NY] (born September  2013)
    and [DD] (born September 2014).  She appealed against  the  refusal  of
    her application to remain in the UK as a refugee and the refusal of her
    claim for humanitarian protection under paragraph 339 of HC  395.   The
    refusal letter is dated 27th February 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that when she was young she  and  her  parents
    moved to Ethiopia, as a 1 year old child, and this was because  of  her
    father's work.  They then returned back to Eritrea.  There  her  father
    was arrested and imprisoned for being a member  of  a  political  party
    opposed to the government.   She  and  her  mother  then  left  Eritrea
    illegally for Sudan and stayed there and her mother  worked  illegally.
    She died in Sudan in 2006.  The Appellant married her husband in  Sudan
    on 21st May 2009.  There are no marriage documents.  Subsequently  they
    left for Libya and from there on a lorry to  Italy  where  she  claimed
    asylum.  Their application was rejected.  From Italy she  went  through
    to France and from France to  the  UK  where  she  was  apprehended  by
    Immigration Officers on 12th August 2013.   She  then  claimed  asylum.
    She claims to have a well-founded fear of persecution  if  returned  to
    Eritrea because of her imputed political opinion, given her association
    with her father, who was a member of the Gebha Party which  is  opposed
    to the government.  Political opposition is not tolerated in Eritrea.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed  how  the  Respondent  had  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was an Eritrean national because she could not name  Eritrean
    customs and festivals, and the dishes that she named  with  respect  to
    food were Ethiopian dishes, and she could give no examples  of  typical
    Eritrean food.  She knew no names or geography of Eritrea.   There  are
    also discrepancies in the Appellant's account of where  she  had  lived
    and during what ages.  The judge set out these matters at paragraphs 15
    to 16 of the determination.  The judge observed, however, that the most
    significant area of concern  was  the  Appellant's  answers  about  the
    language she spoke.  She said she did not speak to her parents in their
    native language of Tigrinya, and this was because she had left  Eritrea
    at a very young age, but this was difficult  to  comprehend  (paragraph
    17).  In fact, the Appellant wrote to the  Ethiopian  Embassy  on  16th
    April 2015  to  ask  if  she  could  apply  for  Ethiopian  nationality
    (paragraph 18).

 5. The judge concluded that the Appellant's evidence  lacked  credibility.
    Her account of the time she spent in  Eritrea  and  what  age  differed
    between the two interviews and differed again at the hearing.  She  was
    also inconsistent as to whether she left Eritrea in 1997 and  had  gone
    to Sudan or gone back to  Ethiopia  (paragraph  20).   The  judge  also
    observed that the Appellant did not speak Tigrinya  and  this  was  the
    most significant part of the case (paragraph 23).   The  Appellant  was
    moreover refused asylum with her husband in Italy (paragraph 25).  Most
    importantly, however, as far as the political aspect of the  claim  was
    concerned, the judge observed that even if the Appellant's  father  was
    Eritrean and had been imprisoned for political opposition, "on her  own
    evidence the only information the Appellant has  about  her  father  is
    that he was in a political party opposed to the government and  was  in
    prison" (paragraph 26).  This did not expose the Appellant to any  risk
    of persecution.

 6. Finally, the judge gave consideration to the Appellant's two  children.
    Article 8 of the ECHR was applied.  It was noted that the Appellant had
    a husband.  The judge concluded that,

         "the Appellant has been in the UK a relatively short time  and  has
         continued a family life  here  while  her  immigration  status  was
         precarious.  One of  her  family  members  is  settled  here.   Her
         husband is awaiting his own appeal against  refusal  of  an  asylum
         claim.  Her children were born here but have no leave to remain  in
         their own right" (paragraph 30).

    In the circumstances, the judge went on to say that  he  would  "attach
    little weight to her family life here" (paragraph 30).

 7. As far as Section 55 of the BCIA 2009  was  concerned,  the  judge  had
    regard to the "best interests of the children", and observed that  "the
    children have no independent life to remain in the UK and are too young
    to have developed a private life here" (paragraph 31).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge had failed to give  due
    regard to Section 55 BCIA  given  that  it  had  been  found  that  the
    children had no place to return to in their country of  origin  and  no
    income.  In these circumstances, the children's "best interests"  could
    not be served by removing them with the parents.

10. On 28th July 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    it was  arguable  the  judge  had  not  properly  considered  the  best
    interests of these very young children under Section 55 of the 2009 Act
    because the children would be returned to their  mother  to  a  country
    where they will have no home or income.

Submissions

11. At the hearing  before  me  on  19th  April  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Andrew Alexander of Counsel, and  he  submitted  that
    the "best interests" of the children to remain in the  UK  had  already
    been accepted.  In the circumstances, it was not correct for the  judge
    to then conclude that the children could go with  the  parents  to  the
    country of origin.  Mr Alexander submitted that this was clear from the
    judge's observation that,

         "whilst it is submitted that their best interests would  be  served
         by remaining in the UK rather than being returned with their mother
         to a country where they have no home and no income, I find any such
         interests are outweighed by the fact that their mother entered  the
         country  with  no  legitimate  claim  to  asylum  or   humanitarian
         protection" (paragraph 31).

    Second, Mr Alexander submitted that in the case of  ZH  (Tanzania),  it
    had already been accepted that an appalling immigration history by  the
    mother could not be visited upon the interests  of  the  children,  and
    there the appeals of the children were allowed.

12. For his part, Mr Parkinson submitted that the children were 2 years and
    1 year old and  their  proper  place  was  with  the  parents,  and  in
    particular the mother.  The better example here was not  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4.  The better example was Zoumbas [2013]  UKSC  74,  where
    the children were British by birth, and had actually been resident  for
    a far longer time in this country, than these two children of  under  2
    years of age, and yet it was found that because they had  developed  no
    independent life of their own, their proper place was to go with  their
    mother back to their country of origin.  Second, it was not true, as Mr
    Alexander  had  submitted,  that  the  judge  had  accepted  that   the
    children's best interests "were served by remaining in  this  country".
    What the judge was referring to was the fact that this is what had been
    "submitted" (at paragraph 31).  It was not  accepted  as  such  by  the
    judge.

Reply

13. In his reply, Mr Alexander submitted that it was not in  issue  whether
    the judge found the Appellant's mother to be credible or not  credible.
    What is in issue was that she was being returned to a country where she
    had no home and no income.  In these circumstances, the children  could
    simply not have their  "best  interests"  served  by  being  forced  to
    accompany their parents to such a country.  Section 55  BCIA  2009  was
    plainly being violated.   The  judge  had  engaged  in  no  substantive
    consideration of this issue.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  First, this was the appeal of the Appellant  mother,  Miss
    Helen [A].  The judge did not find her to be credible  on  any  matter.
    Those findings are unassailable.

15. Second, the judge  did  give  consideration  to  the  position  of  the
    children at paragraphs 30 to 31.  In this respect, the  judge  observed
    that the Appellant was not alone, but had her husband with her, and  he
    had his own independent appeal before the immigration authorities.  The
    judge also observed that the children were born here but have no  leave
    to remain in their own right (paragraph 30).  Thereafter, it was firmly
    recognised that the position of the children in terms  of  their  "best
    interests" is a matter that requires "primary consideration" (paragraph
    31).  This shows the judge having understood the legal import  of  this
    provision perfectly clearly.

16. Third, thereafter, the main issue  was  whether  the  children  had  an
    independent life of their own, such that  they  should  be  allowed  to
    remain here on the basis of their "best interests".  Although the  case
    of ZH (Tanzania) has been referred to me, the better authority in these
    circumstances, is Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74, because there  the  children,
    although British born, were not much older, but had no independent life
    of their own, and the Supreme Court held that in  these  circumstances,
    the children should accompany the parents back  to  their  country,  in
    this case Ethiopia, where their "best interests"  would  be  adequately
    served because the  family  unit  would  be  retained  intact  and  not
    separate.  In the circumstances there is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th September 2016




