
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04343/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2016                  |On 25th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                                     NN
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Anzani, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

I order that the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely  to  lead
members of the public to identify the Appellant is prohibited.   Any  breach
of this order may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant comes from Sri Lanka  and  is  of  Tamil  ethnicity.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 16th February 2014 and claimed  asylum
    on the following day.  The essence of his claim was that he was at risk
    from the Sri Lankan Authorities in  the  light  of  his  history.   His
    mother, he said, had disappeared in 1992, his sister had been an active
    member of the LTTE who had been killed in the course  of  that  service
    and he himself had been forcibly recruited by the LTTE although he  had
    managed to escape. His father was suspected of being an LTTE member  as
    a result of which he was ill-treated. In December of 2013  some  skulls
    were discovered in the local area and the Appellant gave evidence to an
    investigating judge concerning the  disappearance  of  his  mother.   A
    matter of days later the Appellant claimed that he was arrested,  taken
    to an army camp and seriously ill-treated.  The  detaining  Authorities
    were aware of the Appellant's cousins who had been given asylum in  the
    United Kingdom and he was accused of providing  information  concerning
    the discovery of the skulls to his cousins which was  to  be  given  to
    Channel 4.  During his detention he was fingerprinted.  He was released
    following the payment of a bribe  via  the  Eelam  People's  Democratic
    Party but was obliged to sign a document in Sinhalese which he believed
    to be a confession.  With the assistance of false documents he left via
    the airport.  The Respondent  did  not  accept  the  substance  of  the
    Appellant's claim, refused his  application  and  made  a  decision  to
    remove him to Sri Lanka.

 2. The Appellant's appeal against that decision was heard before Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal J H H Cooper.  The appeal was  dismissed  in  a
    decision promulgated on 22nd September 2015.  The judge heard evidence
    from the Appellant and from his cousin.  For the purposes  of  decision
    the judge accepted that the Appellant's mother had disappeared in 1992,
    that his sister had joined the LTTE in 2000 and had been killed in 2008
    and that the Appellant had been forcibly recruited  into  the  LTTE  in
    2007 and spent three or four months with them,  before  escaping.   The
    judge did not however accept that the events subsequently  claimed  had
    occurred.  He pointed out that injuries to the Appellant's  father  did
    not appear to have been attributed by a hospital to the cause  claimed.
    He accepted the discovery of the grave with the skulls in  December  of
    2013 but said that the only evidence given  by  the  Appellant  to  the
    judge in Sri Lanka appeared to be details of his mother and of  himself
    and his father and that the Appellant had spoken at the behest  of  the
    local village officer.  Although a medical report referred to a scar on
    the Appellant's arm there was no medical assessment of  the  source  of
    that scar.

 3. As to the Appellant's claimed detention  and  ill-treatment  the  Judge
    Cooper noted a letter produced by a Sri Lankan attorney, which appeared
    to corroborate the Appellant's claim to  have  given  evidence  to  the
    judge in Sri Lanka and to have subsequently been  unlawfully  detained,
    and Judge Cooper accepted that he should not seek to doubt the letter's
    authenticity. He said  however  that  the  information  given  was  all
    hearsay, presumably from the Appellant's aunt and the letter  indicated
    that inquiries of the police and CID showed that  they  denied  holding
    the Appellant.  A letter from  the  Appellant's  aunt  was  written  in
    English.  The Appellant's cousin had given evidence  that  his  mother,
    the Appellant's aunt, had telephoned him on the day the  Appellant  was
    detained in order to  tell  him  what  had  happened  but  the  witness
    accepted that what he knew he had been told by others.

 4. The judge laid particular emphasis on the claim  that  the  Authorities
    suspected the Appellant of giving information to  his  cousins  and  to
    Channel 4, but there was  no  evidence  from  Channel  4  and  if  that
    television channel had broadcast anything about the matter prior to the
    Appellant's detention it would have been easy to ascertain  that  fact.
    Having regard to those matters the judge did  not  find  it  reasonably
    likely that even if the Appellant had spoken to the judge in Sri  Lanka
    he was detained and tortured as claimed.  He concluded "that finding is
    consistent with his  ability  to  leave  Sri  Lanka  without  hindrance
    (whether or not using a false passport)."  On the basis of his findings
    the judge dismissed the appeal.

 5. In seeking permission to appeal to this Tribunal it was  noted  in  the
    grounds that the judge had accepted that  the  Appellant's  mother  had
    disappeared in 1992, that his sister had been a member of the LTTE from
    2000 until she was killed in 2008 and that the  Appellant  himself  had
    been forcibly recruited.  There had been no clear finding, it was said,
    as to whether the Appellant had spoken to the judge as claimed and  his
    claim to have been detained and  tortured  was  specifically  rejected.
    notwithstanding  the  supporting  corroborative   evidence.    It   was
    submitted that no basis had been given for dismissing the evidence from
    the Appellant's aunt  and  that  in  turn  impacted  upon  the  judge's
    consideration of the letter from the attorney and the oral evidence  of
    the Appellant's cousin which was seemingly dismissed  as  hearsay.   No
    explanation was given as to why such evidence was unreliable.  Reliance
    was placed upon the reported decision of  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) as to the  need  to  give  reasons  if
    evidence was rejected.  It was also stated that the judge had erred  in
    suggesting that the Appellant's ability to  leave  Sri  Lanka  via  the
    airport was determinative of his earlier detention and torture.  It was
    clear from background material and reported  decisions,  it  was  said,
    that having left Sri Lanka without difficulty was not  probative  of  a
    lack of interest in an individual.   That  had  been  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State in GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT (IAC).  It was said that the judge  had  erred  in
    placing any reliance upon the Appellant having left through the airport
    without being stopped.  Permission was granted on both grounds.   In  a
    response under Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 24 it  was  asserted  that
    the judge had adequately reasoned his findings.

 6. At the hearing before me Miss Anzani provided a copy of the decision in
    MK and also of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in MM (Sri Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 36 in which the Secretary of  State  had  accepted
    that an Upper Tribunal Judge had  made  a  material  error  of  law  in
    concluding that an appellant would not have been able  to  depart  from
    the airport unnoticed if the Sri Lankan Authorities had an interest  in
    him.  She then expanded upon the Grounds of Appeal.  She said there had
    been no independent evidence of the oral  evidence  of  the  Appellant.
    There was documentary evidence to support the Appellant's evidence  and
    also the separate oral evidence of the cousin.  The reasoning rejecting
    that evidence, she said, was inadequate in law.  Simply to suggest that
    the evidence was hearsay was not sufficient.  Numerous elements of  the
    Appellant's evidence had been accepted by the judge.   With  regard  to
    the claim that there was no objective evidence from Channel  4  it  was
    not necessary for there to be evidence from that  source  or  even  for
    Channel 4 to have been contacted in connection with the finding of  the
    skulls for the Authorities to make the allegation  that  the  Appellant
    was involved in  that  way.   The  antipathy  between  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government and Channel 4, she said, was well-known and  the  fact  that
    there  have  been  no  broadcast  by  a  particular  date  was  a  very
    substantial leap to make in finding it significant in  indicating  that
    the Appellant was not being truthful.

 7. She continued that  the  second  ground  was  connected.   The  country
    guidance, as confirmed in the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  MM,
    was clear that an individual's ability to leave Sri Lanka without being
    stopped at the airport was not determinative of whether that individual
    was at risk.  In the case of this Appellant he had left under  a  false
    identity.  That was a further cause of concern as to the assessment  of
    credibility.  I queried whether if the Appellant's case was  proven  in
    its entirety that he would come within the guidelines within GJ.   Miss
    Anzani responded that the detention in 2013 was recent  and  there  was
    likely to be a record of that.  The Appellant was already on record and
    was accused of LTTE connections.  He had family  in  the  UK  whom  the
    Authorities suspected.  He had  been  released  from  detention  on  an
    irregular basis and he had exacerbated his position by  coming  to  the
    UK.  If he were returned it would  have  to  be  on  the  basis  of  an
    emergency travel document and the Sri Lankan Authorities would be aware
    of his circumstances and of his sympathies.  He would be likely  to  be
    detained and interrogated on return and if detained there  was  a  real
    likelihood that he would be seriously ill-treated.  She submitted  that
    he would come within category (a) and potentially category (d)  of  the
    head note to point (7) of GJ.

 8. In response Miss Everett said that in the refusal letter the  Secretary
    of  State  had  taken  issue  with  the  Appellant's  claim  that   the
    Authorities were concerned with a connection with  Channel  4  and  the
    Secretary of State would have expected evidence to  be  produced.   She
    accepted that a non-broadcast was not a good basis for disregarding the
    Appellant's evidence but said that he could have obtained some evidence
    as to contact with Channel 4 and that had not  been  addressed  by  the
    Appellant.  His cousin had allegedly cooperated with  Channel  4.   She
    relied upon the judgment of the Court of Appeal in TK (Burundi) v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 40 to the effect that importance could be attached to a
    lack of supporting evidence when it would have been readily  available.
    As to the weight placed by the judge upon the letter from the  attorney
    that that was a matter for him.   The  letter  from  the  aunt  was  in
    English and all the cousin could say was  that  he  had  no  reason  to
    disbelieve his aunt.  The balance shown by the judge had been indicated
    by the fact that he had accepted  other  elements.   Many  people  were
    likely to have given evidence to the judge's inquiry in Sri Lanka as to
    the disappearance of relatives.  With regard to the second  ground  she
    submitted that the judge had not misdirected himself in a material way.
     Although in itself it was not a good point that the Appellant had left
    through  the  airport  without  being  detained,  that  had  not   been
    determinative.

 9. I queried with both Counsel whether if the Appellant's  claim  were  as
    set out that he could be at risk in accordance with the criteria in GJ.
     Both were of the view that that would depend upon  the  findings  made
    and therefore potentially he could do so.  If I found a material error
    they agreed that the appeal would have to be reheard.

10. The decision by Judge Cooper is detailed and articulate.  He considered
    that certain events could be accepted as having occurred.  The  crucial
    issue was whether the Appellant was or was not detained as claimed, and
    significantly ill-treated, by  the  Sri  Lankan  Authorities  following
    giving evidence to the judicial inquiry.  The judge found that  he  had
    not.  I found there was force in the submission made by Miss Anzani but
    it was not sufficient simply to say that the  supporting  evidence  was
    hearsay.  The Appellant himself had given evidence on the  point.   The
    letter from the attorney was detailed and the judge  accepted  that  he
    should not doubt its authenticity.  In that letter the attorney  stated
    that he had been contacted by the Appellant's  aunt  on  26th  December
    2013 and instructed that the Appellant  had  been  arrested.   He  made
    inquiries of the police and the CID who denied holding  the  Appellant.
    The attorney stated that he was preparing to  submit  a  habeas  corpus
    application when the aunt advised  him  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    released.  He stated that  the  arrest  and  detention  were  therefore
    extrajudicial and had not involved court proceedings.

11. The aunt's statement (which it is correct was in  English  and  without
    any version in a Sri Lankan language) stated that  she  had  instructed
    the attorney.  The cousin stated that on the  evening  of  the  claimed
    arrest his mother, the Appellant's aunt, had telephoned  him  and  told
    him of the arrest.  Together those elements present a coherent  picture
    and it was incumbent  on  the  judge  to  state  why  he  rejected  the
    evidence, both of the Appellant,  of  the  cousin  and  the  supporting
    evidence.  The reliance on elements of that evidence being hearsay does
    not in itself discredit the evidence and the  parties  giving  evidence
    were entitled to know with reasons why that evidence was not  accepted.
    The head note to MK reads:

         "(1)     It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the
             reasons for a Tribunal's decision.

         (2)   If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
             incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight
             whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and
             for  such  findings  to  be  supported  by  reasons.   A  bare
             statement that a witness was not believed or that  a  document
             was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the  requirement
             to give reasons."

12. Miss Anzani also referred to the judge's reliance upon  the  fact  that
    there was no evidence from Channel 4, in particular that there had been
    no broadcast on or before 25th December 2013.  The judge stated at  the
    end of paragraph 64 of his decision:

         "Finally there is no evidence that  Channel  4  broadcast  anything
         about this matter before 25th December 2013; unless they  had  done
         so there is no way  that  the  interrogating  officers  could  have
         accused him of passing information to that organisation."

    That I believe to be a non-sequitur.  The Authorities could  have  made
    an accusation to that effect simply on the basis of  a  fear  that  the
    Appellant, who had an LTTE background  both  personally  and  from  his
    family, would pass or have passed details to an  overseas  broadcasting
    organisation of the finding of the graves.  The  judge's  reasoning  in
    that respect was speculative.

13. As to the judge's reliance  upon  the  Appellant  leaving  the  airport
    without being detained, that was, as was accepted by Miss Everett,  not
    a good point but it is arguable that the  judge  was  simply  making  a
    passing comment.  However in the light  of  the  other  errors  I  have
    referred to, I have come to the conclusion that I must  set  aside  the
    judge's decision and the appeal will have to be reheard.  In the  light
    of the fact-finding necessary I agree with the submissions of  the  two
    representatives that the appropriate course is remittal to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Having regard to statement  7(2)(b)  of  the  Tribunals
    Judiciary Practice Statements I remit the case accordingly to the First-
    tier Tribunal under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and I make the directions set out below.

Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  a  material
error of law and the decision is set aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

I have made the anonymity order set out above.

Signed   Dated 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


DIRECTIONS

Sections 12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
2007

 (1) The appeal is to be reheard by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  a  judge
    other than Judge J H H Cooper, with no findings preserved;

(2)  The appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House.  The time  estimate  is
    three hours and a Tamil interpreter will be required;

(3)  Each party shall serve upon the other and upon the Tribunal  copies  of
    all documents, including witness statements,  upon  which  reliance  is
    sought to be placed at least seven days before the hearing.

Signed   Dated 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
