
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA040462015
      AA040472015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 May 2016                               |On 20 June 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                           m f k (FIRST Appellant)
                           n f (SECOND Appellant)
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Yeo, Counsel, instructed by Roelens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellants from serious harm, having regard to the interests of justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Introduction

 1. The two  Appellants  are  husband  and  wife  and  are  both  Pakistani
    nationals. Their appeals have been linked throughout.

 2. By a decision promulgated on 31 March 2016 I found that the  First-tier
    Tribunal had materially erred in law when  dismissing  the  Appellants'
    appeals  against  the  Respondent's  decisions  of  13  February  2015,
    refusing to vary leave to remain and to remove  them  from  the  United
    Kingdom under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
    2006. My error of law decision is set out in full at Annex 1.

 3. I am now remaking the decision on the Appellants' appeals.

The parameters of the remaking decision

 4. As can be seen from my error of law decision, this is  not  a  complete
    rehearing of the appeals: certain findings of fact  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are preserved. A number of these findings are adverse  to  the
    first Appellant in particular, and this places obstacles in the way  of
    success in the appeals.  However,  it  is  the  logical  effect  of  my
    decision to have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal that
    the adverse matters are not fatal to the Appellants' cases. If it  were
    otherwise I would have found  any  errors  of  law  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be immaterial.

 5. I summarise the preserved findings here:

   a) both the Appellants are Ahmadis by birth;

   b) the first Appellant had a distinguished career in the Pakistani  Civil
      Service;

   c) the first Appellant had not had specific problems  in  Pakistan  as  a
      result of an alleged argument with an  individual,  or  indeed  anyone
      else;

   d) no fatwa had been issued against the first Appellant;

   e) the Appellants had not severed all ties with Pakistan;

   f) whilst in Pakistan the first Appellant had not engaged  in  activities
      prohibited by law.

 6. The basis upon which I found there to be material errors of law in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's  decision  was,  in  summary,  that  despite  the
    adverse findings on particular claims offered by the  first  Appellant,
    the Judge had failed to address the following questions:  why  he  (the
    first Appellant) had acted as he did in Pakistan;  what  activities  he
    had undertaken in the United Kingdom; how  and  why  he  would  act  if
    returned to Pakistan now.

 7. These questions all arise from the relevant country guidance case of MN
    and Others (Ahmadis - country conditions -  risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 389 (IAC) (hereafter, MN), which encapsulates the  principles  set
    down in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 as part of its conclusions.

The evidence

 8. I have the original Respondent's appeal  bundle  (RB)  containing:  the
    screening interview; the full asylum interview; a witness statement for
    the first Appellant dated 23 January 2015; a letter from  the  Ahmadiya
    Muslim Association UK (AMA) dated 25 January 2015; a letter from  Mr  J
    Kelly dated 29 January 2015; the notice of  immigration  decision;  and
    the reasons for refusal letter. As the second  Appellant  is  dependent
    upon her husband's, all  the  evidence  in  RB  relates  to  the  first
    Appellant.

 9. From the Appellant I  have  the  bundle  prepared  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing (AB), indexed and paginated 1-125. This has  not  been
    referred to in the hearing before me.

10. In addition, I have a new witness statement from the Appellant, dated 9
    May 2016, and a second letter from the AMA, dated 17 February 2016.

11. Both Appellants attended the hearing. The  first  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence with the assistance of an Urdu interpreter. A full note of the
    oral evidence is contained in the Record of Proceedings.

12. In summary, the first Appellant gave the following evidence.  In-chief,
    he adopted his latest witness statement. He told me that  he  has  been
    distributing leaflets on the Ahmadi faith  in  this  country,  and  has
    attended inter-faith meetings. He has manned a stall in  public  places
    on a regular basis. Leaflets have been given out and people spoken to.

13. In cross-examination the first Appellant confirmed that he  had  had  a
    good career as a tax officer in Pakistan. Since retirement he  had  had
    more time to undertake faith-related activities.  He  was  asked  about
    being discreet when in Pakistan. I was told  he  was  discreet  in  the
    sense that he knew he was unable to  go  out  and  speaking  openly  to
    people. However, if asked about his faith, he  would  tell  the  truth;
    neighbours and colleagues knew he was Ahmadi.  He  knew  that  the  law
    prohibited open practising of his faith.

14. Preaching was said to be important. It was a primary duty of Ahmadis to
    preach. The first Appellant had noticed that marks had been  placed  on
    his front doors at different addresses at which he resided in Pakistan.
    He had not been attacked, though. The first Appellant  maintained  that
    his whole account was true, even when the  preserved  adverse  findings
    from the First-tier Tribunal Judge were pointed out to him. Soon  after
    arrival in the United Kingdom he registered with the  AMA.  When  asked
    why Mr Kelly was not at the hearing to provide supporting evidence, the
    first Appellant said that he had not been  asked  to  attend.  The  AMA
    letters confirmed the fact of conversion and the  first  Appellant  did
    not want to give the impression that this was being exploited  for  his
    own advantage.

15. The first Appellant was asked  about  the  contents  of  the  2015  AMA
    letter. It did not mention  the  distribution  of  leaflets.  This  was
    because the  letter  was  issued  in  a  hurry.  Initially,  the  first
    Appellant stated, the AMA had been unsure of his  reason  for  entering
    the United Kingdom; they thought it was to attend a specific  religious
    event. They did not want to issue a letter in support of the Appellant.
    However, when the Appellant cleared this up by showing them his  multi-
    entry visit visa, they did issue a  letter  on  25  January  2015,  the
    evening before the  full  asylum  interview  with  the  Respondent.  In
    respect of why it took over a year to obtain  a  more  detailed  letter
    from the AMA, the first Appellant said that his previous solicitors had
    not told him the need for a  better  letter.  He  subsequently  changed
    representation and the new letter was obtained. He had not thought that
    the first AMA letter was problematic. He was unaware of the  importance
    attached to such evidence. He was doing more activities in January 2015
    than is stated in the first AMA letter. Specifics  were  not  mentioned
    there. In respect of activities in Pakistan,  the  AMA  in  the  United
    Kingdom had  obtained  a  report  from  the  relevant  organisation  in
    Pakistan only in September 2015. The  first  Appellant  said  that  his
    activities in the United Kingdom were expanding all the  time.  He  had
    not done more simply to bolster his asylum claim. In Pakistan,  he  had
    been in fear to practise his faith. It is very different in the  United
    Kingdom.

16. There was no re-examination.

Respondent's submissions

17. Mr Kotas relied on the preserved adverse credibility findings from  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.  A  number  of  material  parts  of   the   first
    Appellant's claim were found to be untruthful.  There  is  a  'tipping'
    point at which the rest of the  claim  falls  down  in  line  with  the
    previously disbelieved elements.

18. Nothing on meetings was mentioned in the asylum  interview.  The  first
    AMA letter was very brief. It was odd that the second letter  contained
    so much more information. Was the first Appellant doing more now simply
    to bolster his asylum claim? In any  event,  the  first  Appellant  had
    lived his life in Pakistan as it suited him; he could return and do the
    same again. It was of real concern that Mr Kelly had not  attended  the
    hearing.

19. In short, the Appellant could not bring himself within the scope of MN.

Appellants' submissions

20. Mr Yeo relied on his skeleton  argument.  Contrary  to  what  Mr  Kotas
    submitted, the first Appellant had not been comfortable in Pakistan  as
    far as his faith was concerned. In any event, the life in this  country
    has changed the first Appellant's  view  of  matters.  The  second  AMA
    letter is reliable and significant. There is a credible explanation for
    why the first letter was brief. The first Appellant is not a lawyer and
    would not have known  about  MN  or  the  importance  attached  by  the
    Respondent and Tribunal to AMA letters. He  had  undertaken  activities
    before and after his appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. Both he and his
    wife are Ahmadi by birth. The second  Appellant  is  from  a  prominent
    Ahmadi family. This is consistent with the importance attached to their
    faith.

21. In respect of MN, preaching in the ordinary sense used by lay people is
    not the only way  of  breaching  Pakistani  legal  restriction  of  the
    practise of the Ahmadi faith. Tabligh is  a  wider  concept.  It  makes
    sense that the first Appellant has had more time  since  retirement  to
    undertake activities. In respect of the preserved  adverse  credibility
    findings, I was referred to the facts of the various appeals in MN  and
    paragraphs 9-13 of the skeleton argument. The first Appellant's  former
    career as a successful civil servant would make him a 'good' target for
    extremists. If the first Appellant were to exercise any  discretion  in
    the practising of his faith on return to Pakistan, it would be in order
    to avoid persecution.

Burden and standard of proof

22. The burden of proving material facts rests with the Appellants, and the
    standard of proof is that of the balance of probabilities.

Findings and reasons

The preserved findings

23. I have referred to the preserved findings of fact from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, above. Most of these are adverse to the first Appellant.

24. Clearly, these are relevant  to  my  assessment  of  the  rest  of  the
    evidence, and I have taken them very much into account. I have assessed
    the evidence in the round, of course, but this has been coloured by the
    fact that material aspects of the claim as put  forward  by  the  first
    Appellant have been deemed untruthful. As I have stated previously,  it
    makes the first Appellant's task in succeeding all the  more  difficult
    and I have viewed his latest evidence with appropriate caution.

25. Having said, I do not accept that by virtue of the  preserved  findings
    alone, a 'tipping point'  has  been  reached,  after  which  all  other
    aspects of the first Appellant's account fall to be  rejected.  I  find
    this to be so for the following reasons.

26. First, it is a trite proposition  in  this  jurisdiction  that  certain
    parts of an individual's account can be rejected, whilst other material
    aspects are believed.

27. Second, there is merit in Mr  Yeo's  reliance  on  the  actual  factual
    backgrounds to the linked appeals in MN. The four appellants in MN  all
    had significant adverse credibility findings against them (I  refer  to
    the  summary  at   paragraphs   9-13   of   the   skeleton   argument).
    Notwithstanding this, they all ultimately succeeded in  their  appeals.
    This illustrates well the importance of my first point, above.

28. Third, in the present case the rejected aspects of the claim related to
    alleged specific incidents: the argument with Mr Rana, the issuance  of
    the fatwa, and the disposal of assets in Pakistan. It has been accepted
    throughout that he is in fact an Ahmadi by birth. It  is  also  a  fact
    that the open practising of the Ahmadi faith is severely restricted  in
    Pakistan, whilst that is clearly not the case in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Therefore, in seeking to peer through the 'window of a man's soul',  as
    it were, and in  ensuring  that  anxious  scrutiny  is  accorded  to  a
    protection claim, there remains the possibility of embellishments being
    made and certain untruths stated whilst at the  same  time  a  core  of
    credibility running through the claim.  In  particular,  there  is  the
    possibility of a development or  awakening  in  the  first  Appellant's
    approach to his faith  since  arriving  in  this  country  (as  I  will
    discuss, below).

29. Having considered all of the evidence  with  care,  I  have  concluded,
    based on what I have said above and below, that the  untruths  told  by
    the first Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  were  not  of  such
    central gravity  as  to  undermine  the  core  thread  of  the  claimed
    adherence to, and practise of his Ahmadi faith.

Activities in Pakistan

30. The undisputed fact that both Appellants are Ahmadis  by  birth  is  of
    some significance. There has never been any  suggestion,  let  alone  a
    finding, that they are non-practicing Ahmadis. Whether  they  practised
    their faith discreetly is different question. In my view it  adds  some
    weight to the first Appellant's underlying  claim  to  have  wanted  to
    practise his own  faith  and  that  of  his  parents  without  fear  of
    consequences.

31. Also of some import is the fact, as I find it  to  be,  of  the  second
    Appellant being from a prominent Ahmadi family. Whilst this does not of
    course mean that the couple would themselves be  fervent  practitioners
    of the faith, it nonetheless lends credence to the  claimed  importance
    of religion to their respective identities.

32. I  find  that  the  first  Appellant  was  fully  aware  of  the  legal
    restrictions on the practice of the Ahmadi faith in Pakistan. He is  an
    educated man with a distinguished career in the  civil  service  behind
    him. He has always been an Ahmadi. It is obvious  that  he  would  have
    known about the legal position. His own  evidence  is  consistent  with
    this (see, for example, Q58-61 of the asylum interview).

33. The  same  applies  to  the  societal  hostility  towards  Ahmadis,  in
    particular those seeking to practise their faith openly.

34. The first Appellant has never claimed to have 'stood on  the  rooftops'
    and proclaimed his faith to all. As the First-tier  Tribunal  found,  a
    finding I have preserved, the  first  Appellant  did  not  engage  with
    behaviour specifically prohibited under Pakistani law. That would  have
    included proactive open discourse with non-Ahmadis in a public setting,
    for example. I take Mr Kotas' point that this discreet behaviour was in
    order for the first Appellant to continue in his civil service  career.
    However, I find that the actual evidence indicates  at  least  a  mixed
    picture. The first Appellant may well have  adopted  this  position  in
    part with a view to maintaining his career. Yet he knew full well  that
    there were  legal  restrictions  in  place,  and  that  'indiscretions'
    could/would lead  to  serious  consequences  potentially  going  beyond
    dismissal from employment. Taking my assessment of the  evidence  as  a
    whole, I find that a desire to  maintain  his  career  was  at  most  a
    secondary motive in the first Appellant's self-denying approach to  his
    faith.

35.  I  accept  that  the  first  Appellant  had  responded  truthfully  to
    neighbours and work colleagues who asked him about his  faith.  I  find
    this to be consistent with his evidence of acting discreetly but with a
    sense of pride in his religion of birth (see Q59-60  of  the  interview
    and paragraph 4 of the latest witness statement).  It  also  sits  well
    with his decision to voluntarily have his Ahmadi faith  stated  in  his
    passport.

36. I turn to the AMA letter of 17 February 2016.  I  will  deal  with  the
    issue of what the Appellant has done  whilst  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    below. For present purposes I find the  first  section  of  the  letter
    relating to activities in Pakistan to contain reliable evidence. I find
    the source (the AMA) to be, in principle, a reliable one (the Pakistani
    end of the association was deemed a reliable  source  in  MN,  and  the
    Respondent has historically attached importance  to  the  presence,  or
    indeed absence, of letters from the AMA). Indeed, the AMA is  a  source
    cited in the Respondent's guidance on Ahmadis in Pakistan.

37. I find that the AMA sought and obtained  a  report  from  the  Pakistan
    association on 24 September 2015. Thus, the  information  contained  in
    the AMA letter has been sourced from  records  held  in  Pakistan.  The
    relevant information includes confirmation that:

   a) the first Appellant was involved in the Majlis Ansarullah group;

   b) he had good contact with the community;

   c) he regularly attended prayers, meetings and sermons;

   d) he was well-known locally and at work;

   e) that his father was an Ahmadi activist in the 1960s;

   f) that the second Appellant is from a very prominent Ahmadi  family  and
      was involved in meetings  at  the  family  home  and  participated  in
      medical camps, deemed to be important outreach work.

38. I find that the information summarised above is accurate.

39. I accept the evidence as expressed in both witness  statements,  albeit
    by a narrow margin, that there  was  a  genuine  desire  on  the  first
    Appellant's part to engage in a more expansive, open  practise  of  his
    faith but for the restrictions in place and the serious consequences of
    contravention.

40. All of the above leads me to find that despite  the  preserved  adverse
    credibility findings, the first Appellant has  proved  three  important
    elements of his case:  that  his  faith  was  genuinely  of  particular
    significance to his religious identity  whilst  in  Pakistan;  that  he
    maintained a desire to practise his faith more  openly;  and  that  the
    major factor in not acting in this  way  was  in  order  to  avoid  the
    potentially serious consequences for his freedom and safety.

Activities in the United Kingdom

41. As with the issue of the activities in  Pakistan,  I  have  taken  full
    account of the preserved adverse credibility  findings  when  assessing
    this aspect of the case.

42. I turn first to the two AMA letters. The  first  letter  is  brief  and
    omits particularised information which is included in the second letter
    and upon  which  the  first  Appellant  seeks  to  rely,  such  as  the
    distribution of leaflets and the  attendance  at  certain  events.  The
    explanation offered by the Appellant for  the  omissions  is  that  the
    letter was issued in a hurry and just prior to the asylum interview. It
    is right that the  letter  is  dated  25  January  2015  and  that  the
    interview was the following day, and  this  supports  the  explanation.
    Having  said  that,  the  second  AMA  letter  does  not  set   out   a
    corroborative account of the reasons for the brevity of  the  first.  I
    also note that the first letter refers to a report from the  "President
    of Birmingham East", dated 21 January 2015, which  apparently  provided
    the  information  upon  which  the  relevant  details  of   the   first
    Appellant's activities was based. I note too that in his  own  evidence
    the first Appellant has not particularised the chronology  of  when  he
    began undertaking the various  claimed  activities  (stalls,  leaflets,
    etc.). Taking of this into account, I will accept that the first letter
    was issued in a hurry and that it might not have stated every aspect of
    the activities then undertaken by the first Appellant.  However,  I  do
    not accept that he was in fact doing as much then as he appears to have
    claimed in his own evidence, or at least  was  not  then  as  centrally
    involved in the activities. If he had been, I find that the President's
    report would have made some mention of them. The first Appellant cannot
    have it both ways: if the AMA letters are reliable (which I  find  them
    to be), I need to go  by  what  is  contained  therein,  including  the
    sources stated therein.

43. The  second  AMA  letter  is  much  more  detailed.  I  note  that  the
    information contained in paragraph 2 was derived from a report from the
    Leamington Spa President, dated 21 January 2016. I accept that this  is
    the source of the information contained in the letter. I also find that
    the AMA is fully aware of the need for reliable evidence to be provided
    in respect of asylum applicants. It is, as I have already mentioned,  a
    source for the Respondent's own country information  guidance,  and  it
    has been subjected to scrutiny by the Tribunal  over  time.  It  is,  I
    find, reasonably likely that the information provided in respect of the
    Appellant is accurate.

44. As it is, and applying a good  deal  of  caution  to  the  evidence  of
    activities undertaken in this country,  I  do  accept  that  the  first
    Appellant has taken  an  increasingly  active  role  in  promoting  and
    espousing  his  faith  since  arriving  in  the  United   Kingdom.   In
    particular, and based in the main upon what is contained in the  second
    AMA letter,  I  find  that  the  first  Appellant  has  undertaken  the
    following:

   a) attending prayers and local meetings;

   b) attending the annual AMA convention;

   c) continued involvement in the Majlis Ansarullah;

   d) distributing leaflets door-to-door;

   e)  manning  stalls  in  public  places  at  which  literature  and  oral
      information on the faith is provided;

   f) attending Tabligh training sessions with a view to enhancing knowledge
      and disseminating the faith;

   g) participating in a peace conference.

45. I go  on  to  find  that  these  activities  are  consistent  with  the
    importance of his faith whilst in Pakistan and also  a  development  of
    this aspect of his identity during his  residence  in  a  free  society
    here. The activities undertaken are, I find  part  and  parcel  of  the
    Ahmadi concept of Tabligh, as stated by the  AMA  and  in  the  country
    information.

46. Rather than see the timing of this increased activity  as  suspiciously
    convenient to the progress of his appeal, I find  that  this  has  been
    undertaken out of genuine motives. It is, I find part  of  a  plausible
    continuum beginning with his faith by birth, moving through  restricted
    atmosphere in Pakistan, and then into an environment in which the first
    Appellant could articulate and manifest  his  religious  identity  more
    fully.

47. The delay in obtaining the second AMA letter is not significant. First,
    because the first Appellant is not a lawyer and would not  be  expected
    to appreciate the importance of AMA letters and the Tribunal's case law
    on Ahmadis. Second, I have found that the first Appellant's  activities
    in fact increased over time in any event.  Third,  I  have  found  this
    increase to be genuine, and thus the reliability of the AMA  letter  is
    not undermined.

48. I find that the genuinely undertaken activities of the first  Appellant
    in the United Kingdom include open public  discourse  with  non-Ahmadis
    and the open distribution of literature which is very likely to include
    references to Ahmadi practices banned under Pakistani law.

49. In summary, the behaviour genuinely engaged in by the  first  Appellant
    in this country is of particular importance to his  religious  identity
    and elements of this behaviour would also be contrary to Pakistani law.

50. I make it clear that without this evidence from  the  AMA  I  would  be
    highly unlikely to have accepted the first  Appellant's  word  at  face
    value.

51. I now address the issue of the conversion of Mr  Kelly  to  the  Ahmadi
    faith. This is not without its evidential problems. I have to say  that
    I find it odd that Mr Kelly was not asked to attend the hearing  or  at
    least provide a statement. Whilst there is something to be said for the
    first Appellant's sentiment that he  did  not  want  to  appear  to  be
    exploiting the conversion, the potential importance of evidence from Mr
    Kelly should have overridden this.

52. If it were not for the AMA letters I would probably not  have  accepted
    this element of the evidence either. As it is, the letters confirm  the
    conversion. It is  reasonably  likely  that  the  AMA  would  not  have
    committed themselves to writing unless they knew of the conversion  and
    had confidence in its authenticity. I combine  this  reliable  evidence
    with  the  consistent  (yet  somewhat  tarnished)  evidence  from   the
    Appellant himself, and the letter from  Mr  Kelly  in  RB.  Overall,  I
    accept that the first Appellant was instrumental in converting Mr Kelly
    to the Ahmadi faith.  I  see  this  as  another  aspect  of  the  first
    Appellant's commitment to his faith and the manner in which  he  wishes
    to practise it.

The position on return to Pakistan

53. If removed to Pakistan now I find that the first Appellant would hold a
    genuine desire to continue to practise his faith as he has  been  doing
    in the United Kingdom.

54. In light of his knowledge of the state of Pakistani law,  the  societal
    attitudes and the manner in which he conducted himself when last there,
    I find that he would forego the expression and behaviour  exhibited  in
    the United Kingdom, and would act discreetly.

55. However, it is clear to me that the primary reason  for  adopting  this
    course would be in order to avoid the very  real  risk  of  persecution
    (including persecutory prosecution) should he not do so.

Conclusions

56. I apply my findings of fact to the guidance contained in paragraphs 119
    to 126 of MN.

57. Both the Appellant's are in fact Ahmadis by birth.

58. I have  found  that  it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  first
    Appellant's religious identity that he is able to manifest his faith in
    a manner that would contravene the restrictions set down  in  Pakistani
    law.

59. He would deny the manifestation of his faith in this manner in order to
    avoid persecution.

60. In light of MN and HJ  (Iran),  the  first  Appellant  is  therefore  a
    refugee and a person at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment if  removed  to
    Pakistan.

61. It has never been suggested that the second Appellant's  case  has  any
    material independence to that of her husband:  they  clearly  stand  or
    fall together.

62. Therefore, the second Appellant's appeal succeeds as well.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeals on asylum  and  human  rights
(Article 3 ECHR) grounds.


Signed                                       Date:  16 June 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  16 June 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

ANNEX 1: The error of law decision

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/04046/2015
      AA/04047/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2016                              |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                           M F K (first Appellant)
                           N F (second Appellant)
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, Counsel, instructed by Roelens Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Asjad (the judge), promulgated on 23 July 2015, in which
    she  dismissed  their  appeals.  Those   appeals   were   against   the
    Respondent's decisions of 13 February 2015, refusing to vary  leave  to
    remain and to remove the  Appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. Both Appellants are Pakistani citizens.  The  first  Appellant  is  the
    husband of the second. It has been accepted throughout that  they  were
    Ahmadis by birth, and that the first Appellant had had a  distinguished
    career in the Pakistani civil service. His protection claim was founded
    upon problems said to  have  arisen  as  a  result  of  his  faith.  In
    addition, he asserted that he was  unable  to  practise  his  faith  in
    Pakistan to the extent  desired  because  of  the  legal  and  societal
    restrictions in place there.

The judge's decision

 3. In line with the Respondent's position, the  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellants were Ahmadis and that the first Appellant was a former civil
    servant (paragraphs 14-16). She found that there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that the first Appellant was a "staunch Ahmadi" (paragraph 17).
    In paragraphs 19-27 the judge deals with  a  specific  element  of  the
    first Appellant's claim, namely that as a result of  an  argument  with
    one Mr Rana an FIR and fatwa were consequently issued against him.  For
    a variety of reasons, the judge rejects this aspect of the  account  in
    fairly robust terms. The first Appellant's evidence concerning his ties
    with Pakistan was also subject to criticism (paragraph 28).

 4. Having made these findings, the judge goes on and sets out the headnote
    of MN and Others (Ahmadis - country  conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 389 (IAC).  At  paragraph  30  she  finds  that  the  first
    Appellant had not engaged in activity that was prohibited in  Pakistan,
    and that his faith had been practised out of  sight,  as  it  were.  At
    paragraph 31 she appears to have accepted the contents of a letter from
    the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association (AMA) in the United Kingdom. It  seems
    implicit in what the  judge  says  that  she  regarded  the  activities
    carried out by the first Appellant in this country  as  being  somewhat
    opportunistic in nature. His conversion of a  British  citizen  to  the
    Ahmadi faith did not, it seems, carry much weight.

 5. The appeals were dismissed on all grounds (including  those  pertaining
    to Article 8).

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds are in essence threefold: the judge failed to  have  regard
    to the evidence of witnesses; the HJ (Iran) issue was  not  considered;
    and there was a failure to examine the evidence in the round  and  give
    the first Appellant the benefit of any doubt.

 7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Plimmer  on  9
    December 2015. Whilst not formally limiting the grant,  her  focus  was
    clearly on the HJ (Iran) point.

The hearing before me

 8. Mr Yeo relied on the grounds. He accepted that the HJ (Iran) issue  was
    central to the appeals. The judge had, he submitted, simply  failed  to
    engage with this matter. In addition, the  judge  had  failed  to  have
    regard to evidence from the second Appellant and background information
    about the Ahmadi faith in general.

 9. Ms Isherwood submitted that there were no errors at  all.  The  adverse
    credibility findings were relevant to all other issues in the  appeals.
    In light of these findings, there was only one conclusion open  to  the
    judge, namely that the appeals failed.

Decision on error of law

10. As I announced at the hearing, there is a material error of law in  the
    judge's decision as regards the HJ (Iran)  issue.  Notwithstanding  the
    adverse credibility findings in relation to the FIR/fatwa  issue  (more
    of which, below), and the conclusion that the first Appellant  had  not
    practised his faith overtly in the past, the judge still needed to  ask
    herself the following questions: why had the first Appellant  acted  in
    the way he did whilst in Pakistan (i.e. why was he discreet); what  has
    he done whilst in this country and why; how would he act on  return  to
    Pakistan and why. These issues are of relevance  to  Ahmadi  cases,  as
    indicated in paragraph 3(ii) of the headnote in MN.

11. In my view, the judge has not deal with  these  matters  in  sufficient
    detail, or indeed in some respects at all. Paragraphs 16 and 17 do  not
    include sufficiently detailed findings as to what the  first  Appellant
    in fact did  as  regards  his  faith.  Further,  and  importantly,  the
    question of why he did what he did (or perhaps more pertinently, why he
    did not do certain things) is simply not posed or answered. In terms of
    the first Appellant's time in this country, there is a failure to  make
    clear findings of fact on precisely what he  has  done,  in  particular
    relating to the conversion of Mr Kelly  and  the  activities  described
    (albeit briefly) in the AMA letter. Again, the question of why  he  has
    acted as he has is not adequately addressed. The implication  that  the
    first Appellant has acted in bad faith is not  properly  reasoned  with
    reference to findings on the evidence. Finally, there is nothing on how
    the first Appellant would wish to act on return to Pakistan and why  he
    might in fact act differently by reason of the  restrictions  in  place
    there. This was an aspect of his case before the judge and it  required
    full consideration. Thus, the judge has erred.

12. The errors are material. First, the judge's comment that there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that the first Appellant was a "staunch" Ahmadi  is
    in part predicated upon the basis that he was not openly preaching. Yet
    that is of course part and parcel of the HJ (Iran) issue:  why  was  he
    not acting in this way? The judge's errors in respect of the HJ  (Iran)
    issue render what is said in paragraph 17  unsustainable.  Second,  and
    contrary to Ms Isherwood's submission,  the  adverse  findings  on  the
    FIR/fatwa issue do not necessarily lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    first Appellant's case could not in any event succeed on the HJ  (Iran)
    issue. Applicants for protection do sometimes exaggerate  or  embellish
    their claims, and it maybe that the first Appellant has done just that.
    In the present case, the FIR/fatwa element can  properly  be  separated
    from the remainder of the claim for the  purposes  of  my  decision  on
    error of law.

13. In light of the above, the judge's decision is set aside.

14. I have decided that the judge's findings on the FIR/fatwa  issue  shall
    stand. As I have said, they can be split off from the rest of the claim
    without rendering the remaking exercise artificial. Adverse credibility
    findings on  the  discreet  point  clearly  do  not  assist  the  first
    Appellant, but they certainly do not  preclude  success  under  the  HJ
    (Iran) principle (as that falls within the scope of MN).

15. The judge has given numerous reasons for her findings on the  FIR/fatwa
    issue. These were open to her. The evidence of  the  second  Appellant,
    whilst not expressly referred to, would not  in  my  view  have  had  a
    material effect on this aspect of the decision. There  was  nothing  in
    the AMA letter to support the first Appellant's case in this regard.

Disposal

16. On the basis that these appeals do  not  require  a  full  fact-finding
    exercise, retaining them in the Upper Tribunal is appropriate.

17. In the normal course of events I would be remaking the decision on  the
    evidence currently  before  me.  However,  there  is  good  reason  for
    adjourning the appeals to a future date. The Appellants have produced a
    new letter from the AMA. This is fairly detailed and Ms  Isherwood  did
    not have a proper opportunity to consider it at the hearing before me.

18. Adjourning the appeals will also allow for some limited  oral  evidence
    to be given on the HJ (Iran) issue.

Anonymity

19. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellants from serious harm, having regard to the interests of justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision
The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

These appeals are adjourned.








Directions to the parties:

   1. The ambit of the adjourned continuation hearing of  these  appeals  is
      limited to the following:
   a) How and why the Appellants practised their Ahmadi faith in the  manner
      they did whilst in Pakistan;
   b) How and why the Appellants have practised their Ahmadi  faith  in  the
      manner they have whilst in the United Kingdom;
   c) How and why the  Appellants  would  practise  their  Ahmadi  faith  if
      returned to Pakistan now;
   d) The issue of risk on return in light  of  MN,  including  whether  the
      first Appellant's profile as a former civil servant is relevant.
   2. It is undisputed that the Appellants are both  Ahmadis  by  birth  and
      that the first Appellant was a civil servant  of  some  standing,  and
      these facts stand;
   3. The findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  paragraphs  19-28  are
      preserved;
   4. A further witness statement from  the  Appellants,  dealing  with  the
      relevant issues set out above, shall be filed with the Upper  Tribunal
      and served on the Respondent no later than 10 working days before  the
      next hearing;
   5. A skeleton argument on behalf of the  Appellants  shall  be  shall  be
      filed with the Upper Tribunal and served on the  Respondent  no  later
      than 5 working days before the next hearing;
   6. Any further evidence relied on by either party shall be filed with the
      Upper Tribunal and served on the other side no later than  10  working
      days before the next hearing;
   7. Oral evidence on  relevant  issues  will  be  permitted  at  the  next
      hearing.


Directions to Administration:

   1. These appeals are adjourned for a continuation hearing  before  Deputy
      Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor at Field House on 23 May 2016;
   2. There is a 3 hour time estimate for the continuation hearing;
   3. An Urdu interpreter is required for the continuation hearing.



Signed                                       Date: 29 March 2016


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
