

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04411/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 July 2016                              |On 05 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between


                                    H H H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a nation of Iraq. On 15  February  2015  the  Respondent
   rejected her application to remain in the UK on the basis of  asylum  and
   found that her return would not breach  her  rights  under  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). The Appellant appealed  this  decision
   under section 82 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
   and her appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge A M S Green  in
   a decision promulgated on 5 October 2015. The Appellant sought permission
   to appeal against this decision and permission was granted on 29  October
   2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen. He found that the basis of  the
   decisions in relation to the matters complained  about  was  the  judge's
   findings that the Appellant could return  safely  to  her  home  province
   where she would have family support. He found that there was an  arguable
   error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  there  were
   insufficient reasons given for the Judge's finding: "whilst I accept that
   there may be increased practical difficulties for  her  family  to  offer
   further  support  I  am  not  satisfied  that  these  are  insurmountable
   obstacles or that they would not be offered".


   Grounds of appeal


2. There are eight grounds of appeal. Ground 1 asserts that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal misdirected itself in relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention  in
   finding that Appellant had been subject  to  past  persecution  and  that
   there were no  findings  to  negate  this  serious  indicator  of  future
   persecution. Ground 2  argues  that  there  is  inadequate  reasoning  at
   paragraph 29 of the decision as to why the presence  of  the  Appellant's
   brother in law would mean  that  she  would  have  sufficient  protection
   particularly in view of the fact that the expert, Dr George had confirmed
   that the family would be at real risk. Ground 3 asserts  that  the  Judge
   made no finding as to whether the Appellant was  a  member  of  a  social
   group or as to her credibility. Ground 4  contends  that  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  has  not  adequately  assessed   the   Appellant's   individual
   characteristics in accordance with Elgafaji (C-465/07) and  QD  (Iraq)  v
   SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 620. Ground 5 asserts that the Judge gave no reasons
   for departing from the expert's findings and did not give any reasons why
   significant weight could not be attached to the findings of  the  expert.
   Ground 6 asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  findings  in
   relation to the persecutory risk the Appellant faced as a consequence  of
   her religio-political identity. Ground 7  asserts  that  the  Judge  gave
   inadequate reasons in relation to Articles 2 and  3  ECHR  and  ground  8
   asserts that the Judge did not assess credibility  and  vulnerability  in
   accordance with Presidential Guidelines. It is  also  asserted  that  the
   Judge did not give adequate reasons as to why there  would  not  be  very
   significant obstacles to the Appellant's reintegration into life in Iraq.


   The Hearing


3. Mr Howard relied on the grounds of appeal. He submitted that AA  (Article
   15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 0544 (IAC) had not  been  promulgated  at  the
   date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision and it was an error of law  to
   rely on it and not  to  ask  for  submissions  in  relation  to  it.  The
   Appellant was an individual in respect of whom Dr  George  made  numerous
   findings. There was no reasoning for rejecting the positive  findings  of
   the expert. She was a single female with three children and there were no
   findings as to social group  and  Shia  ethnicity.  The  Appellant  would
   appear to be a vulnerable witness which affected her general  credibility
   overall. Paragraph 276ADE was not addressed  and  no  sufficient  reasons
   were given as to why there would not be very significant  obstacles.  New
   country guidance was applied without representations and no reasons  were
   given for why the expert's report was not being  relied  on.  There  were
   material errors in the decision.

4. In relation to the  matters  that  were  not  in  the  grounds  Mr  Mills
   submitted that AA was promulgated on 30 October 2015 and relied on before
   publicly promulgated. However, it was hard to see it was a material error
   as it concerned the background evidence in May 2015. Even  if  it  was  a
   procedural error the Judge was bound to follow it within a couple  weeks.
   The point in relation to being given  the  opportunity  to  make  written
   submissions in response was a valid point and that was a procedural error
   but he queried what further written submissions could have done.  AA  was
   largely related to matters that didn't apply to this Appellant. There was
   much discussion about Kurdistan and north of Baghdad and in paragraph  15
   of the headnote addressed travelling and suffering serious harm en  route
   from Baghdad airport. There was no finding that the southern governorates
   were dangerous.  It was hard to see that much could have been said by the
   Appellant.

5. With regard to  Ground  1,  paragraph  339K  was  a  starting  point.  In
   paragraph 29 the Judge had given reasons why there would not be a risk of
   persecution, namely that the Appellant had a brother in law. Ground 2 was
   a disagreement. There was no basis for the conclusion that she  would  be
   living on the street. She was here with  her  husband  and  returned  and
   there was no claim that she did not have the protection of her husband or
   her husband's family. There were adequate reasons as to why she would not
   be on the street. The Judge did not need to find that  she  would  be  in
   particular social group. In relation to Ground 4 what was clear was  that
   some people may be at risk even if there was not a general risk.  It  was
   hard to see what those circumstances were other than the claim  that  she
   was a single woman living on the streets. It was not clear that there was
   added value to the Article 15 (c) point. Ground 5 had some merit  but  he
   did not concede.   Essentially he relied on paragraph 29  which  was  the
   finding that she was someone with a protector in  the  police  force.  He
   accepted that the Judge should have dealt in more detail than he did  but
   it was not a material error. Ground 6 did  not  have  force  because  she
   could return to her home area which was almost exclusively  Shia  and  it
   was hard to see how that would give rise to a problem. Ground 7  and  the
   human rights claim stood or fell with the asylum claim. There was nothing
   in Ground 8 about vulnerability.  If  the  Article  8  consideration  was
   flawed he did not need to consider 276ADE. He was leaving that  open  for
   reconsideration.


6. In reply Mr Howard submitted that the error in relation to  the  expert's
   report was material as Dr George had found that the Appellant would be  a
   prime target for kidnapping and that needed to be addressed. In  relation
   the country guidance submissions could have been material  and  may  have
   made a material difference.  She had been subject to past persecution. It
   was her evidence that she had no contact with her  husband  and  he  said
   that there were material errors.

7. The parties agreed that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal if I found that there was a material error.


   Discussion and Findings

8. The First-tier Tribunal's reasons for dismissing the  Appellant's  asylum
   appeal and claim to be entitled to humanitarian protection were brief and
   confined to one paragraph:


   "29. Having considered the latest country  guidance,  the  Appellant  and
   other witness evidence, the background evidence and Dr George's report  I
   believe that return is a possibility for the Appellant. She has family in
   Iraq including a brother in law who is a colonel in the police force.  He
   can provide her with protection and redress. I do not accept the validity
   of the report on the alleged bomb attack. I have not  seen  the  original
   report or a properly certified translation. In any event the  Appellant's
   family provided her with support when she was last in Iraq and  whilst  I
   accept there may be increased practical difficulties for  her  family  to
   offer further support I am not satisfied that these are insurmountable or
   that they would not be offered. The Appellant does not come from  one  of
   the contested areas. She comes from the Al-Dinwaniyah  Governorate  which
   is in south-central Iraq. It does not form part of the Baghdad belt.  The
   degree of armed conflict in the  remainder  of  Iraq  (including  Baghdad
   City) is not such as to give rise to indiscriminate violence amounting to
   such  serious  harm  to  civilians,  irrespective  of  their   individual
   characteristics, so  as  to  engage  Article  15  (c).  Consequently  the
   Appellant is not at risk of indiscriminate  violence  regardless  of  her
   individual characteristics if she returns to her home city. Following AA,
   there is not a real risk of the Appellant travelling from Baghdad airport
   to  her  home  province,  suffering  serious  harm  en  route   to   such
   governorates so as to engage Article 15 (c)."




9. The Appellant relied on an expert report from Dr George at  pages  57  to
   123 of the Appellant's bundle. He assessed the Appellant's claim  on  the
   basis that she was of Arab ethnicity and  Shia  Muslim  religio-political
   identity, that she  was  born  and  lived  in  Diwaniyah,  that  she  was
   separated from her husband, who had remarried, and that there was now  no
   contact between them, that she was targeted in Diwaniyah and that she had
   been in the UK since December 2013. He found that she would  be  at  real
   risk in Iraq from the group or groups that had already  targeted  her  in
   her home city and possibly beyond. He also found that  she  would  be  at
   risk as a single woman as her only close relatives were in Diwaniyah  and
   she would be at risk there from those who had targeted  her  already.  He
   considered that she would be at risk on  relocation  as  a  single  woman
   without the benefit and support and protection of an extended  family  or
   clan network including male protectors. He also concluded that she  would
   be at risk as a Shia and especially in vulnerable in Sunni-dominated  and
   mixed Sunni-Shia communities in central Iraq, including her home city  of
   Diwaniyah and the capital city, Baghdad. He concluded that she  would  be
   regarded by armed criminals and insurgents in central and  southern  Iraq
   as a prime target for  kidnapping  because  she  would  be  perceived  as
   relatively wealthy. He also concluded that she would be at risk from  the
   general violence in the centre and, to a lesser extent, in the  south  of
   Iraq because of the general security situation. He also  states  that  in
   his very firm opinion,  the  Baghdad-based  Iraqi  authorities  would  be
   unable to protect the Appellant. He added that Shia militias that  target
   Sunnis for reasons of  sectarian  hatred  are  closely  allied  with  the
   Baghdad authorities to the extent that there is no meaningful distinction
   between the two.


10. He then considers the  internal  flight  alternative  and  concludes  at
   paragraph 161 that there is no part of central or southern Iraq in  which
   the Appellant could live free of risks. He comments  that  in  all  these
   parts of the country she would be at real risk as a single woman  without
   a family support network including male protectors. He states that in the
   centre and north-centre including her home city of Diwaniyah the security
   situation is  nothing  short  of  dire.    In  the  Shia-dominated  south
   conditions are much more  settled  than  in  the  central  parts  of  the
   country, but armed groups including Sunni groups remain active there  and
   violence remains a problem. In Sunni-dominated and  in  mixed  Sunni-Shia
   communities (including Diwaniyah and Baghdad) in north and  central  Iraq
   Shias, such as the Appellant are being targeted.  He  concludes  that  in
   central and southern parts of the country, as a returnee from abroad, she
   could be at risk of being kidnapped and in Diwaniyah and possibly beyond,
   she may also be at risk from the group or groups that  had  targeted  her
   and her family.


11. It is the Appellant's case that  she  separated  from  her  husband  who
   lives in Iraq and with whom she has no contact. According to her  witness
   statement at page 25 of the Appellant's bundle she has contact  with  her
   mother and brother who still live in Diwaniyah. Her brother in law  is  a
   colonel in the police force in Baghdad but according to her evidence, was
   unable to help her because his own  home  was  bombed.    The  Respondent
   accepted in the reasons for  refusal  letter  that  she  had  encountered
   problems from unknown terrorist groups due to returning to Iraq from  the
   United Kingdom and  that  her  husband  had  remarried.   The  First-tier
   Tribunal did not take issue with the factual  basis  of  the  Appellant's
   claim save for the finding that the bomb attack did not take place.


12. I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not adequately engage  with  the
   conclusions of Dr George. Dr George concluded, as set out above, that she
   would be at risk on return in her home area of Diwaniyah as she would  be
   targeted by those who had already  targeted  her.  In  finding  that  her
   family in Diwaniyah could support her the  Judge  did  not  address  this
   conclusion at all.  He  appeared  to  accept,  at  paragraph  26  of  the
   decision, that the Appellant had been subject to past  persecution  which
   he states he considered to be a serious indication that there was a well-
   founded fear of persecution on return in accordance with  paragraph  339K
   of the Immigration Rules.  He failed to give reasons  why  the  Appellant
   would not be at risk of persecution in  her  home  area  addressing  only
   practical difficulties.  Whilst he concluded  that  her  brother  in  law
   could provide her with protection and redress, he lived in Baghdad and in
   assessing whether the Appellant could either receive protection from  her
   brother in law or relocate there he did  not  address  any  of  the  risk
   factors which in the opinion of Dr George pertained.  Even  assuming  the
   Appellant could live with her brother in law in Baghdad and therefore was
   not a single woman without the benefit of extended  family  networks  the
   First-tier Tribunal was still obliged to engage with Dr George's evidence
   that the Appellant would be at risk in Baghdad as a  Shia  and  that  the
   Baghdad based authorities would not  be  able  to  offer  her  sufficient
   protection.  I find therefore that First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  have
   regard to material evidence  and  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  in
   respect of it. This error is clearly material as it cannot be  said  that
   the conclusion would have been the same had it been addressed.


13. As the First-tier Tribunal's findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
   ability to return to her home area are infected by an  error  of  law  it
   follows that the findings in relation to Article 15 (c) also cannot stand
   particularly in view of the fact that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  neither
   assessed  her  individual  characteristics  nor  gave  the  Appellant  an
   opportunity to address him on the case of AA which was promulgated  after
   the hearing.

14. The decision under Article 8 ECHR stands.


15. In the light of my findings, the extent of the judicial fact finding  is
   such that the decision in the appeal should be remade in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I remit the decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  with  no
findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify her or any member of her family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated  05 October 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

