
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04393/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 9 February 2016                       |On 7 March 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    [D L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth (Counsel instructed by Vasuki
solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The appellant appeals a decision  and
    reasons by First-tier Tribunal (Judge David Taylor) ("FtT") promulgated
    on 4 December 2015 in which it dismissed the appeal on asylum and human
    rights grounds.

Appellant's claim

2.   The appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  [  -  ].   His
    application for asylum was refused by the  respondent  on  17  February
    2015.  The appellant is of Sinhalese ethnicity.  The basis of his claim
    was that he left Sri Lanka in 2006 to work for an insurance company  in
    Dubai until July 2009. The basis of this claim was that whilst in Dubai
    he donated money through a friend to the LTTE and although not a  Tamil
    was a supporter for their cause. In or  about  July  2009  he  arranged
    accommodation for two Tamil friends. He then applied for a student visa
    to study in the UK, which was granted until 13 June 2017.  On 15 August
    2013 he returned to  Sri  Lanka  for  a  visit.  He  was  arrested  and
    questioned on 5 September 2013 about a CD that he had agreed  to  bring
    back with him to the UK.  He did not know what was on the CD but  later
    found  out  that  it  held  details  of  torture  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities.  He was taken to a police station where  he  was  tortured
    and an attempt was made to sexually abuse  him.   He  was  burned  with
    cigarettes although the scars are no longer visible.  He  was  released
    on payment of a bribe and not charged.  On 14 September  2013  he  left
    Sri Lanka on his own passport without difficulty and re-entered the  UK
    on his student visa.  He claimed asylum on 24 January  2014  some  four
    months later. He fears arrest and persecution on return to  Sri  Lanka.
    His mother told him there was a warrant out for his arrest.

3.   The FtT dismissed the appeal on all grounds  setting  out  findings  of
    fact from [24(i) to (xv)].  The FtT did not find the appellant's  claim
    to be credible. It placed weight on the delay in  making  a  claim  for
    asylum, little weight was given to a medical report prepared more  than
    two years after the appellant returned to the UK in September 2013, the
    lack of medical evidence of scarring and lack of  supporting  evidence.
    The FtT concluded the appellant's claim lacked credibility and he would
    come within the risk factors in GJ.

Application for Permission

4.   In the grounds of application the appellant argued that  the  FtT  made
    material errors of law as follows.

5.   Ground 1.  The FtT failed to provide any reasoning  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's explanation for the delay in claiming asylum,  and  finding
    that this was damaging to his credibility.  The appellant  provided  an
    explanation in his witness statement  with  which  the  FtT  failed  to
    engage.

6.   Ground 2.  The FtT attached little weight to the medical report  of  Dr
    Lawrence which  it  found  was  based  on  the  appellant's  subjective
    account.  This was  factually  incorrect  as  the  medical  report  was
    detailed and reference was  made  to  past  diagnosis  of  anxiety  and
    depression.

7.   Ground 3.      The FtT materially erred in failing to engage  with  the
    evidence in the appellant's witness statement pertaining to funds  that
    he had remitted to the LTTE whilst in Dubai.

8.   Ground  4.   The  FtT  made  a  material  factual  error  at  paragraph
    24(viii).

9.   Ground 5.  The FtT failed to engage  with  medical  evidence  that  the
    appellant showed scars to  his  GP,  which  were  recorded  in  medical
    records.  The FtT erred by requiring corroborative  evidence  from  the
    appellant's mother as regards the existence of an arrest warrant.

10.  Ground 6.      The FtT rejected the appellant's account of  payment  of
    a bribe because there was no supporting evidence from  his  brother-in-
    law.

11.   Ground 7.  The FtT failed to give adequate consideration to  the  risk
    factors in GJ (Sri Lanka).

Grant of Permission

12.  Permission was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
    on  6  January  2016.   It  was  arguable  that  given   the   clinical
    observations made by Dr Lawrence in his report such as the  appellant's
    heart racing  when  recounting  events,  with  the  same  difficult  to
    simulate, that the FtT erred.  It is  also  arguable  that  unless  the
    evidence, which the FtT suggested should  have  been  provided  by  the
    appellant's mother, was easily available: TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA  Civ
    40, the FtT ought not to have  held  the  absence  of  it  against  the
    appellant.  Still further it is arguable that the FtT's approach to the
    evidence concerning the appellant's exit was flawed.

13.  Judge Zucker observed (in order to assist the Upper Tribunal) that  the
    determination which appears to have troubled the FtT at paragraph 24(4)
    may well be the covering letter to the respondent's Reasons for Refusal
    Letter.  That letter is dated 17 February 2015 but the covering  letter
    is dated 20 February 2015.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

Submisssions

14.  Mr Butterworth expanded on the detailed  grounds  of  application.   He
    repeatedly emphasised the significance of GJ arguing that if  found  to
    be credible the appellant's claim would come within  the  risk  factors
    set out in the headnote at 7(a) and or 7(d).  Mr Butterworth  submitted
    that the FtT erred in assessing credibility which was material  to  the
    assessment of risk factors.  In respect of ground 1 he  submitted  that
    there  was  medical  evidence  as  referred  to  by  the  appellant  in
    interview.  He referred to a visit to his GP  and  to  having  obtained
    medication to treat the scars.  The FtT  failed  to  grapple  with  the
    issue of scarring and the existing medical evidence.

15.  The FtT erred by inaccurately referring to the  appellant's  arrest  in
    the context of his provision of accommodation for LTTE members. The FtT
    failed to take into account the appellant's answers in interview  where
    he confirmed that following his arrest he was  questioned  about  funds
    and offering of accommodation.

16.  In rejecting the medical report the FtT failed to have  regard  to  the
    detailed assessment made of the symptoms, the clinical plausibility and
    failed to give adequate reasons why the evidence was rejected.

17.  GJ specifically referred at [275] to the fact that it was  possible  to
    leave through the airport even when actively sought by the authorities.
    It was submitted that the FtT was effectively seeking evidence that was
    outside the knowledge of the appellant and his brother-in-law.

18.  The FtT gave  no  adequate  reasoning  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    explanation for the delay  in  making  his  asylum  claim.   There  was
    evidence available in the appellant's  witness  statement  and  in  the
    interview record to support his claim that the delay  was  due  to  his
    being unwell.

19.  Mr Butterworth made no further submissions  on  the  issues  concerning
    money as this was not a key point.

20.  In response Mr Bramble  argued  that  the  determination  was  entirely
    sustainable and that the FtT made findings open to it on  the  evidence
    available.  As regards the scarring he emphasised  that  there  was  no
    medical report detailing the scars and\ or  how  they  came  to  be  in
    existence.

21.  He accepted that the FtT had fallen into error as to  the  reasons  for
    the appellant's arrest, which  was  because  of  the  CD  and  not  the
    provision of accommodation.  The FtT's failure as regards  the  finding
    re accommodation was not sufficient  to  jeopardise  the  decision  and
    reasons as a whole.

22.  The FtT had not sought to undermine  the  doctor's  qualifications  but
    was entitled having seen the appellant in evidence to find against  the
    expert  opinion.   The  FtT  accepted  the  diagnosis  of  illness  and
    medication  prescribed,  but  found  that  there  was  an   alternative
    explanation for the cause of the condition.  Further the FtT considered
    the medical evidence in the light of the fact that the consultation and
    report were prepared  in  November  2015,  some  two  years  after  the
    appellant came to the UK.

23.  There was no reason why the FtT could not comment  on  the  appellant's
    brother-in-law's failure to  provide  additional  supporting  evidence.
    This did not amount to a requirement for corroboration.

24.  The FtT considered the assessment  of  credibility  and  delay  in  the
    light of his claim that he continued to go to college. It was  arguable
    that in the event of significant illness this would have been  impacted
    on his ability to study.

25.  Mr Bramble conceded that there were some individual errors made by  the
    FtT in terms of dealing with  the  evidence  as  to  accommodation  and
    leaving Sri  Lanka.  However  these  were  not  material  and  did  not
    fundamentally  affect  the  reasoned  findings  made  and   conclusions
    reached.  Furthermore the FtT addressed the country  guidance  case  GJ
    sufficiently and considered the same in the alternative  in  the  event
    that the appellant were to be found credible.

26.  Mr Butterworth responded that the two errors  of  law  conceded  by  Mr
    Bramble were material.
Discussion and Decision

27.  I have decided that there were no material errors of law in the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision which shall stand.

28.  Dealing first with the new argument raised by Mr Butterworth  it  would
    be an error of  law  for  any  Tribunal  to  make  a  finding  that  an
    arrest/detention in 2013 would not  automatically  establish  that  the
    appellant was wanted by the Sri Lankan  authorities  and  perceived  by
    them as someone capable of destabilising the present  regime  and  thus
    meet risk factors set out in GJ in particular 7a and d.  I pointed  out
    to Mr Butterworth this issue did not form any ground in his application
    or appeal before the FtT.   No  application  for  leave  to  amend  the
    grounds was made. In any event I was satisfied  that  this  was  not  a
    material consideration in the light of the fact that the FtT found  the
    appellant's claim to be lacking in credibility.

29.  I concur with the submissions made by Mr Bramble as to the  two  errors
    made by the FtT.  The first as regards the reason for  the  appellant's
    arrest and the second the  plausibility  of  a  person  sought  by  the
    authorities being able to leave the  airport  without  difficulty.  The
    latter was a point covered by the guidance in GJ.  However, I am of the
    view that the two errors taken together or separately are not material.
     These are discrete  issues  which  are  insufficient  to  disturb  the
    decision in the context of the many findings  of  adverse  credibility.
    They are not sufficient to significantly impact  on  the  decision  and
    reasons as a whole.  Looking at the  totality  of  the  decision  I  am
    satisfied that the FtT's consideration was clear, sound  and  reasoned.
    Mr Butterworth  identified  specific  and  particular  aspects  of  the
    appellant's evidence which were supportive of his claim in  an  attempt
    to reargue the appeal. In particular  as  regards  the  FtT's  apparent
    failure to have regard to medical evidence in relation to scarring  and
    reasons for delay for example.

30.  I see no failure in the FtT's consideration of the absence  of  medical
    evidence as to the scarring issue.  Mr Butterworth was correct to point
    out that reference was made by the appellant  to  the  scarring  in  GP
    medical records and to his obtaining medication.  However, this is  not
    evidence  from  a  medical  expert  that  identifies  and   establishes
    scarring; its location, age, causation clinical plausibility etc.  When
    considered in that context the FtT properly found that in  the  absence
    of expert evidence little weight could be  placed  on  the  appellant's
    claim that he was tortured from cigarette burns.

31.  As to the submission that the FtT failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's explanation for delay in  making  his  asylum
    claim,  I am satisfied that the FtT fully considered  this  issue.   It
    reasonably found that it was not believable  that  the  appellant  were
    able to continue studying in the light of the fact that he  claimed  to
    be too ill to make  a  claim  for  asylum.   The  FtT's  findings  were
    entirely open to it on the available  evidence.   Furthermore  the  FtT
    properly took into account in its assessment the time delay before  the
    appellant saw the medical expert which was some  two  years  after  his
    return to the UK. I am satisfied that the findings are sustainable.  In
    any event the  FtT  accepted  the  diagnosis  of  depression  and  post
    traumatic stress disorder.

32.  The FtT may not have specifically referred to each and every aspect  of
    the evidence relied on but I am satisfied that overall it gave adequate
    and sufficient consideration to the evidence and I conclude  that  none
    of the concerns raised by Mr Butterworth amount to material  errors  of
    law (MA (Somalia) 2010 UKSC 49).  Overall I am satisfied that  the  FtT
    has considered the evidence in the round in reaching a conclusion  that
    the appellant's claim is lacking in credibility (Shizad (sufficiency of
    reasons : set aside) 2013 UKUT 85 IAC).

Notice of Decision

I find no material error of law in the  decision  which  shall  stand.   The
appellant's appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 29.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.




Signed                                  Date 29.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
