
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA041052015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 May 2016                       |On 26 May 2016                       |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                                     E K
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms U Dirie, Counsel
For the Respondent:     Mr Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce dated 5 April 2016.   The  appeal
    relates to a decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul promulgated
    on 21 January 2016. The Judge  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision  on  all  grounds,  including  asylum
    grounds.

2.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal seeking  permission  to  appeal  had
    contended that the Judge's decision was flawed because:

      1) The Judge failed to make a finding as to whether  it  was  accepted
         that the Appellant  was  a  smuggler  of  alcohol  and  pornography
         between the Iran-Iraq border;

      2) The Judge failed to apply the correct standard of proof;

      3) The findings amount to only four paragraphs and although the  Judge
         said that there were  no  arguments  raised  in  respect  of  human
         rights, that was wrong; and

      4) There was a failure to provide adequate reasons. There was reliance
         on the screening interview and that was the wrong approach in  law.



3.    At the hearing before me Ms Dirie took  me  through  her  grounds  and
    also referred at some length to the background material that was before
    the Judge. She also produced additional copies of  background  material
    that she had provided to the Judge on  the  day  of  the  hearing.  She
    submitted that the evidence was clear that there  were  smugglers  just
    like the Appellant at the border between Iran and Iraq. In addition  it
    was clear that smugglers do what  they  do  as  they  have  no  choice.
    Despite the risk of losing one's life smuggling  was  still  rife.  The
    terrain of the area was mountainous and the Police do catch people.

4.    Mr Duffy said that in respect of paragraph  7  of  the  grounds,  that
    related to the screening interview but  the  letter  of  complaint  was
    about the substantive interview. Both the solicitor and the Appellant's
    own interpreter  were  present  during  the  screening  interview.  The
    Appellant was not particularly young at the time of his  interview,  he
    was aged 17. The credibility findings were open to the Judge. The  rest
    of the grounds amounted to a perversity challenge. There was  a  slight
    slip when the Judge said at paragraph 21 that it was  drugs  that  were
    being smuggled. That was wrong but it was not the Appellant's case that
    he was smuggling drugs.

5.    After hearing in reply from Ms Dirie, I had reserved my decision.

6.    The Judge's findings are contained within  four  paragraphs.  That  of
    itself is obviously not an error of law, but it means that  those  four
    paragraphs had to deal with the multi-faceted aspect of the Appellant's
    case. In my judgment the reasoning is inadequate.

7.     I  come  to  this  view  for  the  following  reasons.  Firstly,  the
    background material highlighted to me and also  apparently  highlighted
    to the Judge does show that there  is  indeed  smuggling  of  the  type
    alleged to have been undertaken this Appellant by persons on the  Iran-
    Iraq border. The evidence also explains how this is "life" for many and
    the career path has been passed  along  through  the  generations.  The
    background material therefore provided some support for the Appellant's
    claim.  Therefore in that respect I conclude that Ms Dirie  is  correct
    that the Judge erred in concluding that because the  Appellant's  uncle
    was prepared to fund him fleeing Iran, then that meant that  there  was
    no need for the Appellant to have been a smuggler. In my judgment it is
    quite clear that it was quite possible for the Appellant to have been a
    smuggler and for his uncle to have come to his aid once the Appellant's
    position was so serious that he had to flee Iran.  The  fact  that  the
    Judge has not referred to or used the extensive background material  in
    coming to his assessment is a material error of law. As Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce observed when granting  permission  to  appeal,  particular
    care was required before rejecting the evidence of this  child  (as  he
    apparently was at the time of the hearing) as "incredible".

8.     Secondly,  the  Judge  has  placed  great  weight  on  the  screening
    interview. Whilst it is correct that the Appellant's solicitor and  his
    own interpreter were present, it is also the case  that  the  screening
    interview was not the time for the details and the intricacies  of  the
    claim to be dealt with. The Court  of  Appeal  in  JA  (Afghanistan)  v
    Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  and  in  particular  the
    judgment of Moore Bick  LJ  made  it  clear  that  it  is  particularly
    important when considering the significance to be attached  to  answers
    given in the course of an interview,  there  be  proper  assessment  of
    factors such as reliance on an interpreter or vulnerability because  of
    age. In my judgment the ground of appeal raised about  the  Appellant's
    solicitor's relatively contemporaneous complaint about the interpreter,
    albeit mainly in respect of the substantive interview,  was  more  than
    capable of having a bearing on why discrepancies  were  recorded.  This
    therefore required  the  Judge  to  explain  in  some  detail  why  the
    screening interview was being given prominence as the first reason  for
    rejecting the Appellant's appeal.

9.    Thirdly, although not sufficient on its  own,  the  Judge  incorrectly
    recorded in his decision that there were no  arguments  in  respect  of
    human rights grounds. There were, albeit the human rights grounds would
    have been weak.

10.   Overall the cumulative effect of these errors and  the  way  in  which
    the assessment of credibility was approached, particularly noting  that
    the Appellant was apparently a minor, amounts to a  material  error  of
    law.

11.   I therefore allow the appeal. There shall be a rehearing at the First-
    tier Tribunal. None of the current findings shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law and is set aside.

The appeal shall be reheard at the First-tier Tribunal.

An anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date: 25 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


