
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aA044582014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 April 2016                             |On 23 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE TURNER
                                     and
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                           suhirthan kameleswaran
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by Linga and Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He arrived in this country on
    10 October 2010 and is now 24 years old.  Nearly four years  later,  on
    24 June 2014, he claimed asylum.  His claim was refused by  a  decision
    of the Secretary of State on 30 June 2014.  That decision was  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal and the judge handed down his decision on 23
    April 2015.  This was a late claim for asylum.  Initially the appellant
    had  arrived  on  a  student  visa  following  which   he   overstayed.
    Subsequently he claimed marriage to an EEA national.   That  claim  was
    found not to be genuine.  No appeal was lodged against that finding.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal found against the appellant in his  application
    to challenge the decision of the Secretary of State in relation to  his
    status as an asylum seeker and it is useful to set out the  basis  upon
    which that decision was reached by quoting at least some of the reasons
    given by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Beginning at paragraph  74  of
    his decision he found the following:

         "Against this background, it is of course easy  enough  to  suggest
         (as the respondent has  done)  that  the  whole  history  has  been
         invented; that the appellant was never involved with the  LTTE  and
         never held in custody or ill-treated.  The  appellant  himself  has
         invited such a perspective of his  case  by  the  circumstances  in
         which his claim finally came to  be  made  that  I  have  described
         above.  I am certainly however prepared to take a broader  view  of
         the case put forward and I do not decide the case on the  basis  of
         the somewhat trivial and confusing discrepancies said to exist.   I
         look at the case also against the particular background of what was
         happening in Sri Lanka in 2009."

    I pause there to observe that the background referred to by the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was that relating to events between 2010  and  2014
    when finally the appellant made his application for asylum:

         "The appellant was living in an LTTE dominated area while  the  war
         was going on and there was no reason not to believe that  he  might
         well have been involved in the activities he says he  was  even  at
         quite a young age.  Whatever he was doing, it was undetected  until
         the occasion in May 2009 when he says that those in command in  his
         area instructed surrender to the Sri Lankan Army because  the  LTTE
         had been overwhelmingly  defeated.   Incidentally  I  am  far  from
         convinced that the appellant was actually a member of the  LTTE  as
         opposed to someone just supporting them as he was only a  child  at
         the time.  It matters little to my final decision.  I do  not  give
         any probative weight to the mysterious letters supplied by a  named
         person who the appellant does not even know and transported to him,
         apparently, by an unidentified friend.  It is  undated,  refers  to
         Boosa as a prison (which it is not) and is written in  terms  which
         appear entirely contrived and to be what can properly be  described
         as a 'self serving' document.  The simple fact  of  the  matter  is
         that there were many thousands of individuals surrendering  to  the
         authorities in the early months of 2009 and particularly  from  May
         onwards when the war was over.  Many were detained or held in camps
         of various kinds and their numbers actually  included  many  people
         who were not combatants at all including many women  and  children.
         It took a significant period of time for the  circumstances  to  be
         normalised and for many people to be released and allowed to return
         to their home areas.  It was a chaotic period of time generally and
         particularly given the circumstances of his  claimed  surrender  it
         would be far from impossible for this appellant to be held  for  an
         extended  period  of  time  at  an  army  camp  and  indeed  to  be
         significantly ill-treated whilst he was there.  It is not  possible
         to put the matter any more strongly than that because there  is  no
         independent evidence of any value as to what occurred  and  one  is
         left with the bare evidence of the  appellant  himself  coupled  of
         course with a significant medical report (the latter of course  was
         not  available  to  the  respondent  when  this   application   was
         refused)."

    The judge goes on to deal with the contents of the medical report which
    he records accurately and having identified the contents of the medical
    report he goes on to say at paragraph 80 of his decision:

         "This finding is however what one might describe as the high  point
         of the appellant's case; as for the reasons I now set out I do  not
         consider him to be at any real risk of further harm on return."

 3. At this point in his decision the judge identifies  the  background  to
    the hostilities in Sri Lanka which ended in May 2009 which he says:

         "... led  to  a  somewhat  traumatic  period  of  months  for  many
         thousands of Tamils who had surrendered and who had to  have  their
         backgrounds  and  circumstances  resolved  (and   in   many   cases
         documented) before sensible dispersal  to  home  areas  could  take
         place.  It was of course right in the middle of this period of time
         that the appellant claims to have been ill-treated.  He was still a
         child at the time and without in any way wishing to be  unkind,  he
         was always a person of minimal interest to the  authorities  and  I
         certainly doubt whether he was an LTTE member.  He was not arrested
         (or looked for) in relation to his actual activities but  he  along
         with others was simply trying to surrender at the end of  the  war.
         Almost by very definition of his age he could not  even  then  been
         regarded as anyone of  any  significance  at  all  and  if  he  was
         released easily on payment of a bribe,  he  might  well  have  been
         released in any event before long.

         He had no family LTTE connections and remained  in  Sri  Lanka  for
         almost a year after his release before leaving the country  without
         any difficulty using his own passport.  There  is  more  reason  to
         doubt his second brief detention as it was  not  mentioned  in  his
         screening interview and it took a long time to emerge in  his  full
         interview; even then he did not claim ill-treatment  at  that  time
         although in fairness to him he did refer to being  'abused  in  bad
         language'  when  he  reported  after  his  first  release;  it  was
         suggested to him at the hearing that he had  never  mentioned  this
         before but he clearly did at his answer to question 97.

         The civil war in Sri Lanka has now  been  over  for  close  to  six
         years; it is little more than fanciful to suggest that there  could
         possibly still be any interest in the appellant on  his  return  to
         Sri Lanka; his history was of no more than  a  few  months  claimed
         activity on behalf of the LTTE as the war was coming to a close and
         when the appellant himself was a child.  If he was detained and ill-
         treated then quite frankly so were many thousands of others  during
         that tumultuous time and there would be nothing to suggest that the
         case of the appellant would stand  out  in  any  way  or  that  the
         circumstances of his activities or  detention  would  lead  to  him
         being in any sense a wanted person.   Even  if  he  had  failed  to
         report as required to the army camp, it is in my view a matter  now
         effectively lost in the midst of history and I  repeat  my  overall
         conclusion that I do not consider the  appellant  will  be  of  the
         slightest interest to anyone other than his own family on return to
         Sri Lanka.

         The Tribunal decision has to be made on the basis  of  known  facts
         and the law applicable."

 4. Then the judge goes on to consider the case  of  GJ  and  Others  (post
    civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319:

         "It is clear, said the judge that from GJ that real risk of harm on
         return to Sri Lanka now only embraces a very  limited  category  of
         individuals; in the main those who 'are or are perceived  to  be  a
         threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they
         are or are perceived to have a significant role in relation to  the
         post conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal
         of hostilities in Sri Lanka'.  Anyone  further  from  meeting  this
         description than the appellant it would  be  difficult  to  imagine
         both in terms of age, history of activity in Sri Lanka, passage  of
         time since he was last in the country as a child, and his  lack  of
         any significant activity since.  I am afraid that even  if  he  did
         attend a few demonstrations in London along with hundreds of others
         he was simply 'one of the crowd' with  no  status  or  position  of
         authority at all and even if he attended genuinely and  not  simply
         in an attempt to bolster his asylum claim,  his  presence  at  such
         activities is close to irrelevant.

         Particularly having read the medical report, I must not  of  course
         rule out  the  fact  that  the  appellant  himself  may  feel  very
         different about returning to Sri Lanka; he may well  consider  that
         his life is both safer  and  better  here.   However  the  Tribunal
         assessment has to be an objective one;  whether  there  is  a  real
         likelihood of significant harm  coming  to  the  appellant  on  his
         return to Sri Lanka.  Using that  criterion,  my  finding  is  that
         there is no such risk and that therefore his claim must  inevitably
         fail, as indeed must the claims under Articles 2 and 3."

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was challenged by way  of
    an application for permission to  appeal  directed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that permission was refused on 27 May 2015:

         "The grounds of the application asserted that the  Judge  committed
         errors of law in assessing the risk on return and  the  application
         of caselaw, did not apply GJ and Others correctly,  had  not  found
         the appellant credible despite the plethora of evidence  submitted,
         his highly credible oral evidence and proof of his suffering in Sri
         Lanka, his medical and psychological evidence of torture  and  that
         the  IJ  made  arbitrary  findings  of  credibility,  on  a  narrow
         application of the  facts,  without  considering  the  evidence  or
         applying weight to it, and the case had  not  received  the  minute
         consideration it deserved.  It  was  asserted  that  the  objective
         country evidence showed that the detention of the  appellant  would
         be recorded and he would be at risk on  return,  or  of  having  to
         bribe officials."

 6. On the substantive representations made on behalf of the  appellant  to
    me this morning the  focus  has  been  entirely  on  the  issue  as  to
    consistency of the decision of the First-tier Judge and GJ relying only
    peripherally  upon  the  medical  evidence  and  the  question  of  the
    credibility of the appellant.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on in giving reasons in  respect  of
    refusal to grant permission to appeal as follows:

         "The determination  shows  that  all  the  evidence  was  recorded,
         assessed and taken into account,  including  the  appellant's  late
         asylum claim, false student visa application, rejected  EEA  spouse
         application and objective country evidence from 2009 to date.   The
         IJ was far from satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  a  member  or
         supporter of the LTTE, he could not give any weight  to  mysterious
         documents submitted by the appellant whose provenance the appellant
         did not know, whose contents were self serving.   The  IJ  accepted
         that the medical evidence showed  he  had  been  mistreated  before
         coming to the United Kingdom, but not that there was a real risk on
         return because he had been a child at the time  of  the  events  he
         spoke of and it was not credible that he had come  to  the  adverse
         interest of the authorities as claimed.  The appellant's claim of a
         second arrest and  detention  were  not  credible.   The  IJ  fully
         considered the risk categories in the caselaw  and  concluded  they
         were not pertinent to the appellant's case.  The  IJ  proceeded  to
         reach conclusions about the appellant  the  findings  reached  were
         properly open to him.  The application amounts to no  more  than  a
         disagreement on interpretation and emphasis, the  grounds  disclose
         no  arguable  error  of  law  and  there  are  no  merits  to   the
         application.  It is not in the interests of justice  to  admit  the
         late application following consideration of the merits."

 8. At that  stage  matters  took  an  unusual  turn.   The  fact  that  an
    application was made to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal was
    not unusual.  The fact that that permission incorporated reliance on an
    entirely fresh ground is.  The grounds upon which permission was sought
    to the Upper Tribunal followed, as one might expect those that had been
    pursued but included the following at number 6:

         "Additionally,  with  greatest  respect  to  the  learned  IJ,  our
         advocate, Mr Lingajothy who had represented the  appellant  at  the
         hearing has observed the learned IJ had fell [sic] asleep,  nodding
         off on few occasions during the  hearing  [Please  refer  to  Sworn
         Witness Statement of Mr V P Lingajothy  attached  herewith].   This
         observation  has  also  been  made  by  the   appellant   and   the
         interpreter.  This action  of  the  learned  IJ  casts  doubt  over
         whether he  had  heard  the  totality  of  the  oral  evidence  and
         submissions that was presented before  him  and  made  an  informed
         decision.  This goes to the heart of interest [sic] of justice  and
         fairness.  Justice must not only be done but has to be seen  to  be
         done."

 9. The basis upon which that assertion was made was  a  witness  statement
    from Mr Lingajothy dated 15 June 2015 approximately  two  months  after
    the events to which it refers.  That statement which is identified as a
    sworn statement but is in fact a signed statement with a  statement  of
    truth, insofar as is material, provides as follows:

         "I  have  attended  the  hearing  of  the  Applicant's  appeal  and
         represented him at the hearing on 1 April 2015.  The appellant gave
         oral evidence through the aid of an interpreter.  With the greatest
         respect to the learned IJ during the hearing I had observed him not
         being attentive and on  a  few  occasions  he  dozed  off.   I  was
         wondering whether the learned IJ was paying due  attention  to  the
         proceedings.  The same observations were made by the Applicant  and
         the interpreter and after the hearing we had a brief  chat  on  the
         matter.  In the interest of justice and fairness I feel  it  is  of
         great importance that this matter be brought to  the  attention  of
         the  court  who  will  be  deciding  the  applicant's  grounds  for
         permission to appeal as this action of the learned IJ  casts  doubt
         on the whole of Determination and  Reasons,  is  perceived  by  the
         Applicant that the learned IJ had given judgment without sufficient
         regard to the oral evidence and the submissions that were  made  to
         the Tribunal.  Justice must not only be done but has to be seen  to
         be done."

10. The matter then came for the consideration of the Upper Tribunal  Judge
    on the application for permission on  31  July  2015  and  the  reasons
    included the following:

         "The following arguments are put forward: (1) the judge  failed  to
         properly consider the case in the light of  country  guidance;  (2)
         the appellant's oral evidence was credible and established that  he
         had suffered in Sri Lanka; (3) the medical evidence indicated  ill-
         treatment which confirmed his account of his arrest  and  (4)  that
         the judge fell asleep during the course of the hearing."

    The Upper Tribunal Judge considered the application and in refusing  to
    grant permission to appeal it recorded the following:

         "The fourth ground is a serious accusation and  yet  was  not  even
         mentioned in the grounds to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Had  this
         occurred, I cannot accept that it would not have been raised at the
         earliest opportunity.  In view of its late  submission,  I  do  not
         find that this ground has arguable merit.  Moreover I note that the
         grounds do not point to any part of the evidence  that  was  missed
         out or overlooked as a result of the alleged conduct on the part of
         the judge.

         Grounds 2 and 3 are simply assertions  of  the  appellant's  claim.
         They fail to point to arguable errors of law.  The  judge  assessed
         the evidence and reached the conclusion  that  the  claim  was  not
         credible.  He took account of the late asylum claim and  the  false
         student application made by the appellant.

         Contrary to what is argued, GJ was considered but the  judge  found
         that the risk categories did not apply to the appellant.

         The  judge's  findings  and  conclusions  are  sustainable  and  no
         arguable error of law has been identified."

11. The matter did not end there.  In December of last year the  case  came
    before Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb by way of judicial review.  In granting
    permission she made the following observations:

         "1.  The basis for this application is an assertion  of  procedural
             unfairness which it is said tainted  the  hearing  before  the
             First-tier Tribunal Judge, Mr Wiseman.  The complaint is  that
             Mr Wiseman fell asleep during parts of the hearing.  This is a
             very  serious  allegation.   It  is  supported  by  a  witness
             statement from the advocate who represented  the  claimant  at
             the hearing, Mr V P Lingajothy dated 6 October 2015.  [I  note
             that the witness statement that finds it way into my bundle is
             dated 15 June 2015].

         2.    Whilst  this  allegation  was  not  made  in   the   original
             application for the permission to appeal against the  decision
             of the First-tier Tribunal it was made when an application for
             permission to appeal was made to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Mr
             Lingajothy has explained why he failed  to  ensure  that  this
             allegation of procedural unfairness was  included  within  the
             initial grounds of appeal.  In essence he avers that it was  a
             failure of administration in his office.

         3.   It is to  be  observed  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  a
             contemporaneous note of the complaint  by  Mr  Lingajothy  was
             made during  the  course  of  the  hearing  and  there  is  no
             statement from the Claimant or indeed the interpreter who  was
             also present.  Furthermore, there  is  no  indication  in  the
             application for permission that the determination and  reasons
             of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  23  April  2015
             demonstrate any failure  to  refer  to  relevant  evidence  or
             submissions.   However,  in  light  of  the  fact   that   the
             Claimant's lawyer, an officer of  the  court,  has  made  this
             complaint in what  was  a  very  important  hearing  for  this
             Claimant, permission ought to be granted to allow  the  matter
             to be considered at a hearing if the Defendants wish."

    Ultimately, on 29 February 2016 permission was granted to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal on the basis of the  decision  of  Mrs  Justice  Cheema-
    Grubb.  The matter comes before us in that context.

12. In relation to the substantive grounds of appeal by which  I  mean  all
    bases upon which this appeal is progressed,  save  for  the  allegation
    that the judge fell asleep and/or was inattentive, it is  to  be  noted
    that no judge at any stage thought there was any merit in any  part  of
    that appeal.  The basis upon which it comes before this Tribunal is  on
    misgivings expressed by Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb as to  the  suggestion
    that the judge  was  asleep.   She  passed  no  observations  upon  the
    substantive merits of the appeal beyond that and it  was  through  that
    gateway that the matter appears before us this morning.  We  appreciate
    and accept however that that gateway is one that was laid wide open and
    therefore our jurisdiction is not limited and ought not to  be  limited
    simply to the issue of procedural impropriety relating to the  sleeping
    allegation.

13. However, we do find that the reasons given by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in relation to the likely risk or, more  appropriately,  lack  of
    likely risk to the appellant in the event of his return  to  Sri  Lanka
    were entirely in accordance with the proper approach.  As will be  seen
    from those extracts from his decision  which  I  have  quoted  in  this
    judgment he made a detailed  analysis  of  the  background  facts.   He
    weighed up those background facts and came to  a  conclusion  that  was
    fully reasoned and consistent with the building blocks on which it  was
    based.  Criticism is made that the judge departed  from  parts  of  the
    guidance in GJ to the extent  he  ought  to  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant, having been detained  and  having  bribed  his  way  out  of
    custody in Sri Lanka, would be somewhat likely to be recorded on a stop
    list and that that gave rise to the sort of risk that  fell  within  GJ
    and ought therefore at any  rate  to  have  been  considered  as  such.
    Looking at the entirety of the context in which the judge refers to  GJ
    we are in no doubt whatsoever that the judge had all  of  these  issues
    firmly in mind and he dealt with the  question  of  detention  and  the
    consequences of that.  He balanced those issues against the age of  the
    appellant at the time of the troubles in Sri Lanka  together  with  the
    evidence relating to his somewhat peripheral involvement with the Tamil
    Tigers.  In all the circumstances we consider that the suggestion  that
    the judge ought to have made more of the record  which  may  have  been
    kept of his detention amounted to  little  more  than  speculation  and
    failed to persuade either the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  or  us  that
    there was any substantive merit in that and we are substantiating  that
    view by the agreement both of First-tier Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judges  who  considered  that  there  was  no  arguable  merit  in  the
    substantive issues on appeal.

14. We now turn to the question of the allegedly sleeping judge.  There are
    a number of authorities relating to the consequences of judges found to
    be  sleeping  or  inattentive  during  the   course   of   proceedings.
    Doubtless,  purely  coincidentally,  many  of  those  relate   to   the
    Employment Appeal Tribunal.  There are of course  authorities  also  in
    the context of  other  jurisdictions  and  we  note  that  there  is  a
    discussion of the matter in the case of the Crown  v  Betson  &  Others
    [2004] EWCA Criminal 254 and also in the case of KD v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (KD - inattentive judges) Afghanistan [2010] UKUT  261.   There
    is absolutely no question that it is  entirely  inappropriate  for  any
    judge or Tribunal member to fall asleep or to give  the  impression  of
    having fallen asleep during  the  course  of  a  hearing  and  all  the
    authorities which we refer to are unanimous in criticising a judge  who
    falls into that category.  In the case of KD, in  accordance  with  the
    head note which is an accurate reflection of the substantive  judgment,
    the following was observed:

         "The parties to an appeal are entitled to expect the Judge both  to
         be alert during the hearing and to appear to be  so.  Consequently,
         if a Judge actually falls asleep or gives  the  appearance  of  not
         giving the appeal his full attention,  there  may  be  grounds  for
         setting aside the determination on the basis  that  there  has  not
         been a fair hearing.  It is preferable for any  concern  about  the
         behaviour or inattention of the Judge to be raised at the  hearing.
         When such a ground of appeal  is  raised,  it  is  only  likely  to
         succeed if there is cogent  evidence  of  the  actual  or  apparent
         behaviour in question."

15. In  the  case  of  Betson  the  Court  of  Appeal  made  the  following
    observations:

         "There remains the ground in relation to the judge's falling asleep
         because the appearance as well as the actuality  of  justice  being
         done is important.  No judge ought in  any  circumstances  to  fall
         asleep during  any  stage  of  a  criminal  trial.   It  is  highly
         regrettable that this judge did so  but  because  the  judge  falls
         asleep or for any other reason  allows  his  or  her  attention  to
         wander, it does not necessarily follow that the trial is unfair  or
         that any ensuing conviction is unsafe.  It is the  effect  not  the
         fact of such inattention which is crucial.  This must in each  case
         depend on all the circumstances including the period of inattention
         both absolute and as a proportion of the length of the whole trial,
         the stage of the trial at  which  the  inattention  occurs  and  of
         primary importance the impact of that inattention, if any,  on  the
         course and conduct of the trial.  We give two examples  by  way  of
         illustration.  First if a  judge  is  inattentive  however  briefly
         during a defendant's evidence-in-chief and in consequence fails  to
         register and in due course sum up to the jury a  piece  of  crucial
         evidence to the defence the conviction may be regarded  as  unsafe.
         The unsafety arises not because the judge slept  or  was  otherwise
         inattentive but because in consequence the summing up was defective
         in  that  the  defence  was  not  properly  put  before  the  jury.
         Conversely, a conviction is unlikely to be regarded  as  unsafe  if
         during a lengthy trial a judge is inattentive even for  substantial
         periods.  If in consequence he lists no significant point  meriting
         inclusion in this summing up and did not fail properly  to  control
         their admissibility of evidence the  conduct  of  Counsel  or  some
         other aspect of the proceedings.  In the present case the judge  as
         he frankly and properly admits was for a  time  asleep  during  the
         speeches of Counsel for Betson and Ciarrocchi.  We are prepared  to
         accept that he was asleep on a few other  occasions,  sometimes  to
         the extent that he woke himself up by the sound of his snoring.  It
         is however of some significance that at the trial no  defendant  or
         no Counsel in the case of whom there were a total of  thirteen  and
         no jury were sufficiently concerned to raise the  matter  with  the
         judge, other  Counsel  or  the  court  usher.   It  is  of  greater
         significance that before this court it  has  not  been  shown  that
         because he slept the judge missed and failed to sum up to the  jury
         any significant feature  of  the  evidence  or  speeches.   On  the
         contrary this summing up extending to approximately  250  pages  of
         transcript and delivered as we have said over four days shows every
         sign of having been carefully prepared.  It was  comprehensive  and
         balanced, accurate as to the law and detailed as to  the  evidence.
         The defence of each defendant was fully put.  Had  the  judge  been
         awake when he was asleep the appearance of justice would of  course
         been obviously enhanced  but  the  trial  would  have  followed  no
         different course.  Furthermore, regrettable though it is  that  the
         judge occasionally slept, no objection having been made at the time
         were unpersuaded that the jury even  arguably  unfairly  prejudiced
         against any defendant bearing in mind also the length of the trial,
         the full, fair and accurate  summing  up,  the  lengthy  period  of
         retirement, the pertinent  question  asked  by  the  jury  and  the
         compelling powerful evidence against the defendants.   It  was  for
         these reasons that yesterday we refused Betson and  Cochrane  leave
         to appeal against conviction."

16. Now against that  background  we  have  to  address  the  circumstances
    arising in this  case.   First  of  all,  an  important  and  realistic
    concession was made on behalf of the appellant that he  was  unable  to
    identify any respect in which the  judge  had  missed  out  a  material
    primary fact in his decision or had got any primary fact  wrong.   That
    would indicate that throughout the duration of  the  case  during  when
    relevant evidence of primary facts was being given, the judge was alert
    to it and bore it in mind when he reached his decision.

17. The second point is this.  It was prayed in aid of the  appellant  that
    the judge's alleged  errors  in  substance  could  be  attributable  to
    inattention.  There are two difficulties  with  that  submission.   The
    first is that the hearing of evidence took place on  1  April  and  the
    decision  was  promulgated  on  23  April.  Accordingly  the  secondary
    inferences from the  primary  building  blocks  of  the  evidence  were
    considered over a period of three weeks and were not dependent  on  any
    issue as to whether the judge was alert or sleeping during  the  course
    of the hearing.

18. More importantly, as this court has found, there was no  error  in  the
    judge's assessment.  On the contrary this was an extremely detailed and
    considered judgment which followed a  logical  pattern  and  reached  a
    logical conclusion.  It is also important to note as the courts did  in
    both KD and Betson that no complaint was made at the time.  If  it  had
    been considered that any appearance of lack of attention on the part of
    the judge was significant then one is entitled to expect that advocates
    would have intervened or, at the  very  least  have  raised  the  issue
    immediately.  Not only was the issue not raised immediately  after  the
    hearing, it was not included within the grounds of the application  for
    permission to appeal before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  It is  very
    difficult to understand how if the alleged inattention of the judge had
    been considered to be so significant it  would  not  have  been  raised
    until two months  after  the  hearing.   Despite  a  reference  to  the
    appellant and his interpreter chatting about the matter afterwards,  no
    corroborative  evidence  has  been  put  before  this  court  from  the
    appellant or his interpreter or anyone else in court  to  support  this
    late contention.  In addition, we have been provided with notes from Ms
    Hunjan who represented the Secretary of  State  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and there is nothing in those notes to indicate any concern in
    relation to the judge being asleep.  One could  well  expect  that  any
    such concern would have been recorded.

19. There is no further evidence put before this court apart from the  very
    late uncorroborated evidence of  the  appellant's  representative.   We
    find in the very particular  circumstances  of  this  case  it  is  not
    necessary  to  reach  any  conclusion  (and  in  fact   it   would   be
    inappropriate to reach a conclusion) as to whether or not at some stage
    the judge fell asleep.  It would be wrong  on  paper  to  make  such  a
    finding in relation to a matter  of  professional  importance  such  as
    this.  What we do however find is that the evidence from  the  decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  demonstrates  minute  consideration   of
    detailed facts, getting none of them wrong and ensuring  that  all  the
    material ones are incorporated into  what  is  a  long  and  considered
    approach makes it absolutely and abundantly clear that  any  perception
    of inattentiveness or unconsciousness could  have  made  no  difference
    whatsoever to the result in this case and although it may very well  be
    in less clear cases that an assertion such as this has to  be  resolved
    factually and  may,  if  resolved  against  the  judge,  result  in  an
    overturning of the decision, this case on its  particular  facts  falls
    far, far short of that and in the circumstances we dismiss this appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.








Signed:        Sir Mark Turner                   Date:  11th May 2016
                     Mr Justice Turner
