

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04925/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated:     |
|On 21 September 2016                  |On 18 November 2016                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between


                                    N M S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Neale, instructed by the Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Libya. She arrived in the UK  on  26  June
   2008 and her leave was extended on two occasions until 17 November  2014.
   She claimed asylum on 25 November 2013. Her  claim  was  refused  by  the
   Respondent in a letter dated 1 July 2014  and  a  decision  was  made  to
   remove her from the United Kingdom. She appealed  against  that  decision
   under section 82 (1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
   Her appeal was dismissed on 25 September 2014 and she  sought  permission
   to appeal against that decision. Permission was granted on  30  September
   2014 and her appeal was remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  re-
   hearing on 2 February 2015. Her appeal was heard and dismissed by  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Sweeney in a decision promulgated on 12 August  2015.
   The Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  against  that  decision  and
   permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Garrett  on  7
   September 2015 on limited grounds.  On  renewal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
   permission was granted on all grounds  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
   Archer on 12 October 2015.


   The Grounds


2. Ground 1 asserts  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  take  into
   account  relevant  evidence  in  relation  to  the  non-payment  of   the
   Appellant's fees. The Appellant's counsel had submitted  at  the  hearing
   that a key piece of evidence in the Appellant's case was  the  fact  that
   her fees had not been  paid  since  2011.  It  was  submitted  that  this
   demonstrated that the post-revolutionary Libyan authorities had taken  an
   adverse view of her. It is asserted that the Judge failed to have  regard
   to  the  evidence  adduced  at  S28  of  the  Appellant's  bundle   which
   demonstrated that as of 2013 the General  National  Congress  was  paying
   fees for  Libyan  students  abroad  and  was  expanding  its  scholarship
   programme. Thus the fact that the payment of  the  Appellant's  fees  had
   been stopped was clearly something that called for  explanation  and  was
   consistent with her being a supporter of the Gaddafi  regime.  The  Judge
   failed to take into  account  material  evidence  and  give  reasons  for
   accepting or rejecting it.

3. Ground 2 asserts that  the  Judge  had  been  troubled  by  typographical
   mistakes identified by the Appellant's own expert Dr George in two of the
   documents which the Appellant relied on. The Judge  had  stated  that  he
   preferred the evidence  of  Dr  George  over  that  of  Mr  Meghrawi,  an
   interpreter and translator who provided a  witness  statement  addressing
   this issue. However,  he  did  not  engage  with  the  substance  of  the
   explanations offered by the Appellant  for  the  apparent  discrepancies.
   There was evidence before the Judge that the confusion of  the  word  was
   one of  the  most  common  spelling  errors  in  written  Arabic  and  Mr
   Meghrawi's evidence was not being relied on as a country expert but as an
   Arabic interpreter. His evidence was intended to address  the  prevalence
   of these types of typing errors in the Arabic language. Judge Sweeney  is
   said to have offered no reason for rejecting this evidence.

4. There was also evidence that Arabic was a language which  used  masculine
   nouns in the  generic  sense  as  inclusive  of  women  and  it  was  the
   Appellant's case that it was not surprising that a standard  printed  pro
   forma on which the Appellant's name  and  details  had  been  handwritten
   would use masculine nouns and  pronouns.   It  is  submitted  that  Judge
   Sweeney failed to take  into  account  the  explanations  that  were  put
   forward on the Appellant's behalf for the apparent inconsistencies in the
   documents or give reasons for rejecting those explanations.



5. Ground 3 asserts that the Judge considered the issue of  Article  15  (c)
   relatively briefly at paragraphs 112-120. It is  submitted  that  a  very
   substantial  volume  of  background  evidence  was  put  forward  by  the
   Appellant, covering the entire period between July  2014  and  July  2015
   demonstrating that  there  had  been  a  dramatic  deterioration  in  the
   security and humanitarian situation in Libya since AT and Others (Article
   15 (c) : risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT  00318.  It  is  submitted
   that whereas the Upper Tribunal in AT had been presented with a situation
   in which the internationally recognised  government  was  in  control  of
   Tripoli and its airport, the situation had  since  radically  changed.  A
   coalition of militias called the Dawn of  Libya  had  seized  Tripoli  in
   August 2014 and there were  two  rival  governments.  There  was  intense
   fighting in many parts of the country between  rival  forces  and  forced
   displacement on a very large scale. The Judge had not referred to any  of
   the evidence or taken it into account. It was the task of  the  Judge  to
   form an assessment of the facts based on the  evidence  before  them.  If
   Judge Sweeney considered that it was not open to him to depart  from  the
   country guidance unless he had up to date expert evidence he  misdirected
   himself in law.


6. Ground 4 asserts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  undertake  a
   proper best-interest analysis under Article 8  ECHR  in  respect  of  the
   Appellant's daughter. He noted that she was 6  years  old  and  that  her
   focus was on her parents. He failed, it is asserted, to take into account
   the country information concerning the risk  of  indiscriminate  violence
   and sufficiently take into account her length of residence.

   The Rule 24 Response

7. The  Respondent  argues  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  directed
   himself appropriately and that the grounds are  mere  disagreements  with
   the findings. It was not  an  error  of  law  to  follow  extant  country
   guidance and the Judge gave careful consideration to the  best  interests
   of the child.


   The Hearing


8. Mr Neale added to the grounds of appeal. With regard to  Ground  1  there
   was country evidence that people had been deprived of  scholarships.  The
   Judge said that there was no witness evidence and no  other  evidence  to
   the effect that their fees were being paid. However, there  was  evidence
   that in 2013 that there was a programme at S28 to 29 of  the  Appellant's
   bundle. He failed to have regard to this piece  of  evidence.  There  was
   clear evidence that the tuition fees were paid. If he had considered that
   evidence it would be another matter and he had overlooked and  failed  to
   engage with that evidence and he was  obliged  to  state  that  and  give
   reasons for those findings.


9. With regard to Ground 2, the key feature  was  the  authenticity  of  the
   documents. Mr Meghrawi's evidence was adduced to give evidence about  the
   factual points. Dr George said that one of these  documents  was  written
   using male pronouns. It was a pro forma and Dr George asserted that there
   were male pronouns that were used in the hand-written part. Dr George was
   wrong about that and Mr  Meghrawi  was  performing  his  function  as  an
   interpreter. He confirmed that no part of the hand-written part was male.
   Dr George had a GSCE in Arabic. At A61 and 62  of  the  old  bundle  were
   details in hand-writing in the main body of the letter the two components
   which were hand written. If you looked at each entry surrounded  by  dots
   none contained any male pronouns or the word "brother".

10. There were two other aspects which had not adequately been  dealt  with.
   Mr Meghrawi had said that the default position was to have a document  in
   the masculine. Male pronouns were used  inclusively.  It  was  within  Mr
   Meghrawi's expertise. The Judge was not required to take his word for  it
   and there was an academic  argument  at  paragraph  15  of  the  skeleton
   argument. The third point related to a different document.  There  was  a
   typing error and the issue was that this was common place in an  internal
   document, an internal committee minute. There was also  further  evidence
   at paragraph 15 at S3 of the Appellant's bundle. The approach  the  Judge
   took was wrong and he was not asked to choose  between  two  experts.  On
   those three key factual points Mr Meghrawi was well  within  his  factual
   competence and those points were backed up. Reading a document and seeing
   what was contained was by definition the task of  an  interpreter.  These
   were significant issues to tip the balance.

11. Ground 4 concerned the assessment of the best interests  of  the  child.
   She had not completed 7 years of residence and  that  would  have  to  be
   considered at the remitted hearing. Sending a child back to a warzone was
   relevant to best interests.

12. Mr Richards agreed  that  there  was  a  misdirection  in  relation  the
   country evidence. He submitted that the best interests of child should be
   looked at afresh in the light of  current  circumstances.  There  was  no
   material error in respect of the credibility findings. With regard to the
   issue of the non-payment of fees there was nothing wrong in  the  Judge's
   logic in finding  that  at  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
   Appellant's fees had been withdrawn  for  political  reasons.  The  Judge
   pointed to the submission  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  yet  this
   Appellant's fees were withdrawn in 2011 and in those  circumstance  there
   was no evidence to persuade him even on the lower standard.  There  could
   not have been direct evidence from Libyan authorities and it was for  the
   Judge to come to the conclusion in the round and whilst the Appellant may
   disagree with the conclusion it was within the range of findings open  on
   the evidence and revealed no material error of law. On the  second  issue
   and regarding the conflict in evidence the Judge never made  the  mistake
   of finding that Mr Meghrawi was placing himself  in  the  position  of  a
   country expert but he was none the less giving expert evidence of another
   kind and the Judge found at 72 that it  was  not  appropriate  to  attach
   significant weight to his views. What the  Judge  was  effectively  being
   asked to do was consider the evidence of an expert and  give  significant
   weight to the majority of the evidence of the expert but disregard one or
   two potentially significant parts of the evidence. It was highly  unusual
   to produce evidence and asked for some of it to be believed and some not.
   Things might have been different if Dr George  was  asked  to  put  in  a
   supplemental report stating that he  was  mistaken.  But  Dr  George  was
   experienced and well-known and weight was given to it and the Judge could
   not be criticized for so doing. The credibility findings were  free  from
   error of law and ought to be preserved and that the matter  ought  to  go
   back to First-tier Tribunal specifically for  the  consideration  of  the
   Article 15 (c) issue and on no other basis.


13. Mr Neale replied that with regard to the  second  ground  he  identified
   the three factual propositions, two of those  he  accepted  were  opinion
   evidence.   However,  Mr  Meghrawi's  opinion  was  also  backed  up   by
   background evidence in the supplemental evidence. He was not  obliged  to
   accept that but he  did  not  engage  with  it  and  did  not  appear  to
   appreciate that it was before him. This items  were  all  referenced  and
   foot-noted in the skeleton argument. He  needed  to  look  at  where  the
   evidence was independently corroborated. The third issue was whether  the
   hand-written evidence  contained  masculine  pronouns.  Mr  Meghrawi  was
   competent to undertake that task and express an opinion and it was  clear
   that he was right just looking at the document. Dr George  was  factually
   wrong which undermined the document. The report was out of date as it was
   before  Judge  Creswell.  The  fact  was  that  his  assessment  of   the
   credibility of the documents was premised on a factual mistake and  Judge
   Sweeney was not entitled to ignore that.

   Discussion and Findings

14. In the light of Mr Richard's agreement that there was a  material  error
   of law in the  treatment  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  the  country
   evidence this matter must be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
   rehearing. The Appellant had argued that the First-tier  Tribunal  should
   depart from the extant country guidance of AT and Others (Article 15  (c)
   : risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 00318  because  since  the  Upper
   Tribunal considered the evidence in that case there had been  a  dramatic
   deterioration in the situation in Libya. In DSG & Others  (Afghan  Sikhs:
   departure from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 the Upper Tribunal  held
   that the First-tier Tribunal  had  justified  a  departure  from  country
   guidance, which was permitted  to  be  done  according  to  the  Practice
   Direction 12.2 and 12.4 and the UT (IAC) Guidance Note.


   Practice Direction 12.2 and 12.4 state as follows:

         "12.2 A reported determination of the  Tribunal,  the  AIT  or  IAT
             bearing the letters 'CG' shall be treated as an  authoritative
             finding on  the  country  guidance  issue  identified  in  the
             determination, based upon the evidence before the  members  of
             the Tribunal, the AIT or the IAT that  determine  the  appeal.
             As a result,  unless  it  has  been  expressly  superseded  or
             replaced by any later 'CG' determination, or  is  inconsistent
             with other authority that is binding on the Tribunal,  such  a
             country guidance case is authority in any subsequent appeal so
             far as that appeal:-


             (a)       relates to the country guidance issue  in  question;
             and


             (b)       depends upon the same or similar evidence.


         12.4 Because of the principle that like cases should be treated  in
             like  manner,  any  failure  to  follow  a  clear,  apparently
             applicable country guidance case or to show why  it  does  not
             apply to the case in question is  likely  to  be  regarded  as
             grounds for appeal on a point of law."

In the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note  2011  No
2, at paragraph 11, it is stated:

         '"If there is credible fresh evidence relevant to  the  issue  that
         has not been considered in the  country  guidance  case  or,  if  a
         subsequent  case  includes  further  issues  that  have  not   been
         considered in the CG case, the judge  will  reach  the  appropriate
         conclusion on the evidence, taking into account the  conclusion  in
         the CG case so far as it remains relevant."

      And at paragraph 12:

         "Where  country  guidance  has  become  outdated   by   reason   of
         developments in the country in question, it is anticipated  that  a
         judge of the First-tier Tribunal  will  have  such  credible  fresh
         evidence as envisaged in paragraph 11 above."


15. In AT the Upper Tribunal considered the country evidence up to  November
   2013. At paragraph 112 the  First-tier  Tribunal  noted  that  no  expert
   evidence had  been  adduced  by  the  Appellant  demonstrating  that,  if
   returned to Libya, she would be at risk due to the  armed  conflict.  The
   First-tier Tribunal found at paragraph 113 that it was  not  possible  or
   proper on the basis of the background  documentation  alone  and  in  the
   absence of expert evidence addressing the nature, extent and currency  of
   such alleged risk, to conclude that the situation in Libya had changed so
   dramatically since the above country guidance case that he should  depart
   from the same.  The Appellant relied on evidence up to July  2015  and  I
   accept that evidence was fresh and credible as envisaged by the  Practice
   Direction. Expert evidence was not required and the  Judge  in  requiring
   the same and failing to have regard to  the  evidence  submitted  by  the
   Appellant materially erred in law in respect  his  consideration  of  the
   risk under Article 15 (c). It  follows  also  from  this  that  the  best
   interest analysis under Article 8 ECHR was also flawed because it  failed
   to take into account the risk of indiscriminate violence.


16. The Respondent argues that the credibility findings should stand and  be
   preserved.  I  have  firstly  considered  the  issue  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal's findings on the authenticity of the documents relied on by the
   Appellant. The First-tier Tribunal had before it the report of Dr George,
   an acknowledged country  expert,  at  pages  A11-56  of  the  Appellant's
   bundle. He concluded, albeit with the caveats that he noted at paragraphs
   26 to 29 of his opinion, that the Appellant's testimony was plausible and
   stated that in his view, on the  basis  of  her  testimony,  if  she  was
   returned to Libya she would be at real risk  because  of  her  actual  or
   perceived past involvement with the Revolutionary Committees.  Paragraphs
   26 to 29 of the report addressed scanned copies and translations of three
   letters and a memorandum. Dr George recorded that there were  aspects  of
   three of the documents which troubled him. Firstly,  a  letter  dated  15
   March 2000 approving the Appellant's appointment as a Teaching  Assistant
   at Tripoli's Al-Fateh University included a significant grammatical error
   in the name of the Libyan  State.  The  word  al-udma  ("Great")  in  the
   state's name had been misspelled as there were two dots under  the  final
   letter in the word which should not be there. Dr George did not  consider
   it likely that  Libyan  official  agencies  would  make  such  an  error.
   Further, the letter dated  7  May  2000  referred  to  the  Appellant  as
   'brother' and throughout used masculine forms.  Further,  the  memorandum
   dated 9 September 2002 was addressed to 'military passports'.  Dr  George
   could not state that there was no such agency,  but  he  had  not  before
   heard of such.


17. The Appellant sought to deal with these matters by  producing  a  letter
   dated 18 February 2015 from Mohamed Meghrawi, an Arabic  Interpreter  and
   Translator. He examined the documents and the comments of Dr  George  who
   he mistakenly  thought  was  the  Home  Office  expert.  He  provided  an
   explanation for the misspelling in the word "Great" and the  use  of  the
   masculine  pronoun.  The  explanation  he  offered  in  relation  to  the
   misspelling was that the two different letters in  question  had  exactly
   the same body but one was written with two dots underneath. With the  two
   dots it became "yay" pronounced 'i' or 'iy' instead of an "alif maqsoura"
   pronounced 'a' or 'aa'. He states that it is important to note  that  the
   dotted "yay" at the end of the  work  was  only  introduced  to  the  MWA
   (modern written Arabic) in the last 2-3 decades with the introduction  of
   computer based word processing and that when written at the  end  of  the
   word is still written without the two dots in  all  handwritten  standard
   Arabic and in most printed material.  It  is,  he  says,  therefore  more
   important to write the main body of the letter correctly but the dots are
   much less significant when that letter is placed at the end of the  word.
   In short, "yay" at the end of the word should not have any  dots  and  is
   only used for the sake of "extra" clarity. He states that  in  this  case
   the  composer  of  the  letter  seems  to  be  using  the  dotted   "yay"
   indiscriminately and that this is not an uncommon spelling mistake simply
   because either of habit or poor use of Arabic keyboard or simple lack  of
   knowledge or a combination of those. He says that it is evident that this
   is the case in this letter because the composer makes  exactly  the  same
   mistake in a much more commonly used three-letter proposition at the  end
   of the last sentence of the  letter.  This  explains  that  the  composer
   simply uses one form for both letters for ease of  use  habit.   He  also
   adds that the words are composed on a word processor and no headed  paper
   was used. He states that it was an internal document within a low  ranked
   office of the Revolutionary Committee offices and not meant to be read by
   external users.


18. In respect of the use of the masculine forms, he states that the  letter
   is a template where it is generally composed in  the  standard  masculine
   pronouns and the clerk simply  produces  photocopies  and  fills  in  the
   blanks with name/dates/etc using hand-writing. These types  of  templates
   usually require the form-filler to  add  one  letter  by  pen  to  change
   pronoun from female to male but in most cases no one takes the time to do
   that.

19. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the evidence of  Mr  Meghrawi  for  the
   following reasons. Firstly, Mr Meghrawi was expressing an expert  opinion
   and not giving factual evidence. Secondly, there was no evidence  of  his
   qualifications or what experience he had to entitle him  to  give  expert
   evidence on this issue  justifying  placing  reliance  on  his  comments.
   Thirdly, his letter did not contain the expert's declaration of truth  or
   state that he recognised his duty in expressing his views to  the  court.
   Fourthly, the Appellant was asking him to prefer the evidence of  one  of
   her own expert's over another without oral evidence and in  circumstances
   where Dr George had not been  afforded  the  opportunity  to  address  or
   comment. He concluded that he preferred the evidence  of  Dr  George  and
   accepted that concerns did arise in relation to the authenticity  of  the
   letters. Particularly, he was concerned that Mr Meghrawi  was  expressing
   views that the letter of March 2000 was an internal  document  and  there
   was no basis on which he had shown he had  the  expertise  to  make  that
   comment. Further, there was no evidence as  to  the  basis  on  which  Mr
   Meghrawi expressed his view and the experience and expertise he possessed
   that enable him to comment on the practice of changing the  pronoun  from
   male to female.


20. The First-tier Tribunal was undoubtedly correct to  reject  the  opinion
   offered by Mr Meghrawi that the letter of  March  2000  was  an  internal
   document and that there was the  practice  of  changing  the  pronoun  on
   templates. Mr Meghrawi had not demonstrated his expertise to be  entitled
   to comment on these matters. What was not disputed however, was  that  Mr
   Meghrawi was a translator for  Language  Services  UK  Limited  and  that
   notwithstanding the absence of a statement of  truth  or  declaration  he
   could comment on matters relating  to  translation.  The  information  he
   provided in relation to the  misspelling  was  also  supported  by  other
   evidence produced by the Appellant and not referred to in the decision of
   the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant relied on an extract from  a  book
   called "Introduction to Arabic Natural Language  Processing"  Morgan  and
   Claypool Publishing, 2010 at 1-6 of her bundle. At page 3 it is said that
   the most common spelling errors in Arabic involve Hamzated Alifa and Alif
   Maqsoura/Ya confusion. These errors are said to affect 11% of all  words.
   Further, the letter of 7 May 2000 is translated at A61 and  the  original
   is at A62. I think it is fairly clear from looking at the original  that,
   as Mr Meghrawi asserts, the letter is a template and  some  details  have
   been filled in by hand. Mr Meghrawi was of course  clearly  qualified  to
   say that the masculine words were part of the template.  Dr  George  does
   not in fact represent himself to be an expert in the Arabic language  and
   does not comment on the use of the masculine pronoun, except to point out
   that of course  the  Appellant  is  a  woman.  The  information  from  Mr
   Meghrawi's in respect of the use of the masculine  pronoun  is  therefore
   not in conflict with that  of  Dr  George  but  explains  its  usage.   I
   therefore consider that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  treating  the
   evidence of Mr Meghrawi as conflicting  with  Dr  George's  evidence  and
   rejecting it in its entirety particularly in view of the fact that  there
   was also independent  support  for  the  prevalence  of  the  misspelling
   identified. I conclude that  the  failure  to  give  any  weight  to  the
   contents of Mr Meghrawi's statement was a material error as it was a  key
   factor in rejecting the Appellant's account.


21. I do not however,  consider  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  lack  of
   reference to the document at A28 of the Appellant's bundle in relation to
   scholarships for Libyan students  was  a  material  error  of  law.  That
   document is dated May 2013 and states that funding would start for 40,000
   Libyan students but it does not necessarily impact on the question of why
   the Appellant's fees had been stopped in 2012.

22. The remaining  findings  on  credibility  are  well  reasoned  and  were
   clearly open to the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence. However, in  the
   light of my conclusion as to  the  finding  on  the  reliability  of  the
   documents those credibility findings cannot stand as it is the Judge  may
   have reached a different conclusion had he attached some  weight  to  the
   explanations given for the discrepancies in those documents. Consequently
   I preserve no findings.


Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

