



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: AA/04305/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 June 2015                            |On 7 July 2015             |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                                     K T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                           Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS



    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Kanaga
Solicitors.
    For the Respondent:    Mr David Clark, Senior Presenting Officer.


   1.    This appeal was last heard on 24 October 2014 when I,  for  reasons
      given in my determination set aside the  decision  of  Judge  Conrath,
      First Tier Tribunal Judge dismissing the appeal of  the  appellant,  a
      national of Sri Lanka. In my decision I preserved the findings made by
      Judge Conrath about the appellant having been  detained  and  tortured
      when she  had  gone  back  to  Sri  Lanka  in  February  2013  as  the
      authorities wanted information about the activities of her husband who
      it is accepted had been involved with the LTTE. At the hearing  on  24
      October 2014 I had directed that the appeal be listed before me for  a
      fresh hearing on 30 January 2015. The appeal had to  be  adjourned  on
      that date.
   2. At the hearing before me the  appellant  was  present  and  gave  oral
      evidence through a Tamil speaking court interpreter. She  adopted  her
      written witness statement, verifying the contents thereof to be  true,
      as her evidence-in-chief to support her appeal. She also relied on all
      the previously  submitted  documents  in  the  course  of  the  appeal
      including medical report etc.

   3. In cross examination the appellant insisted that her statements  given
      in the course  of  her  claim  for  asylum  were  true  and  that  the
      authorities had suspected her also to have been involved with the LTTE
      due to her husband's LTTE profile. She  was  asked  why  she  had  not
      informed the respondent of the breakdown of  her  marriage,  she  said
      that she had not realised that she had to. She had re-entered the  UK,
      as her visa had not expired.

   4. She said that she had been detained and tortured in Sri Lanka  because
      of her husband who they knew was from the LTTE. She said that  as  she
      was being tortured she was not able to understand what she  was  being
      asked. She had left her ten-month old baby in the  United  Kingdom  in
      order to find the whereabouts of her husband and she had at that  time
      been in no state of mind to give any answers to the questions she  was
      asked.

   5. She said that when she had married she did not know that  her  husband
      was involved with LTTE activities. When  she  and  her  husband  lived
      together in London, she also went to various demonstrations  organised
      by the LTTE sometimes with her husband and sometimes on her  own.  Her
      husband used to take photos and videos of the demonstrations and  used
      to get many telephone calls. She said that although their marriage had
      ended by the time she learnt that he had been arrested in  Sri  Lanka,
      she could not bear it and rushed to Sri Lanka to find  what  had  been
      done to him. She had left her baby,  which  she  had  borne  from  her
      relationship with another man following the break up of  her  marriage
      and had planned to return in five days to resume caring for him.

   6. She explained why she had gone to Vavuniya to see her mother  although
      she had thought that her husband was being detained  in  Colombo.  She
      had been given the information about her husband's detention by  K,  a
      friend of her husband who was at the time  living  in  Sri  Lanka  and
      perhaps did not know that her marriage to his friend had broken  down.
      She  was  shown  a  document  produced  titled  "The  Gazette  of  the
      Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka" and was asked why her name
      or that of her husband did not appear in the document which  Mr  Clark
      said gave names of all persons and organisations which the  Government
      of Sri Lanka considered to have involvement in 'Terrorist" activities.
      The appellant was not able to answer the question and looked  somewhat
      bemused.

   7. She said that as far as she knew ports had been put  on  notice  about
      her but she said, "bribes work". The appellant  said  that  the  agent
      that her mother had arranged for her was with her when she went to the
      airport. He had travelled with her to Oman and had taken care  of  the
      exit arrangements for me from Colombo. The  appellant  said  that  her
      mother was still being asked for her whereabouts and  she  writes  and
      calls her. She said that besides the letter  that  is  in  her  appeal
      bundle she has other letters too but they are at  "home".  These  also
      say that the authorities are still looking  for  her.  When  asked  if
      there was a warrant of arrest against her in Sri Lanka, the  appellant
      said she  does  not  know.  At  this  stage  the  appellant  was  very
      distraught and I adjourned the hearing for ten minutes.

   8. Upon resumption, Mr Clark said that he had no more questions to ask of
      the appellant. In re-examination the appellant said that  her  husband
      had been working for "media" but she does not know if he  was  working
      for some one or he was freelance. He had his own cameras  and  he  had
      also been given cameras but she did not know who  had  given  him  the
      cameras. She said that while she was being tortured her torturers said
      they knew  that  she  and  her  husband  had  been  involved  in  LTTE
      activities. They did not believe her when she told them that she  knew
      nothing about her husband's activities.  She  drew  attention  to  her
      mother's  statement,  which  is  in  her  bundle  of  documents.  That
      concluded  the  evidence  of  the  appellant   and   I   invited   the
      representatives to make submissions.

   9. Mr Clark said he relied on the reasons set out in the  refusal  letter
      to support the decision to  refuse  her  claim.  He  accepted  that  a
      Judge's findings on her claimed detention and ill treatment  when  she
      last went to Sri Lanka are not in dispute. Mr  Clark  said  if  I  was
      satisfied on the evidence presented that the appellant's  release  had
      indeed been  procured  by  the  giving  of  bribes,  he  would  be  in
      difficulty  to  defend  the  respondent's  decision  to   refuse   the
      appellant's  claim.  However  Mr  Clark  asked  me  to  consider   the
      immigration history of the appellant. She had  failed  to  inform  the
      respondent about her change of circumstances in her marriage. This was
      particularly important as her visa was  as  her  husband's  dependant.
      Moreover the appellant had failed to apply for asylum upon her return.
      Mr Clark argued that these actions  undermined  her  credibility.  The
      appellant's profile as an LTTE "activist" was very low. Her  claim  to
      have attended many demonstrations is not supported by  anyone  or  any
      organisation. He asked me to bear in mind the  contents  of  paragraph
      3.3.1 (a) of the decision in GJ. Mr Clark asked me to  find  that  she
      was released because she was of no interest. He asked that I  so  find
      also because she is not on the list given with the Sri Lankan Gazette.
      Mr Clark argued that I should pay particular attention to the contents
      of paragraphs 336 and 331 of the GJ decision and of paragraph 309 too.
      He asked that the appeal be dismissed.

  10. In reply Mr Muquit relied on his written skeleton argument. He  argued
      that the appellant had given her evidence in an  honest  and  truthful
      manner and had made no effort to embellish her claim. Mr Muquit argued
      that the appellant had benefitted from  a  corrupt  system  to  escape
      further difficulties and had managed to escape from  Sri  Lanka  as  a
      result of bribes. He said that the husband's profile as LTTE  activist
      of high profile had been accepted by as can be seen from Paragraphs 39
      and 40 of the previous determination. He asked me to give  due  weight
      to the letter from mother as it  establishes  that  the  appellant  is
      still being sought in Sri Lanka. He asked that the appeal be  allowed.
      I reserved my decision which I now give with the following reasons:

  11. In applying the principle that the appellant  carries  the  burden  of
      proof and is required to discharge it on the  standard  of  reasonable
      likelihood and not on a balance of probabilities, I have appraised all
      the evidence with care and anxious scrutiny. I have  also  taken  full
      and proper account of the evidence that  made  the  First  Tier  Judge
      Conrath to accept that when the appellant went to Sri Lanka  in  2013,
      she was detained and  ill  treated  by  authorities  on  suspicion  of
      familial and/or personal involvement with the LTTE. It was  a  finding
      based on medical evidence and well reasoned which  led  me  to  retain
      that finding having  found  the  determination  of  Judge  Conrath  in
      material errors of law for reasons given in my decision promulgated on
      4 November 2014. That is the starting point in my consideration of the
      appeal.

  12. The appellant's claim is that she will  face  persecution  if  she  is
      returned to Sri Lanka and she states that this will happen as  she  is
      suspected or perceived to be a supporter of the LTTE.  In  determining
      this appeal I have taken full account of the fact that the authorities
      in Sri Lanka have inflicted defeat on the LTTE and in  so  doing  they
      face allegations of most grave and serious abuses of human rights.  It
      is borne out by reports from international human rights  reports  that
      the authorities remain very vigilant of resurgence of  the  separatist
      movement. In my judgement therefore it would be fool  hardy  to  think
      that the defeat of the LTTE has made the life and limb of LTTE persons
      or those perceived to have been with the LTTE, safe now.

  13. The matter of risk to Tamils in Sri Lanka with  LTTE  involvement  and
      such returnees was comprehensively reviewed by the Upper  Tribunal  in
      GJ and I respectfully follow the guidance given in that judgment.



  14. As I said earlier, my starting point  in  this  appeal  is  that  this
      appellant has suffered detention and ill treatment at the hands of the
      authorities when she was last in Sri Lanka. This  was  caused  as  the
      authorities thought that she had a political opinion that was  adverse
      to theirs. Or so  they  perceived.  Hence  she  was  without  a  doubt
      detained and ill-treated for a Convention reason.


  15. She has said that she or her mother acting in  her  interests  secured
      her release by payment of bribe. Judge Conrath did not accept that and
      took the view that she was released because  she  was  of  no  further
      interests to the authorities. In so doing the Judge reviewed her  past
      immigration history as well as the fact that she had returned  to  the
      UK on her own Sri Lankan passport and hence could not have been at any
      further risk. I take a different view. I accept the  evidence  of  the
      appellant which has been consistent and plausible throughout that  her
      release was secured by her mother by payment of bribes  and  that  her
      safe departure too was ensured by engagement of an agent who travelled
      with the appellant part of the way to London. Having  heard  and  seen
      the appellant assert these facts before me, I believed  the  truth  of
      this assertion.

  16. I have taken account of all the submissions  made  by  Mr  Clark  that
      appear to show the appellant to be a person whose credibility  is  not
      good. However, the appellant has explained most of the points of "poor
      credibility", and others, in my view, are not of much significance  to
      the core of the claim. In relation to not informing  the  Home  Office
      that her marriage  had  broken  down,  I  understand  and  accept  the
      explanation given by the appellant and the same I  do  about  her  re-
      entry. The appellant came across to me as a simple woman, who I  could
      not find capable of understanding much of  what  went  around  her.  I
      believe that she was unaware of her husband's  LTTE  activities  until
      very late in the day. Her responses to questions about  her  husband's
      activities/employment etc. in the UK demonstrated to me her  level  of
      intellect as well as the strength of their relationship. I  also  find
      it most likely that when she was in detention, the detention  was  put
      on record. While in detention, she was fingerprinted and made to  sign
      a paper. I also give due and proper weight  to  the  letter  from  the
      appellant's mother according to which the authorities are looking  for
      her. I accept her evidence that she has more of such letters at home.


  17. I have of course taken account of the documents presented by Mr  Clark
      claiming to give names and other particulars of  all  those  (real  or
      artificial) persons who the govt. of  Sri  Lanka  have  designated  as
      having been or being involved in terrorist activities. I do  not  give
      it much weight, as I was not able to get a full  explanation  from  Mr
      Clark about the use and purpose of this document. I note that the name
      of the appellant is not in these documents. On the other have  I  note
      that the appellant's husband's involvement  with  the  LTTE  has  been
      accepted for the purposes of this appeal.

13.  In the light of my findings of facts, I conclude that the appellant  is
      a refugee under the Convention on Refugees and that I therefore  allow
      her appeal to remain in the UK as a Refugee.










K Drabu CBE
Date:     5 July 2015
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





