
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04738/2012
     AA/04739/2012
     AA/04740/2012
     AA/04741/2012
     AA/04742/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date sent                  |
|On 20th June 2013                               |On 24th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            MR MANOJ SINGH AHUJA
                            MISS ANGEL KOUR AHUJA
                            Mr Jatin Singh Ahuja
                               mrs kesar devi
                          miss parveena kaur ahuja

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr E Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Times
                    Immigration Consultants Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Birkby) sitting in Bradford IAC who in a  decision
    promulgated on 28th June 2012 allowed the appeals of the Respondents.

 2.   They are Afghan citizens and are followers of the Sikh religion  and,
    consistently with the First-tier Tribunal, are hereinafter referred  to
    as "the Appellants."

 3.   The first Appellant was born on 1st January 1997, the second on  25th
    September 2010, the third Appellant on  20th  March  2006,  the  fourth
    Appellant was born on 1st January 1979 and the fifth Appellant was born
    on 17th February 2004.  The first and fourth Appellants are husband and
    wife and they are the natural parents of the second,  third  and  fifth
    Appellants.

 4. The facts relevant to  the  Appellants'  appeal  are  set  out  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is  said  that  when  the
    first Appellant was approximately 3 years old he and his  family  moved
    from the province of Khost, where he was born to the Karte Parwan  area
    of Kabul.  He attended school there and also attended  the  Guru  Nanak
    Darman School.  The family's persecution due to its Sikh religion began
    after the overthrow of the Communist regime by the  Mujahedden  in  the
    early 1990s.  In 1994, the Appellant's father and  elder  brother  were
    beaten when the Mujahedden raided the  Appellant's  father's  shop  and
    money and goods were stolen.  After  the  Taliban  came  to  power,  Mr
    Harbands Singh was kidnapped.  A ransom was demanded for his return but
    he was murdered by the kidnappers.  The murder of Harbands Singh led to
    the family's decision that they should leave Afghanistan.  In 2000, the
    first Appellant went to Moscow, surviving by selling goods and by  2002
    he returned to Afghanistan briefly and married his wife.  In  2005  she
    and their daughter joined the first Appellant in Moscow.  Their son and
    youngest daughter were born in Moscow in 2006 and 2010.  It is asserted
    that the Appellants were subjected to racism and violence in Russia and
    was asked to pay protection money and when unable to do so was  beaten.
    Throughout the stay in Moscow the family obtained "visas" via an agent.
     In 2009 the agent  took  the  passport  ostensibly  to  renew  it  but
    disappeared and never returned it.

 5. In 2011 the Appellant's nephew Ronak Singh was kidnapped in  Kabul.   A
    ransom was demanded, but the kidnappers killed Ronak before his  father
    Naam Singh could amass the money they had asked for.   Later  the  same
    year the Respondent and his family left Moscow and travelled to the  UK
    where they applied for international protection.

 6. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Birkby)  sitting
    at Bradford who heard evidence from the Appellant and his wife.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 28th June 2012, he allowed their appeals.

 7.   It is clear from the determination that contrary  to  the  assertions
    made in the refusal letter, the judge was satisfied that the Appellants
    were all Afghan nationals and were also followers of the Sikh faith.

 8.   The judge set out  his  findings  in  respect  of  those  matters  at
    paragraphs 33 to 36 of the determination.  At paragraphs 37  to  44  he
    considered the risk on return to Afghanistan faced by  Sikhs.   In  his
    assessment of the risk to these Appellants, he  gave  consideration  to
    the country guidance decision of SL and  Others  (Returning  Sikhs  and
    Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137 but  reached  the  conclusion
    that this was a decision of some antiquity but also that he was able to
    depart from that country guidance case because the  evidence  that  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal demonstrated that some  of  the  factual
    evidence relied upon by the  Tribunal  in  SL  had  been  found  to  be
    demonstrably wrong.  That evidence related to the numbers of  Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan at the time of the  country  guidance  case  and  the  more
    recent and up-to-date evidence  which  demonstrated  that  the  numbers
    given in that determination which was said to number as many as  20,000
    people was wrong.  The judge  had  before  him  what  he  described  as
    "substantial documentation" consisting of updated country materials,  a
    report from Dr Roger Ballard, consultant anthropologist  and  also  the
    decision of Collins  J  in  Luthra  v  SSHD  (CO/5248/2010)  dated  7th
    December 2011.  Having considered the material before  him,  the  judge
    was satisfied that the Sikh population in Afghanistan was  considerably
    smaller than it was assumed to be at the time of the  country  guidance
    case in SL v Others noting  that  from  the  evidence  before  him  the
    current Sikh population was closer to 3,000 in number rather  than  the
    20,000 it was considered to be at the time of SL and Others.  The judge
    placed weight upon the assessment of Dr  Ballard  alongside  the  other
    evidence before him and  reached  the  conclusion  that  discrimination
    against Sikhs, physical and verbal abuse of Sikhs, the  fear  of  Sikhs
    had of various forms of retaliation if they were to pursue for  example
    land disputes or restitution, continued virtually unabated.  He adopted
    the conclusions of Dr Ballard which included that the remaining members
    of the Sikh community  found  themselves  vulnerable  after  aggressive
    exploitation against which they had no meaningful defence and  that  on
    the basis of the evidence before him, the  Sikh  community  was  facing
    forms of discrimination, abuse and  ill-treatment  which  he  found  to
    amount to persecution.  In respect of the  Appellants,  he  found  that
    they would return to a general level of persecution against  people  of
    their faith as Sikhs and that they would not be able to escape that  in
    Afghanistan nor  would  they  be  able  to  find  protection  from  the
    authorities as the evidence before him demonstrated that it  would  not
    be available to them.  Consequently he allowed the appeals.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and it
    was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 12th July  2012.   Permission
    was granted upon renewal by the Upper Tribunal on 17th September 2012.

10. The case was originally  listed  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  19th
    December 2012 before a panel, Upper Tribunal Judge  Jordan  and  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grant.  It is clear from the note provided  by  Mr
    Nicholson that the panel  were  not  able  to  hear  the  case  to  its
    conclusion on  that  day  and  adjourned  the  appeal.   Following  the
    adjournment, on 18th  April  2013  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jordan  gave
    directions in the appeal following the promulgation by the Tribunal  of
    the decision  in  DSG  &  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs:  departure  from  CG)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC).  In the light of that  decision  a
    direction was issued to the Secretary of State in the following terms:-

         "The  Secretary  of  State  is  to  inform  the  Tribunal  and  the
         Appellants in writing by 9th May 2013 whether, in the light of  the
         decision in DSG & Others (Afghan Sikhs:  departure  from  CG),  the
         Secretary of State maintains her contention that the judge erred in
         law by departing from the country guidance set out in SL and Others
         (Returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKAIT 00137."

     Other consequential directions were given .

11. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.  Mr Avery  appeared  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State and Mr  Nicholson  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants.  At the outset of the appeal, Mr Avery conceded that  there
    had been no compliance with the direction made by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan and consequently the Secretary of State had failed to provide in
    writing whether, in the light of the decision in DSG the  Secretary  of
    State maintained the contention that the judge had erred  in  law.   In
    his submission, he did not seek to withdraw the grounds but  recognised
    that since the grounds had been settled, the decision of DSG (as cited)
    put the Secretary of State in difficulty demonstrating that  the  judge
    had made an error of law.  Thus he made no further submissions.

12. Mr Nicholson on behalf of the Appellants relied upon a response that he
    had filed with the Tribunal on an earlier occasion dated 19th  December
    2012.  He submitted that the judge was fully entitled  to  depart  from
    the  decision  in  SL  for  the  reasons  that  he  had  given  in  the
    determination.  He submitted that the  reliance  by  the  Secretary  of
    State upon the country guidance determination  in  SL  and  Others  was
    misplaced and that that had been upheld in the decision of DSG.   There
    had been no appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the Tribunal in DSG and thus it was good law.   The  question  in  this
    appeal was whether the judge was entitled to depart  from  the  country
    guidance case of SL.  In this appeal it was clear that  the  judge  was
    entitled to do so given  the  contents  of  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal in DSG and it could not be  said  that  the  judge  had  given
    insufficient  reasons  for  departing  from  the  country  guidance  as
    asserted by the Secretary of State.  The judge had set out his  reasons
    at paragraphs 38 to 44 of the determination and the  evidence  that  he
    had made reference to, for example, the report of Dr  Ballard  and  the
    decision of Collins J. in Luthra, was strikingly  similar  evidence  to
    that before the Tribunal in DSG.  The judge gave careful  consideration
    to that documentary  evidence  and  in  accordance  with  the  Practice
    Direction and Guidance Note he was justified to depart from the country
    guidance in SL and gave adequate reasons for doing  so,  based  on  his
    assessment of the country materials and the report of Dr Ballard, which
    had not been challenged.   The  Secretary  of  State  has  produced  no
    evidence to challenge Dr Ballard's report nor have they sought to do so
    in the grounds.  For those reasons, it had not been  demonstrated  that
    the judge had made an  error  of  law  in  his  determination  and  the
    decision should therefore stand.

13. The principal ground relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State  in  this
    appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal was in error by  departing  from
    the country guidance case of SL and Others  (as  cited)  and  secondly,
    that if he sought to depart from the country guidance,  the  judge  did
    not give adequate reasons for doing so.  There is no challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State to the facts of this  appeal  as  set  out  earlier.
    There has also been no challenge  to  the  country  materials  and  the
    expert  report  referred  to  by  the  First-tier   Tribunal   in   the
    determination.

14. Since the grant of permission, the Tribunal has considered the question
    of the departure from country guidance cases in DSG  &  Others  (Afghan
    Sikhs: depart from country  guidance)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  00148
    (IAC), on similar grounds to the present  appeal.   In  that  case  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had considered current and up-to-date country
    materials  relevant  to  the  risks  faced  by  Sikhs  on   return   to
    Afghanistan.  The documents before the FtT in that appeal  included  an
    expert report written by Dr Giustozzi, the decision of Collins J  in  R
    (on the application of Luthra v SSHD) [2011] EWHC 3629 (Admin) and  had
    a report from Dr  Roger  Ballard  entitled  "The  History  and  Current
    Position of Afghanistan's Hindu and Sikh Population".

15. The judge in the appeal made reference to the country guidance decision
    of SL and that he was bound to consider it, but that  he  could  depart
    from the country guidance if the position had changed.  He  noted  that
    in SL the Tribunal had relied on figures given to them concluding  that
    the Sikh and Hindu communities were in a total in the  region  of  some
    20,000 persons of whom a substantial proportion were within  Kabul  and
    that against those numbers the specific  cases  cited  to  it  did  not
    support a risk of persecution in general to the  entire  community  but
    rather pointed to the conclusion  that  they  were  simply  victims  of
    random opportunistic acts.  After considering all the material that was
    before him, including the report of Dr  Giustozzi,  the  report  of  Dr
    Ballard and the decision by  Collins  J  alongside  the  other  country
    materials, led the judge to  conclude  that  he  was  entitled  in  the
    circumstances  to  depart  from  the  country  guidance   of   SL   and
    consequently allowed the appeal.

16. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  that  decision  on
    similar grounds to  the  grounds  argued  before  this  Tribunal.   The
    Tribunal by reference to the Practice Direction and the  Guidance  Note
    reached the conclusion that the judge  had  directed  himself  entirely
    appropriately and that it was open to the judge "in the  light  of  the
    glaring differences in the figures (3,700  as  opposed  to  20,000)  to
    consider the Tribunal figures in  SL  were  significantly  wrong."   In
    those circumstances the Tribunal  was  satisfied  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to depart from the country guidance case and that he had given
    adequate reasons for doing so.

17. It is plain from the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  in  this
    appeal that  the  judge  gave  careful  consideration  to  the  country
    guidance decision of SL at paragraph 38 and did so in the light of  the
    submissions made by Counsel and on  the  same  footing  as  those  made
    before the Tribunal in DSG, namely that the country  guidance  decision
    of SL should not be followed given the discrepancy in  respect  of  the
    numbers concerning Sikhs in Afghanistan.  The judge also considered the
    country guidance decision in the light of  the  large  volume  of  more
    recent material that was before him which included the report  from  Dr
    Ballard, the  decision  of  Collins  J  in  Luthra  and  other  country
    materials (I refer to paragraph 39).  Having considered the contents of
    what he  described  as  "substantial  documentation",  he  reached  the
    conclusion that the Sikh population in Afghanistan was now considerably
    smaller than it was assumed to be at the time of the  country  guidance
    in SL.  He said this at paragraph 42:-

         "42. I am satisfied on the basis of substantial documentation, some
             of which I have referred  to,  that  the  Sikh  population  in
             Afghanistan is now considerably smaller than it was assumed to
             be at the time of the country guidance case of  SL  v  Others.
             Indications  vary  in  the  documentation,  the  most   recent
             indication being in the order of 3,000 Sikhs still  living  in
             Afghanistan.  Dr Ballard in his conclusions has given  a  full
             analysis of the difficulties in making a  precise  assessment,
             but the evidence indicates that the current Sikh population is
             closer to 3,000 rather than the 20,000 which it was considered
             to be at the time of SL v  Others,  namely  in  the  order  of
             20,000.  What is clear from the background  documentation  and
             in particular from the evidence of Dr  Ballard  which  I  have
             cited is  that  discrimination  against  Sikhs,  physical  and
             verbal abuse of Sikhs, the fear of Sikhs of various  forms  of
             retaliation if they were to pursue for example land  disputes,
             restitutions,  continues  virtually  unabated.    Dr   Ballard
             concludes that the remaining members  of  the  Sikh  community
             find   themselves   furthermore   vulnerable   to   aggressive
             exploitation against which they have no meaningful defence.

         43.  I have  concluded  therefore  that  the  evidence  is  now  so
             substantial that the basis for the conclusions in the case  of
             SL v Others no longer holds.  On the  basis  of  the  evidence
             before me, the Sikh community in Afghanistan  is  facing  such
             forms of discrimination, abuse and ill-treatment which I  find
             can only amount to persecution.  The reduction in numbers over
             the years confirms the Sikhs themselves can no longer tolerate
             the situation and have used whatever means  are  available  to
             leave their homes to escape such persecution."

18. Those paragraphs have to be read in the light of  the  judge's  earlier
    recitation of the parts of the documentation and  material  before  him
    that he had set out at paragraphs 38 to 40.  Thus the  judge  concluded
    that were the Appellant and members of his  family  now  to  return  to
    Afghanistan that they would face a general level of persecution against
    people of their faith as Sikhs which they would not be able  to  escape
    and that from which they would have no protection provided for them  by
    the authorities as the evidence did not demonstrate that.

19. In the light of the decision of DSG (as cited) the judge  was  entitled
    to depart from the country guidance case in SL for the reasons that  he
    gave.  It was entirely open to the  judge  to  do  so  because  of  the
    distinctive  and  different  nature  of  the  background  material  and
    evidence that was provided before him.   It  is  also  plain  from  the
    determination that the judge gave  careful  consideration  to  what  is
    described as the "substantial documentation" before him concerning  the
    present risks faced by Sikhs returning to Afghanistan and place weight,
    as he was entitled to do on that evidence including the  report  of  Dr
    Ballard which he set out at paragraphs 40 and  42  where  he  described
    discrimination, physical and verbal abuse of Sikhs which was continuing
    "virtually unabated" and that those remaining members  were  vulnerable
    to aggressive exploitation against which they had no meaningful defence
    nor any level of protection.

20. Thus the judge concluded at paragraph 44  that  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him, which have  not  been  the  subject  of  challenge
    before this Tribunal by the Secretary of  State,  that  the  Appellants
    would be at risk of persecution on return to Afghanistan.

21. Those findings were entirely sustainable ones and were open to  him  on
    his assessment of  the  material  that  had  been  placed  before  him,
    including the expert evidence which the  Secretary  of  State  has  not
    challenged by the submission of any other report.  I am satisfied  that
    the judge gave adequate reasons for reaching this decision which can be
    seen at paragraphs 38 to 44 of the determination.  Whilst the Secretary
    of State in the grounds has said that they were "inadequate"  that  has
    not been explained any further by reference to  the  determination  and
    consequently, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated that the
    judge erred in law and his decision allowing the appeals shall stand.

Decision
    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law; the decision shall stand.  The appeals  are
    allowed.






Signed                              Date: 20/6/2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
