

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/04919/2013
      AA/04920/2013; AA/04921/2013; AA/04922/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 1st June 2016                              |On 7th June 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between
                                   GS (1)
                                   SK (2)
                                   JK (3)
                                   KS (4)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms T. Lay of counsel, instructed by Legal Justice,
solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S. Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The appellants have  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  a
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Reed who, by a decision dated 24
      June 2013, dismissed their appeal against  the  immigration  decisions
      that accompanied the decision of the Secretary of State,  made  on  17
      May 2013, to refuse their asylum  and  human  rights  claim.  Although
      permission to appeal was granted as long ago as 15  August  2013,  the
      journey of this appeal through the Upper Tribunal has been regrettably
      delayed pending fresh country guidance relevant to the issues  arising
      in  this  appeal,  now  published  as  TG  and  others  (Afghan  Sikhs
      persecuted) Afghanistan [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC).

   2. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal came eventually before Upper Tribunal
      Judge Plimmer on 24 August 2015, although the fresh  country  guidance
      had still not by then become available. Judge  Plimmer,  who  made  an
      anonymity order that remains  in  place,  found  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had made an error of law material to the outcome of the
      appeal and so she set aside his decision and adjourned the  appeal  to
      be resumed once fresh country guidance, the publication of  which  was
      thought to be imminent, was available. It is helpful to set out  first
      her summary of the issues before her:

           "This is a matter that has previously been considered by  First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Reed.  He dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
           in a decision dated 24 June 2013.  Judge Reed did not accept the
           appellant's claim to have been specifically targeted  whilst  in
           Afghanistan.  The Judge went on to consider the general risk for
           Sikhs in Afghanistan but concluded that he  was  not  minded  to
           depart  from  SL  and  others  (returning  Sikhs   and   Hindus)
           Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137.   The  appeal  was  therefore
           dismissed.


           In a decision dated 15 August 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul
           considered it arguable that Judge Reed failed to give sufficient
           weight to the material contained in DSG (Afghan Sikhs: departure
           from CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148 (IAC).


           The matter was then stayed in order to await the promulgation of
           a CG case on Sikhs in Afghanistan,  which  was  heard  in  March
           2014.  That decision is now understood to be imminently due  for
           promulgation after a further hearing held in August 2015.   Both
           representatives however agree that it is appropriate for  me  to
           consider whether or not the decision contains an error of law in
           advance of the promulgation of the CG decision."

   3. As can be seen from Judge Plimmer's decision, which is annexed  below,
      before the First-tier Tribunal (which, incidentally, is focussed  upon
      the claim of the first appellant  but  plainly  addresses  the  claims
      brought by each of the appellants) the appellants pursued two  grounds
      of appeal. First, they  asserted  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
      rejecting  as  untrue  their  claim  to  have  been  specifically  and
      individually  targeted  by  men  working  for  a  powerful  war   lord
      identified  as  "Mohammed  Khwaja  Nabi"  because  his  reasoning  for
      reaching that adverse credibility  finding  was  said  to  be  legally
      insufficient. The second ground was summarised by Judge Plimmer  as  a
      complaint that the Judge erred  in  law  in  requiring  further  fresh
      evidence to support the submission that SL should not be followed when
      that very material is contained within the decision of DSG.


   4. Judge Plimmer accepted that the second ground was made out and on that
      basis set aside the decision to be  re-made  once  the  fresh  country
      guidance was available.  Should it be necessary for me  to  do  so,  I
      record that this error of law applies also to the decisions to dismiss
      the appeals of the second, third and fourth appellants so  that  those
      decisions are to be remade also. However, Judge Plimmer did not accept
      that the adverse credibility findings disclosed legal error and so she
      directed that the appeal was to be re-determined on the basis  of  the
      facts in relation to the circumstances of the appellants as they  were
      found to be by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.  That  meant  that  the
      account offered by the first and second appellants relating to claimed
      adverse attention from men associated with a local war lord is  to  be
      regarded as untrue.

   5. Today, Mr Lay seeks to  reopen  those  credibility  issues.   That  is
      because, he submits, it can now be seen  that  the  judge  was  simply
      wrong to doubt the existence of  a  powerful  war  lord  named  "Khuja
      Nabi", submitting that the fact of the differences  between  how  that
      name is spelt in the written and oral evidence before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and how  it  is  spelt  in  Dr  Giustozzi's  two  reports  is
      immaterial.


   6. Dr Giustozzi gave evidence before the Tribunal  in  TG  &  others.  He
      provided a report to the Tribunal, an extract of which was  reproduced
      at paragraph 36 of the country guidance judgment, with emphasis added:

           "There are plenty of criminal gangs in Afghanistan and the  most
           active and famous among them operate in  and  around  Kabul  and
           have often been targeting Sikhs. The network of  former  militia
           commanders in control of Parwan is known as the  'Parwan  Mafia'
           which rotates around characters such as the former  Minister  of
           Interior, Zarar Moqbel Ahmad,  Abdul  Basir  Salangi  (Chief  of
           Police of Kabul in 2003), Ayub Salangi (former Chief  of  Police
           of Kabul and currently Deputy Minister of  Interior),  Amanullah
           Guzar (former Chief of Police of Kabul), Haji Almas  (Member  of
           Parliament) and Maulana Sayyidkhel (former Chief  of  Police  of
           Parwan and Kunduz, now dead). Through a cousin of  Zarar,  Khuja
           Nabi, the  network  maintains  contact  with  two  of  the  most
           important criminal gangs in Kabul, those led by  Rais  Khodaidad
           and Habib Estalifi, a fact which allows the network to carry out
           targeted assassination and other operations against  rivals  and
           enemies. In Nangarhar  province  one  of  the  main  sources  of
           criminal violence have been the militias of Hazarat Ali. Attacks
           took  place  wherever  Sikh  or  Hindu  communities  existed  in
           Afghanistan, including Kabul, where  a  commander  of  Jamiat-i-
           Islami, Rahim, was  even  sentenced  to  death  for  his  crimes
           against Sikhs and others, but managed to evade execution due  to
           his connections. Rahim is the only known case of somebody having
           been prosecuted for an attack on Sikhs."

   7. The  judge,  who  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  first  and  second
      appellants, gave a number of reasons  for  rejecting  the  account  of
      harassment by men associated with a war lord named Nabi.  It  was  not
      just that there was no documentary evidence offered of  the  existence
      of this person, which the judge found not credible if he were in  fact
      a powerful and dangerous war lord. Quite apart from  this,  the  judge
      did not accept to be credible that ruthless men associated with such a
      powerful man, able to act with impunity in taking money from  whomever
      they chose and, literally, getting away with murder, would be deterred
      from entering the appellants' home just because they shouted at  them,
      as the appellants had described in their evidence. Also,  for  similar
      reasons, the judge did not accept to be true the appellants'  evidence
      of Nabi having gone to the police to  file  a  complaint  against  the
      first appellant in order to have him  arrested.  That  was  because  a
      powerful war lord who could have his  enemies  killed  with  impunity,
      would not need to have resort to the police in order to have an  enemy
      or opponent removed.


   8.  The  judge  was  reinforced  in  rejecting  as  untrue  the   claimed
      persecutory harassment at the hands of Nabi's men by  the  implausible
      chronology of events asserted in the appellants' evidence.  The  event
      that led to the decision to leave  Afghanistan  was  said  to  be  the
      murder by Nabi's men of the first appellant's  brother  in  a  botched
      kidnap attempt. This took place, according to the appellants, in  late
      February or early March 2013,  approximately  18  months  before  they
      finally departed from Afghanistan. It was claimed that  Nabi  filed  a
      police complaint against the first appellant in response to him having
      reported to police the shooting of his brother. However, this was said
      not to have been done until 30 May 2013. Quite  apart  from  the  fact
      that it was not found to be credible that a powerful  war  lord  would
      seek to protect himself against  a  vulnerable  individual  by  filing
      against him a false police complaint, the judge found lacking  in  all
      credibility that he would wait so long to do so, if he  was  motivated
      to do so.

   9. The judge gave further reasons still  for  rejecting  the  appellants'
      factual account as untrue. The first appellant sought to rely  upon  a
      letter from the Gurdwara in Kabul responding to an enquiry  about  the
      whereabouts of his father, the response being that the family  was  no
      longer in Afghanistan. But as the first appellant had sold the  family
      home to fund the journey to the United Kingdom, he already  knew  that
      his father would no longer be in Afghanistan and so he had  no  reason
      to make such an enquiry of the Gurdwara in Kabul. Indeed, the evidence
      of the first and second appellants is that they all travelled together
      to Pakistan, the plan being that the agent who arranged their  journey
      would arrange for his other relatives to  follow  him  to  the  United
      Kingdom. At question 5 of the asylum interview GS confirmed  that  his
      father was then in Lahore. Therefore, the judge found that the  letter
      from the Gurdwara, which referred also to having seen a  copy  of  the
      police complaint made by Nabi, was "contrived  merely  to  assist  the
      appellants in the appeal".

  10. The First-tier Tribunal judge was plainly entitled to find the account
      of persecutory harassment by Nabi's men  to  be  untrue.  That  was  a
      rational conclusion open to the judge on the evidence  in  respect  of
      which he gave clear and legally sufficient  reasons.  Mr  Lay  submits
      that, even accepting that those findings were open to  the  judge  who
      dismissed the appeal, the evidence  provided  by  Dr  Giustozzi,  that
      became available only after the decisions of both Judge Reed and Judge
      Plimmer, "directly addresses the lacuna in the evidence which  led  to
      the appellants' appeals being dismissed" so that the Upper Tribunal is
      now entitled to revisit those credibility findings.


  11.  It is, in my judgment,  inconceivable  that  Judge  Reed  would  have
      reached any different conclusion even if he had the benefit of knowing
      what is now said by Dr Giustozzi in his reports about a war lord  with
      a name similar to that identified by the appellants. Even if  Mohammad
      Khwaja Nabi (the person identified in the appellants' evidence  before
      the First-tier Tribunal) and Khuja Nabi (the person referred to by  Dr
      Giustozzi) are accepted to  be  one  and  the  same,  the  account  of
      persecution or harassment by men  claiming  to  act  in  his  name  is
      lacking in all credibility, as the  judge  has  found.  The  more  one
      examines that account the more it becomes little short of fanciful. In
      his original witness statement the first appellant set out an  account
      of the asserted visit to his shop by Nabi's men:


           "On the day when Khwaja's Nabi's men came to my shop, I was told
           by my father and brother that they demanded huge sums of  money.
           My father questioned them as to why they were harassing them and
           asking for money. In response he was told that they would  leave
           us alone if we change our religion to Islam. Before leaving,  my
           brother was pushed to the wall and warned him that  we  i.e.  my
           father, brother and I will not get away with this. They  further
           warned: "you don't realise  but  you  are  messing  with  Khwaja
           Nabi's people and you will repent this!"


      From which it seems that this group of ruthless armed men, who  had  a
      reputation of acting with complete impunity and had arrived to  demand
      money from these defenceless Sikh traders occupying it, left the  shop
      empty handed after the  appellant's  father  had  simply  refused  the
      demand. It is entirely unsurprising that the judge did not accept that
      to be a truthful account of an event that had in fact occurred.


  12. It follows that there is no reason to revisit or reopen  the  decision
      of Judge Plimmer that the findings of fact made by Judge Reed  are  to
      stand.


  13. In order to inform the remaking of the decision  in  these  appeals  I
      have heard oral evidence from the first three appellants and  received
      submissions from both representatives.


      Oral evidence of Mr GS


  14. GS adopted his "consolidated statement" and gave oral  evidence  about
      his circumstances in the United Kingdom and how they would  be  should
      he return to Afghanistan with his family. He said  he  had  no  family
      members or other relatives remaining in Afghanistan, not even  distant
      relatives. He had only lived in Parwan.  In  Afghanistan  he  and  his
      family had lived with his own parents and a brother in the family home
      that had been owned for generations by his family. He  rented  a  shop
      elsewhere in Parwan that had been acquired by his father when  he  was
      about 10 years old. In 2012 they left Afghanistan and after a stay  of
      1 �  months or so in Pakistan he, his wife and two children  travelled
      to the United Kingdom, their journey being arranged by the Muslim  man
      to whom the family home had  been  transferred  in  consideration  for
      having done so. GS said that the house was worth about $  US  100,000,
      although had he tried to sell the house himself, he  would  only  have
      realised half that sum because a Sikh  trying  to  sell  property  was
      exploited by the Muslim community who would not pay what the  property
      was worth. $ US 100,000 was the cost of having an agent arranging  for
      him and his children and his parents and  brother  to  travel  to  the
      United Kingdom but his parents  and  brother,  who  were  supposed  to
      follow,  never arrived from Pakistan and he now does  not  know  where
      they are.


  15. On arrival in the United Kingdom he and  his  family  first  lived  in
      Doncaster but then moved to Heston where he and his family live with a
      another family whose hospitality has accommodated them without payment
      and enabled them to live adequately on NASS support.  He  has  a  wide
      range of relatives living in the United Kingdom. Initially,  his  oral
      evidence was that he  cannot  look  to  any  of  those  relatives  for
      financial assistance should he return to Afghanistan because all  were
      in receipt of benefits and so could not assist, but went on  to  agree
      that at least one relative was in employment, that being  his  brother
      in law who worked in an off licence.  He said that  he  has  no  money
      left from living and working in Afghanistan. When he gave up his  shop
      he simply surrendered the lease to the landlord, who he described as a
      "good man" and gave up also the remaining stock for no payment.


  16.  GS  gave  evidence  concerning  arrangements  with  his  landlord  in
      Afghanistan which I found to be wholly lacking in  credibility.  Asked
      why, especially as he regarded his landlord as a good  man,  he  would
      not on return be able to re-open his shop, he said that  his  landlord
      had died and his sons now controlled the property. He  said  that  his
      landlord's children, who are "connected with the police" would want to
      run the shop themselves and so he would be unable to recover it.  When
      asked how he knew this, as he had said that he  had  no  contact  with
      anyone in Parwan, he said that his landlord had died not after he  had
      left  Afghanistan,  as  I  had  understood  his  account  to  be  when
      explaining how he surrendered without  payment  to  his  landlord  the
      stock remaining in the shop, but  while  they  were  still  living  in
      Afghanistan. However, he offered no explanation as  to  why,  if  that
      were so, those sons of the Landlord, if they had  wanted  to  run  the
      shop themselves, had chosen instead to allow him to  remain  until  he
      decided to vacate the shop.


  17. This evidence of GS is of interest for another reason also. As he does
      not claim to have  experienced any problems at  all  from  his  former
      landlord, that demonstrates that it was possible for him to secure and
      retain commercial premises from  a  non-Sikh  landlord  and  that  the
      arrangement came to an end not because of any pressure  to  leave  but
      because the appellant chose to  give  up  possession.  That  does  not
      establish that upon return he would be unable to  find  another  like-
      minded landlord from whom to rent property, even if,  as  the  country
      guidance  indicates,  many  landlords  would  refuse  to  rent   their
      properties to a Sikh tenant.


  18. His daughter was 11 years old  when  they  arrived  in  Doncaster.  He
      described how she had first attended primary school and then commenced
      her secondary education before they moved to London since when she has
      been at school there. She quickly mastered the English  language.  She
      is happy and doing well whereas she had not been able to go to  school
      in Afghanistan and her education could not continue should she  return
      there.


  19. GS said that if he had to return to Afghanistan he would have no  home
      and would not be able to re-establish the business he  had  previously
      run because those who now own it will want to run the shop themselves.
      He will have no access to remittances from  relatives  in  the  United
      Kingdom and so he and his family would be destitute.


  20. Having heard GS give oral evidence I have no doubt at all that  little
      reliance can be placed upon his account of events either  here  or  in
      Afghanistan. I am not satisfied that he has given an accurate  account
      of the circumstances of the relatives he has who are now living in the
      United Kingdom. Having said initially that they "are all on  benefits"
      he conceded, as he  had  no  option  but  to,  given  the  documentary
      evidence available, that  one  at  least  was  in  stable  employment,
      although the level of his income is reflected in the fact that  he  is
      in receipt also of working tax credit. In one sense, of  course,  that
      relative also is "on benefits" but in  the  context  of  the  question
      being answered this was a reply designed, in my judgement, to disguise
      the fact that he at least was  in employment. The fact that a  friend,
      not a relative, has provided GS and his family with free accommodation
      since they moved to London is  such  as  to  evidence  that  the  Sikh
      community is both willing and able to provide support for GS  and  his
      family. There is no reason at all  to  suppose  that  they  would  not
      continue to do so should he return to Afghanistan, especially as it is
      clear also that channels of  communication  remain  open  through  the
      Gurdwara. The appellant said that the congregation of the Gurdwara  he
      and his family attend each week is between 4,000-6,000.


      Oral evidence of Mrs SK


  21. SK also adopted her witness statement, the content of which I have had
      regard to. She explained that she had lived in Kabul until married  to
      the first appellant in 2001 when she moved to live with him in Parwan.
      She has no family or other relatives remaining in Kabul  or  elsewhere
      in Afghanistan. She said that most of those relatives have also  moved
      to the United Kingdom although some have moved  elsewhere  on  leaving
      Afghanistan. In particular her mother and brother are here. There  are
      a number of aunts, uncles and cousins here.


  22. She described how in Parawan she was  "not  permitted"  to  leave  the
      house. The children did not leave the house either. She said that  she
      "could not go out". This was an embellishment  of  the  true  position
      because as her evidence was developed it became clear that she went to
      the Sikh Temple each month and to the doctor when necessary. In  cross
      examination she said that when she went out to the Sikh Temple  or  to
      the shops she went out with "full veil".  She  spoke  of  visits  from
      other Sikh families but these were said to be rare.


  23. SK said that since coming to the United Kingdom "I have realised  what
      life is". In Parwan neither her son nor her daughter had been able  to
      go to school and so received  no  education.  She  said,  as  did  her
      husband, that should they return they would have no money and none  of
      her relatives here had the  resources  to  provide  financial  support
      because they were all on benefits. Again, that was evidence  that  was
      not completely truthful because, as she accepted in cross examination,
      her brother works in a shop. As her evidence has been demonstrated  to
      be inaccurate in  respect  of  that  individual  I  cannot  accept  as
      reliable her evidence concerning her  other  relatives  and  so  their
      economic circumstances are,  at  best,  unknown  and  unsubstantiated.
      Considering SK's evidence in the round, I do not accept that  she  has
      given a truthful account of the economic  circumstances  of  the  wide
      range of relatives to whom  she  can  look  for  support,  by  way  of
      financial remittances, should she return to Afghanistan.


  24. I have no doubt at all that in her oral evidence, which of  course  is
      to be considered in the context of the evidence as a whole,  including
      her  own  witness  statements,  the  account  given  by  SK   of   the
      difficulties actually experienced was an exaggeration. She  said  that
      her children were at risk should they leave the house. She  said  also
      "when we went out the Muslims  would  come  and  beat  us  up".  I  am
      entirely satisfied that in her evidence SK was describing  that  which
      she thought might  happen  to  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan,  not  what  had
      actually happened to her and her children.


      Oral evidence of JK


  25. JK, who is now 14 years old, gave evidence in a fluent, confident  and
      coherent manner. Unlike her parents, she required no  interpreter  and
      her command of the English language is complete. I found her to be  an
      impressive witness and I have no hesitation in accepting as  true  all
      that she said about that which she herself had experienced, as opposed
      to what she had been told by others. She  described  how,  soon  after
      arriving in the United Kingdom with her family, speaking only Punjabi,
      she attended first a primary school in Doncaster and then a  secondary
      school. She is now in year 9 of a secondary school in London. She  had
      not  attended  any  school  nor  received  any  formal  education   in
      Afghanistan  and  her  first   few   weeks   at   school   her   were,
      unsurprisingly, difficult.


  26. JK said that unlike in Afghanistan where "no one taught me  anything",
      she said that "obviously" she  had  a  better  future  in  the  United
      Kingdom as here she will get an education and is very happy. She  said
      that she does not like to talk about life in  Afghanistan  because  it
      makes her feel depressed and upset. In Afghanistan she was not allowed
      to leave the house, save for rarely going to the Gurdwara or to  visit
      the doctor, as it was a risk to go out. Conversely, here she is  happy
      and has lots of friends.


      Submissions


  27. In his skeleton argument, Mr Lay sets out  the  basis  upon  which  he
      submitted  the  appellants  should  each  succeed  in  their  appeals,
      recognising that different issues arise in respect of each appellant:



        a. Even if the historic account is  not  accepted,  the  appellants
           still face a real risk of  persecution  and/or  Article  3  ECHR
           breach if returned to Afghanistan owing to conditions (including
           and/or especially for Sikhs) prevailing in  the  country  as  of
           2016;

        b.  In  the  alternative,  the  family  would  plainly  face  "very
           significant obstacles to integration"  in  Parwan  and/or  Kabul
           given present country conditions and therefore  rule  276ADE(vi)
           is made out;

        c. The family has been in the UK since March 2013 and removal would
           be a breach of Article 8 ECHR, having due  regard  to  the  best
           interests of  the  children,  the  network  of  extended  family
           support they enjoy in the UK and the conditions  in  Afghanistan
           prevailing for Afghan Sikhs in general.


  28. In his oral submissions and in discussion following the oral evidence,
      the case being advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellants  became  more
      nuanced. In respect of the protection claim, Mr Lay focussed upon  the
      position of the children, and upon the elder daughter  in  particular.
      Realistically, he accepted that in the light of the rejection  of  the
      claim of  targeted  persecution  and  in  the  light  of  the  country
      guidance, it was not possible to identify an arguable basis upon which
      the  first  and  second  appellants  could  qualify  for  asylum.   He
      recognised also that, again realistically, it would be very  difficult
      indeed to establish in respect of a person who could not  qualify  for
      asylum that, again given the country guidance to be  applied,  such  a
      person could establish on the basis of country conditions  that  there
      were very significant obstacles to integration on return. In Mr  Lay's
      submission the appellants should, at the very least,  succeed  to  the
      extent that both children should be recognised as refugees, and  their
      parents should succeed under 276ADE and on the basis that there  would
      be an impermissible infringement of rights protected by article  8  of
      the ECHR if the parents were not granted leave to  remain  with  their
      children in the United Kingdom.

  29. Mr Lay submits there is real significance in the fact that in  respect
      of the appellants with whose claim the country guidance case of  TG  &
      others was concerned, the  Secretary  of  State  conceded  that  their
      claims under Article 8 should succeed.


  30. Mr Lay submitted that the evidence demonstrated that it was reasonably
      likely that on  return  to  Parwan  the  family  would  not  have  the
      resources to pay for the children to be educated in a  special  school
      where, as Sikh children,  they  would  be  able  to  avoid  the  risks
      identified in the country guidance. In TG & others a  distinction  was
      drawn between a family that had access to support from family  members
      and one that did not. In support of his submission that  the  children
      should be recognised as refugees he referred to paragraphs 110-111  of
      TG & others which, in the context of  this  particular  appeal  is  of
      particular significance and so I reproduce  those  two  paragraphs  in
      full:


           "A family without adequate resources is unlikely to be  able  to
           pay for private education which may be relevant when considering
           the situation of Sikh and Hindu children in Afghanistan whom  it
           is  proposed  to  return  if   receiving   such   education   is
           demonstrated to be fundamental to that person's identity.  There
           is also evidence that a Muslim is unlikely to employ a member of
           the Sikh or Hindu community in place of a Muslim, out of fear of
           potential reprisal or loss of business, indicating  difficulties
           in securing an  income  with  which  to  fund  accommodation  or
           essentials such as food, heating, clothing. The evidence we have
           been able to consider indicates that there  is  nothing  in  the
           law, the  attitude  of  the  Afghan  government,  or  in  theory
           preventing a member of either of these faith groups returned  to
           Afghanistan from being able to set up their own  businesses  but
           whether they are able to do so will depend upon the availability
           of adequate funding, their ability to secure  business  premises
           in the light of possible hostility  or  opposition  from  Muslim
           traders who may see them as competition  or  not  wish  to  rent
           premises out to them, making it difficult  for  them  to  pursue
           what  has  now  become  the  remaining  traditional   trade   of
           shopkeeper/trader. Whether an individual is in such  a  position
           is fact specific and they will have to satisfy the Tribunal that
           they are without economic means especially if they have  paid  a
           considerable sum of money to come to the  United  Kingdom,  that
           they will not be able to re-establish  themselves  economically,
           and the impact upon family members as a result. Such individuals
           may also be required to provide  appropriate  evidence  to  show
           that there are no alternatives such as being supported  by  NGOs
           or through the Gurdwara  and  that  any  impact  upon  them,  if
           destitution is alleged, is such that the threshold of Article  3
           ECHR will be breached.


           In relation to families with children  it  may  be  possible  to
           establish that it is not in the best interests of such  children
           to be returned, even if  the  threshold  of  Article  3  is  not
           breached, if the degree of hardship and destitution is such that
           it leads to unjustifiably harsh consequences on return for  such
           family members. As with all cases any  assessment  of  the  best
           interests of children will  have  to  be  balanced  against  the
           public interest if it is  a  consideration  of  a  private  life
           argument."

  31. For the respondent, Mr Kotas submitted that application to  the  facts
      of this appeal delivered only one answer, which is  that  the  appeals
      should not succeed. He drew upon the findings of the country  guidance
      case of TG & others in support. At paragraph 81:


           "We find... that there is no clear evidence  of  official  state
           sponsored persecution to the extent that  there  may  have  been
           with previous governments in Afghanistan"

      At paragraph 83:

           "Notwithstanding  the  evidence  of  incidents   of   continuing
           hostility against some members of the Sikh and Hindu  community,
           we do not find it established on the  evidence  that  merely  by
           reason of being a Sikh or Hindu in Afghanistan there is  a  real
           risk of serious harm from non-state actors in  Afghanistan  even
           to the lower standard of proof applicable  to  appeals  of  this
           nature...
           ...We also note that there have been some limited  returns  from
           India who wish to conduct business  activities  in  Afghanistan.
           This lends support to our view that hostilities against  members
           of the Sikh and Hindu communities have not escalated and in fact
           have reduced in frequency."

      And at paragraph 89:

           "It is clear that a Hindu or Sikh Afghan  male  is  able  to  go
           about his day-to-day business although he may from time to  time
           be the subject to verbal abuse  and  harassment.  If  he  has  a
           business and property there is a  risk  of  being  subjected  to
           demands for money by way of extortion by corrupt individuals and
           in extreme  circumstances  may  be  subjected  to  further  more
           serious threats or acts of violence. Such incidents are rare now
           as the most valuable properties are seen to  have  already  been
           taken away from Sikhs. Whether such  events  or  combination  of
           these  events  and  other  forms  of  discrimination  amount  to
           persecution such as to entitle  an  individual  to  a  grant  of
           international protection is fact sensitive, and will depend upon
           the  individual's   particular   characteristics,   wealth   and
           background.


      Mr Kotas did not seek to dispute that the female members of the family
      would face certain restrictions in Afghanistan such as being unable to
      leave the home unaccompanied or  "properly  attired"  but  pointed  to
      paragraph 92 of the country guidance where it was noted that such  was
      required of Muslim  women  as  well.  SK  would  not,  of  course,  be
      returning as a lone woman, with the attendant  risks  associated  with
      that status, but with the protection of her husband.


  32. Mr Kotas accepted that if the children succeed in their  asylum  claim
      then their parents should succeed to the extent that there would be an
      impermissible infringement of article 8 of the ECHR if they could  not
      remain with them in the United Kingdom  even  though  they  could  not
      succeed on any basis if their claims are considered in isolation.


      Discussion


  33. In reaching these findings of fact, set out above, I have  had  regard
      to all of the  documentary  evidence  relied  upon,  particularly  the
      recent report provided by  Dr  Giustozzi,  dated  10  April  2016.  At
      paragraph 10 of that report Dr Giustozzi concludes that,  in  view  of
      the evidence of the existence of Khwaja Nabi:


           "[GS's] claims of having been targeted for extortion  by  Khwaja
           Nabi are therefore plausible. "


      However, in taking to himself (which he  should  not  have  done)  the
      assessment of the credibility of GS's claim he appears to have had  no
      regard whatsoever to the reasons given by the respondent  in  refusing
      the claim or the judge  in  dismissing  the  appeal,  even  though  he
      claimed, at paragraph 2 of his report, to have read both  the  refusal
      letter and the decision of the judge.


  34. This is particularly unfortunate because he has been subject  to  this
      criticism twice before.   At  paragraph  175  of  AK  (Article  15(c))
      Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163(IAC) the Upper Tribunal observed:


           "At para 76 of GS the Tribunal noted that his  report  for  that
           appeal was of limited value "because  it  was  prepared  on  the
           assumption that the appellant's fear of Gul  Karim  [a  warlord]
           and land grabs was correct".  It is somewhat unfortunate to find
           that Dr Giustozzi's report prepared  for  this  appeal  makes  a
           similar misplaced  assumption  in  respect  of  the  appellant's
           claimed fear of a different warlord.  Having noted that paras 4-
           18 of his report (and several other passages) appear to  address
           aspects of the appellant's  account  that  had  previously  been
           rejected, we asked to  see  the  letter  written  by  Blakemores
           formally instructing him.  It is clear from this letter that its
           author sought Dr Giustozzi's opinion not  only  on  the  country
           guidance issues the Tribunal had  identified  (to  consider  the
           current position  with  regard  to  Article  15(c)  and  whether
           Afghanistan had changed  since  GS)  but  also  the  appellant's
           original account. That is an unfortunate blemish on  the  firm's
           otherwise excellent preparation for and handling of this  appeal
           and in our view  it  largely  excuses  Dr  Giustozzi's  faithful
           attempt to respond.  That said, we concur with Mr Blundell  that
           the fact that Dr Giustozzi  devoted  space  to  the  appellant's
           account does not suggest that he had carried  out  in  full  the
           reading of all the case documents sent to him which he  said  he
           had done (see para 2  of  his  report),  since  those  documents
           included the First-tier Tribunal  decision  and  the  subsequent
           Upper Tribunal decision stating that the findings of fact of the
           First-tier Tribunal Judge were to stand."

  35. The respondent does not suggest that  country  conditions  for  Afghan
      Sikhs has improved since the evidence was examined by the Tribunal  in
      the recent country guidance  case.  The  appellants'  solicitors  have
      commissioned for this appeal the fresh report  from  Dr  Giustozzi  to
      which I have just referred. This report, which runs to some 36  pages,
      is dated 10 April 2016. It is hard, however, to see how this takes  us
      any further at all. As far as I can tell, the report is  founded  upon
      documentary evidence that pre-dated the decision in TG &  others  save
      for one single reference source, that being identified in footnotes as
      "interview with Avtar Singh, Kabul, February 2016". It is  clear  that
      Dr  Giustozzi  placed  significant  reliance  upon  this   source   of
      information as it features in no fewer than 10 footnotes.  Yet  we  do
      not have any details of that interview, its context or any  transcript
      of it. We can see from other  footnotes  that  Avtar  Singh  has  been
      described as "leader of the Sikh community in Kabul"  but  we  do  not
      know  who  carried  out  this  interview,  whether  a   recording   or
      contemporaneous note was taken of it  and  whether  a  transcript  was
      prepared or published.


  36.  These  claims  for  international  protection  are  to  be  assessed,
      therefore, on the basis that their individual facts  disclose  nothing
      in addition to the fact that this is a family of Sikhs who disposed of
      all they owned in Parwan in 2012 in order to fund their journey to the
      United Kingdom, and that the two children, one of whom is a girl,  did
      not have access to any education before they left. It does not  appear
      to be in dispute that the decision not to send the children to  school
      was founded upon a reasonably held fear that  if  they  were  sent  to
      school they would face, on account of being Sikh children, harassment,
      discrimination and other ill-treatment. If it is necessary for  me  to
      do so, I record that this is not a case where children were kept  away
      from school in order to work in a family business.  This  chimes  with
      the country guidance given in TG and others at paragraph 94:


           "In relation to Sikh and Hindu children a  number  of  areas  of
           concern arise from the evidence we have been asked to  consider.
           The evidence indicates that there have been occasions  of  Hindu
           and Sikh families  not  sending  their  children  to  school  in
           Afghanistan, especially girls,  as  a  result  of  the  fear  of
           harassment  and  ill-treatment  which  is  corroborated  by  the
           evidence.  Within  the  state  system  where  children  of   all
           denominations are taught there is evidence  of  requirements  to
           learn and recite the Koran, discrimination, and lack of adequate
           education facilities. In areas where numbers  warrant,  such  as
           Kabul, special schools have been set up to provide education for
           children by Sikh teachers and some children  are  taught  within
           the Gurdwara as  a  result.  Such  education  is  only  provided
           however up to and including primary level with  the  requirement
           that at secondary level children will be taught within the state
           system where they become exposed to problems referred to in  the
           evidence unless an individual's family has the means to pay them
           to be educated privately. If credible evidence is provided of  a
           real risk of such ill-treatment and harassment  to  a  child  on
           return sufficient to prevent them receiving a proper  education,
           which is shown to be a fundamental  element  of  their  personal
           identity, that they wish to pursue,  rather  than  a  child  not
           being further educated as a result  of  the  traditional  belief
           that they will continue within a family business  and  therefore
           do not require to be further educated or for some other  reason,
           then this may amount to such serious  discrimination  either  on
           its own or cumulatively with other forms of discrimination  such
           as to cross the threshold of persecution.  However,  this  is  a
           fact sensitive issue that must be considered in each case."


  37. The fact that the eldest child was not sent to a  special  school  for
      Sikh children in  Afghanistan  before  the  family  departed  in  2012
      provides support for the  claim  that  there  were  then  insufficient
      financial  resources  to  do  so.  This  enables  the  appellants   to
      reasonably submit  that,  even  if  some  form  of  accommodation  and
      financial support can be obtained and provided after the family return
      to Afghanistan, as I have found to be the case, it is  not  reasonably
      likely that those resources will extend to cover the cost  of  private
      education for the children.  Therefore,  adopting  the  vocabulary  of
      paragraph 94 of  the  current  country  guidance,  this  will,  in  my
      judgment, amount to such serious discrimination either on its  own  or
      cumulatively with other forms of discrimination such as to  cross  the
      threshold  of  persecution.  As  that  persecution  is  for  a  reason
      recognised by the Refugee Convention and,  applying  the  guidance  at
      paragraph 90 of the country guidance and so recognising that, at least
      at local level, a sufficiency of protection is not available from  the
      authorities, it follows that the  two  children  are  entitled  to  be
      recognised as refugees and so, to that extent, their appeals  must  be
      allowed.


  38.  As  I  have  found  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  discriminatory
      disqualification from any access to education, taken together with the
      serious restriction upon their ability to engage in normal  activities
      outside the family home has crossed the  threshold  into  persecution,
      the serious harm that in  this  case  gives  rise  to  the  children's
      entitlement to be recognised as refugees is sufficient also to require
      that the children's appeal succeeds under article 3.  Given  that  the
      children succeed in the asylum appeal, it is not necessary to  address
      their claims under article 8 of the ECHR.


  39. I address next the position of their parents,  the  first  and  second
      appellants. Mr Kotas is plainly correct to concede  that  the  parents
      must succeed under article 8 simply on the basis that  their  children
      are to be recognised as refugees. However, in  respect  of  the  other
      grounds pursued, considered in isolation  from  the  outcome  of  this
      appeal for their children, they have not  established  that  they  are
      entitled to succeed.


  40. Given the facts as found considered in the light  of  current  country
      guidance the parents do not have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
      upon return simply on the basis of being Sikhs returning to  the  city
      they left in 2012 where the first appellant had lived  all  his  life.
      That is because the first and second appellants  have  chosen  to  put
      forward only an account of difficulties that  has  been  found  to  be
      untrue. Once that is set aside one is left only with the fact that the
      first appellant had lived and worked in Parwan with his family without
      experiencing any significant difficulties, even if he found commercial
      success in business increasingly difficult. I have accepted  that  the
      family home was made over to the agent who arranged their  journey  to
      the United Kingdom but, for the reasons given above, it has  not  been
      established that the first appellant would not be able  on  return  to
      recommence some form of business  activity,  funded  if  necessary  by
      financial support from the friends and relatives who would, I find  as
      a fact do whatever they could to support the  family  after  they  had
      returned to Afghanistan. Thus the asserted return  to  destitution  is
      not established.


  41. For the same reasons the first and second appellants  do  not  face  a
      real risk of being subjected to treatment such as to  bring  about  an
      infringement of article 3 of the ECHR and nor would they face the very
      significant obstacles to integration demanded by paragraph 276ADE(vi).



   Summary of decision:

  42. The appeals of the third and fourth appellants, JK and KS are  allowed
      on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds.


  43. The appeals of the  first  and  second  appellants,  GS  and  SK,  are
      dismissed on asylum  grounds  but  allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
      limited to article 8 of the ECHR.

      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    6 June 2016
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern



                                   ANNEX


         Error of law decision made by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04919/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 August 2015                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     GS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Lay (Counsel)
For the SSHD:     Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


   1. This decision refers to matters relevant  to  the  appellant's  asylum
      claim and I have  anonymised  it.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
      Afghanistan.  He arrived in the UK on 27 March 2013  with  his  family
      members and applied for asylum on the basis of  claimed  ill-treatment
      as a Sikh in Afghanistan.

Procedural history

   2. This is a matter that has previously  been  considered  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  Reed.   He  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  in  a
      decision  dated  24  June  2013.   Judge  Reed  did  not  accept   the
      appellant's  claim  to  have  been  specifically  targeted  whilst  in
      Afghanistan.  The Judge went on to consider the general risk for Sikhs
      in Afghanistan but concluded that he was not minded to depart from  SL
      and others (returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan  CG  [2005]  UKIAT
      00137.  The appeal was therefore dismissed.

   3. In a decision dated  15  August  2013  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
      considered it arguable that  Judge  Reed  failed  to  give  sufficient
      weight to the material contained in DSG (Afghan Sikhs: departure  from
      CG) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 148 (IAC).

   4. The matter was then stayed in order to await the promulgation of a  CG
      case on Sikhs in Afghanistan, which was heard  in  March  2014.   That
      decision is now understood to be imminently due for promulgation after
      a further hearing held in August 2015.  Both  representatives  however
      agree that it is appropriate for me to consider  whether  or  not  the
      decision contains an error of law in advance of  the  promulgation  of
      the CG decision.

Hearing

   5. Mr Lay relied upon  a  skeleton  argument  to  support  his  two  main
      submissions.  First, Judge Reed erred in law in providing insufficient
      reasoning for rejecting the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim.
      Second, the Judge erred in law in requiring further fresh evidence  to
      support the submission that SL should not be followed when  that  very
      material is contained within the decision of DSG.


   6. Mr Tarlow invited me to uphold the decision for the  reasons  set  out
      therein.  After hearing submissions, I reserved my decision,  which  I
      now provide with reasons.

Error of law


   7. I turn to Mr Lay's first submission: the Judge's credibility  findings
      are irrational and insufficiently reasoned.  The Judge was entitled to
      find for the reasons he provided that the appellant has  not  suffered
      in Afghanistan in the specific manner that he has claimed.  The  Judge
      was concerned that he was not taken  to  any  background  material  to
      support the power said  to  be  wielded  by  a  particular  individual
      [26(ii)].  The Judge was entitled to express  his  concern  about  the
      absence of this evidence, in circumstances where it was  claimed  that
      the individual was not just powerful in the appellant's home area  but
      that his influence extended to the government in Kabul.  The Judge was
      also entitled to regard certain aspects of the appellant's account  as
      implausible [26(iv) and (v)].


   8. Mr Lay asked me to find that Judge Reed made his credibility  findings
      without  properly  directing  himself  to  the   relevant   background
      evidence.  I do not accept this.  The Judge expressly directed himself
      to the background evidence as clearly demonstrating that Sikhs  suffer
      harassment and discrimination and there have been attacks on them [28]
      and had earlier summarised in some  detail  the  available  background
      evidence [23-24].  The Judge was therefore aware that the  appellant's
      claims were broadly consistent with the background evidence.

   9. I now turn to Mr Lay's second submission: the Judge erred  in  law  in
      simply following SL without considering DSG.  Judge Reed  was  clearly
      aware of DSG and referred to it twice [20 and  28].   However,  it  is
      very difficult to follow the Judge's reasoning that he  had  not  been
      provided with sufficient fresh evidence to cause him to depart from SL
      [28].  The important point accepted by the Tribunal in DSG is that the
      Tribunal's figures for the number of Sikhs in  Afghanistan  was  wrong
      and this impacted on the assessment of general risk.  The Tribunal  in
      DSG considered that "this  has  clear  implications  for  other  cases
      involving claimed risk on return to Afghanistan for Hindus and  Sikhs,
      in the period between now and such time as further country guidance on
      the subject can be issued".  In these  circumstances  Judge  Reed  was
      obliged to consider whether a returning  Sikh  with  this  appellant's
      characteristics (and those of his family members) may be  at  risk  on
      the basis of  the  material  available  to  him.   This  included  the
      information contained in  DSG  which  strongly  supported  a  need  to
      consider all the evidence available, rather than simply following  SL.
      To this limited extent, I accept that the decision contains  an  error
      of law.


  10. Mr Lay submitted that this error tainted the Judge's consideration  of
      credibility.  I do not accept this.  It is very clear that Judge  Reed
      was aware of the  general  background  evidence  and  his  credibility
      findings cannot be said to have ignored this.  Mr Lay  also  submitted
      that  Judge  Reed  demonstrated  an   'unevidenced   and   irrational'
      evaluation of the degree of impunity which a local  powerbroker  could
      be said to hold against Sikhs.  Mr Lay  was  concerned  that  such  an
      assessment would not have happened if the  Judge  properly  understood
      the importance of the  evidence  referred  to  in  DSG.   Mr  Lay  has
      misunderstood the Judge's concern at  [26(ii)}.   The  Judge  did  not
      doubt the degree of impunity a local power broker could  have  against
      Sikhs.  Indeed the Judge understood that there  had  been  attacks  on
      Sikhs [23, 24 and  29].   The  Judge  was  concerned  that  there  was
      insufficient evidence that the powerbroker in fact had the  power  the
      appellant claimed he had.  This  is  distinct  from  doubting  that  a
      powerful man may be able to wield that power over Sikhs.

Remittal

  11. Mr Lay asked me to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  even
      if I was against him on ground 1.  I have had regard to  para  7.2  of
      the Senior President's Practice Statements and the nature  and  extent
      of the factual findings required in remaking  the  decision.   I  have
      decided that the credibility findings shall  stand.   I  have  decided
      that this is not an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal is suitable  to  remake  the  decision
      with those credibility findings in mind.  Both representatives  agreed
      that this should only be done after the promulgation of  the  imminent
      CG decision and I have given directions to that effect.

Decision

  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law.  The decision to follow  SL  cannot  stand  and  is  set
      aside.

       13. The appeal shall be remade by the Upper Tribunal on the basis of
           the credibility findings made by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           and in light of the imminent CG case.

Directions

        1) Within 21 days of  the  promulgation  of  the  new  CG  case  on
           returned Sikhs to Afghanistan  the  appellant's  representatives
           shall file and serve a document setting out  its  position  with
           cross-referenced to that case.

        2) Within 21 days of receipt of those submissions  the  SSHD  shall
           file and serve its position cross-referenced to the CG case.

        3) The appeal shall be listed on the first available date  after  1
           November 2015.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
24 August 2015



