
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/04779/2014
                                                               AA/04782/2014
                                                               AA/04781/2014
                                                               AA/04780/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On March 31, 2016                    |On April 27, 2016                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MRS S S
                                  MASTER BS
                                 MASTER A S
                                  MISS A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by West Ham Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens  of  Pakistan.  On  October  15,  2011  the
    appellants arrived in the United Kingdom on visit visas having  entered
    on their own passports. They claimed asylum on February 21,  2012.  The
    first-named appellant was subsequently interviewed on  April  18,  2012
    and on July 1, 2014 they were refused asylum  under  paragraph  336  HC
    395. A decision to remove them  from  the  United  Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act
    1971 had previously been taken on February 27, 2012.

 2. The appellants appealed those decisions  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on July 11, 2014.

 3.  The  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davey
    (hereinafter referred to as the  Judge)  on  July  3,  2015  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on November 16, 2015 he  refused  the  appellants'
    appeals on all grounds.

 4. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on December 7, 2015  submitting
    the First-tier Judge had erred by failing to demonstrate he  had  dealt
    with all of the evidence in reaching his decision in the round and that
    there had been a lengthy delay in promulgating the decision.  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Astle gave permission  to  appeal  finding  the
    grounds arguable.

 5. A Rule 24 response was filed by the respondent on December 30, 2015  in
    which the respondent opposed the application.

 6. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives. Mr Iqbal accepted the delay in  promulgation
    was not sufficient, on its own, to show an error in law  but  submitted
    that the Judge's omissions were.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction  and  pursuant  to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I  extend
    that order in the light of the sensitive matters raised in this  appeal
    arising out of the appellant's  international  protection  claim.  This
    order prohibits the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant. Any disclosure in breach  of
    this order may amount to a contempt of court. This order  shall  remain
    in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Iqbal relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted for the  reasons
    contained therein and his oral submissions there was an  error  in  law
    and this matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  for  a  fresh
    hearing. Mr Iqbal drew my attention to the content of the Decision  and
    argued that the Judge had failed to set out anywhere  in  his  decision
    the appellant's oral evidence or the submissions made by both  him  and
    the  respondent's  representative.  He  highlighted   the   first-named
    appellant's memory issues and pointed to sections of her screening  and
    substantive interviews as evidence of this being  something  the  Judge
    should have addressed.

 9. Mr Bramble opposed the application and relied on the Rule 24  response.
    He stated the Judge did not have to set out  all  of  the  evidence  he
    heard as long as  he  demonstrated  an  engagement  with  the  evidence
    overall. The mere fact there was no examination or consideration of the
    oral evidence did not mean the  Judge  had  ignored  it.  In  fact,  he
    submitted there was clear evidence that the Judge  had  had  regard  to
    both the oral and written evidence and he  directed  me  to  paragraphs
    [29] and [37] in particular. There  was  no  evidence  adduced  by  the
    appellant  that  matters  contained  in  oral  evidence  had  not  been
    addressed in the Judge's assessment. The grounds of appeal argued today
    referred to the appellant's memory issues but  the  Judge  clearly  was
    aware of her oral and written evidence on this issue as he referred  to
    it in paragraph [37] of his decision.  On  the  issue  of  the  delayed
    promulgation he relied on the Rule 24 response and submitted that delay
    on itself could not amount to an error in law. He invited me to find no
    error in law on the substantive part of the appeal.

10. I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

11. Both representatives agreed that the fact the Judge  took  almost  four
    months to promulgate his decision is not in itself a reason to find  an
    error in law. The delay in  promulgating  a  decision  only  becomes  a
    factor if the decision itself is defective. Mr  Iqbal's  submission  is
    that the decision is defective because the Judge did not demonstrate he
    had any regard to anything that happened at the hearing.

12. Mr Iqbal represented the  appellant,  as  counsel,  at  the  First-tier
    hearing and in bringing these grounds of appeal he chose not  to  serve
    any contemporaneous note of what happened at the hearing and  seeks  to
    rely on the absence of any findings in the decision on the  appellant's
    evidence. I asked Mr Iqbal what he was alleging the Judge had failed to
    have regard to and his response with which I take no issue, was that he
    was unable to give evidence as he was representing the appellant in the
    appeal.

13. Mr Bramble pointed out  the  mere  fact  the  Judge  did  not  set  out
    everything in his decision did not mean there was an error in  law.  In
    bringing today's appeal on the basis he does Mr Iqbal finds himself  in
    a difficult position for the reasons I will expand on hereafter.

14. Mr Iqbal's submission was the Judge decided the case  on  the  "papers"
    and that must be an error in law. That submission would have  force  if
    something was said in the oral evidence that undermined or  dealt  with
    the subsequent findings made  by  the  Judge.  A  failure  to  consider
    evidence can, in certain circumstances, amount to an error in law.  For
    example, if in assessing credibility about how injuries  were  received
    the Judge did not have regard to medical  reports  that  supported  his
    claim then that almost certainly would amount to an error in law.

15. The thrust of Mr Iqbal's submissions surrounded the appellant's  memory
    issues. Mr Bramble submitted the Judge considered that  aspect  of  the
    case and directed my attention to the relevant paragraphs.

16. I am left in no doubt that the Judge had all of his papers  before  him
    when he prepared his decision. The notes of the hearing were  contained
    on the court file so this was not a case where the notes were lost  and
    the Judge made a decision without them.

17. In considering the appellant's claim the Judge  properly  set  out  the
    claim and nothing advanced today or in the grounds of appeal  suggested
    that the Judge failed to take into account anything that  was  said  at
    the hearing itself.

18. Mr Iqbal's grounds of appeal make no reference to any facts  stated  at
    the hearing which  the  Judge  had  no  regard  to.  Significantly,  at
    paragraph [29] the Judge concluded as follows-

         "Having considered the appellant's evidence as a whole and all  the
         documentary evidence it seemed to me that the appellant  coming  to
         the United Kingdom with the children  was  a  planned  exercise  in
         migration ..."

19. The appellant's case was based on her account  supported  by  documents
    she had submitted. The Judge assessed those documents and her  account.
    As stated above Mr Iqbal has not referred in the grounds of  appeal  or
    his oral submissions today to any evidence the Judge ignored.

20. Mr Iqbal referred to  her  medical  condition  and  memory  issues  and
    directed me to documents in the bundle. Again, there was nothing in the
    grounds of appeal on this specific issue but in any event the Judge  at
    paragraph [37] made it clear he had regard to the appellant's oral  and
    written evidence when considering her complaint.

21. In writing his decision the Judge could have detailed what was said  at
    the hearing but in the  absence  of  any  evidence  that  something  of
    significance was said in oral evidence that  would  have  affected  the
    decision I find no merit in these grounds.

22. In arguing the Judge failed to have regard to something it is incumbent
    upon the party making the allegation to demonstrate  what  it  was  the
    Judge failed to regard. To simply argue the Judge failed to  mention  a
    matter does not amount to an error in law.

23. Mr Iqbal submitted in his grounds that if the notes of evidence were on
    file then this added strength to his complaint. I  disagree.  The  fact
    the notes were on the file merely confirms the Judge kept a full  note.
    If the Judge is said to have failed to have regard to a material matter
    then it was incumbent on the party making that  claim  to  put  forward
    some evidence to support the claim.

24. For the reasons set  out  above  I  am  satisfied  there  has  been  no
    unfairness or an error in law.

    DECISION

25. I uphold the original decision and dismiss this appeal


Signed:     Dated:
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeals.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
