
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04684/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination sent           |
|on 11 March 2014                              |On 27 March 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                ELHAM YAZDANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1)  Both  parties  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
   Permission was granted to the SSHD, whose application was received first,
   while the appellant's application was overlooked.   Mr Matthews agreed to
   the UT  proceeding  as  if  permission  had  been  granted  also  to  the
   appellant.

2) In her determination promulgated on 5  August  2013  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Balloch found that  the  appellant's  account  was  not  reasonably
   likely to be true, but that the indications were that she and her husband
   (a dependant on the claim) left Iran illegally.  The judge  went  on,  at
   paragraph 97:

    Dr Kakhki [a country expert] has  indicated  that  [illegal  departure]
    would be  sufficient  to  engage  the  authority's  attention  and  the
    appellant could be subjected to abusive interrogation.  Even  though  I
    have not found that it has been established that the appellant  removed
    sensitive materials, the respondent has accepted that the appellant and
    her husband were employees of TAKSA and Dr Kakhki has demonstrated that
    this is a company that deals with military matters.


3) The judge referred at paragraph 98 to SB (Iran) CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053.
   That case held that Iranians facing enforced return did  not  in  general
   face a real risk of persecution or ill-treatment even if they had  exited
   illegally.  Such exit was not a significant risk factor but if there were
   difficulties with the authorities for other  reasons,  it  might  add  to
   them.

4) The judge went on to refer to deterioration in relations between  the  UK
   and Iran; to arrests of a student activist and of a member of the Kurdish
   minority on return; and a report that  failed  asylum  seekers  might  be
   prosecuted  for  inventing  accounts  of  persecution  derived  from  the
   respondent's  COIRs  (country  of  origin  information   reports).     At
   paragraph 104 the judge said that the content  of  COIRs  in  respect  of
   failed asylum seekers raised:

    ... sufficient  concern  that  ...  the  appellant  may  on  return  be
    apprehended as someone who has claimed asylum in the  UK  and  ...  may
    suffer treatment that could engage Article 3 of the ECHR.  I  therefore
    allow the appeal to this extent.

5)  The  SSHD's  appeal  is  on  the  grounds   firstly   that   the   judge
   misinterpreted the evidence, which did not demonstrate  that  all  failed
   asylum seekers are at risk of breach of Article  3.   The  COIR  evidence
   referred to three Iranian nationals, one with a political profile,  which
   this  appellant  did  not  have,  and  the  other   two   without   clear
   specification of the facts.  Secondly,  the  SSHD  says  that  the  judge
   acknowledged but failed to apply SB.  The asylum claim had been found not
   to be credible, and there was no evidence to suggest  any  other  factors
   adding to the level of difficulties she might face on  return.   With  no
   profile other than that of an asylum seeker, there was no real risk.

6) The appellant appeals on the grounds that the judge  failed  to  consider
   whether the appellants might be seen as opposed  to  the  regime  because
   they had left the country illegally, had claimed asylum in  the  UK,  and
   had been employees of a company which deals with  military  matters.   In
   those circumstances, political opinion would therefore be to them, a view
   supported by "objective evidence ... and ... the expert  report  from  Dr
   Kakhki."  The judge thus erred by dismissing the appeal under the Refugee
   Convention.

7) Mr Matthews said  that  the  SSHD's  two  grounds  are  interlinked.   He
   referred to the evidence in the respondent's COIRs (paragraphs  31.15  to
   31.18 or 32.25 to 32.27; it is unclear for which years these reports are,
   but the information is the same  in  both  versions,  and  neither  party
   suggested that anything turns on which version  of  the  COIR  is  used).
   There was also information in the appellant's bundle at pages 23 and  27,
   but these were the same instances.  The somewhat obscure circumstances of
   three returns about three years ago did not show a pattern  of  treatment
   of failed asylum seekers which entitled the judge to conclude that  there
   would be a breach of Article 3.  In at least one instance, there had been
   a background of participation in demonstrations.  This appellant  had  no
   similar background.  This was not a mere disagreement over the weight  to
   be given to the evidence, but an error of departure from country guidance
   without adequate justification.  While it was accepted that the  evidence
   post-dated the country guidance case, it was not significantly  different
   from the materials which had been before the Tribunal  when  issuing  its
   guidance.  It did not justify  the  conclusion  that  there  had  been  a
   general deterioration in the treatment of failed asylum seekers.  If  the
   Secretary of State's ground were  upheld,  the  appellant's  appeal  fell
   away.  In any event, the judge had not accepted that  the  appellant  had
   any access to sensitive information, and there was nothing from which  to
   infer  that  the  authorities  would  impute  political  opinion  to  the
   appellant.

8) Mr Caskie said that the appellant's case had not been that all those  who
   left Iran illegally are thereby at risk on return.  He accepted that  the
   background evidence did not support that.  The  position  was  that  this
   particular appellant would be at risk.  The critical findings were at the
   end of paragraph 97 of the determination, quoted  above.    It  had  been
   found that the appellant was likely to have exited illegally, and  checks
   were made on returnees.  The judge  erred  by  failing  to  tie  together
   paragraphs 97 and 104 of her determination.   The  authorities  did  have
   reason to take particular interest in the appellant.  Even if she had not
   removed sensitive materials, the employment  of  the  appellant  and  her
   husband was linked to a company dealing with military matters.   Even  if
   there were no sound grounds against them, the authorities were likely  to
   doubt their loyalty, which involved imputed political  opinion,  so  that
   she should have been treated as a refugee.   The Home Office  submissions
   assumed that the case involved illegal exit only,  but  there  was  more.
   The SSHD's grounds were  framed  as  lack  of  evidence  to  support  the
   conclusion, but a determination should not be set aside  if,  read  as  a
   whole, its conclusion be justified.  So read, the determination justified
   a further conclusion in favour of the appellant.

9) I reserved my determination.

10) There is some substance in the submissions made on both sides.

11) The Tribunal's Practice Directions, approved in case  law,  require  the
   First-tier Tribunal to treat as authoritative country  guidance  findings
   so far as they relate to the issue at stake, and so far  as  they  depend
   upon the same or similar evidence.  Failure to follow  country  guidance,
   or to show why it does not apply to  the  case  under  consideration,  is
   generally error of law.  At paragraph 104, the judge reached  a  sweeping
   conclusion on failed asylum seekers in general.  That was at best  weakly
   justified by reference to a  small  number  of  instances,  not  entirely
   comparable, in the background evidence before her.  She further justifies
   her conclusion by brief reference to the nature of  the  Iranian  regime,
   and to poor relations between the UK and  Iran,  but  those  matters  are
   nothing new.  If there were no more to the case, the determination would,
   I think, need to be reversed.

12) Mr Caskie points out a saving element.  The  judge  made  a  finding  at
   paragraph 97  that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  would  engage  the
   attention of the authorities on return, and that she might  be  subjected
   to abusive interrogation.  It was accepted that the couple were employees
   with a company dealing with military matters.  I see no  apparent  reason
   why they might not be expected to arrange to return on  their  own  valid
   Iranian passports, so as not to attract attention; but the case has  been
   approached on both sides on the assumption that they would visibly return
   as failed asylum seekers.  The judge overlooked that there might, in this
   case, be a further difficulty with the authorities, sufficient  to  raise
   the case to the level of a real risk.  That added  ingredient  brings  in
   the element of suspected disloyalty, or imputed political opinion,  which
   places the case within the Refugee Convention.  There is  therefore  just
   enough not only to save the determination from being set aside for  error
   of law, but to require a further finding in the appellant's favour.

13) To the extent that the  determination  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
   under Article 3 of the ECHR, it shall stand.   To  the  extent  that  the
   appeal was dismissed under the Refugee Convention, it is set aside, and a
   decision is substituted allowing the appeal also  on  Refugee  Convention
   grounds.





                               [pic]
                                17 March 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
