
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04776/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th March 2016                   |On 2nd August 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     CK
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made  an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  CK  ("the  appellant")
       is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   her.    This
       direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this direction could lead to proceedings being
       brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 20th August 2015, in  which  he
       dismissed an appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department to refuse to grant the appellant asylum.


 Background


    3. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of the  Congo
       ("DRC").  She arrived in the UK on 19th October 2014 and applied for
       asylum the following day.  Her claim for asylum was refused for  the
       reasons set out in a decision of  the  respondent  dated  4th  March
       2015.  The respondent accepted that the appellant is a  national  of
       the DRC, but  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  her  father's
       political profile, his death and the account given by the  appellant
       of her own detention and exit from the DRC.  It  was  that  decision
       that gave rise  to  the  appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Shimmin.


    4. The appellant's case is summarised at paragraphs [12] to [21] of the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   Broadly  put,  the  applicant
       claims that her father was a journalist and that in 2012 he and  her
       mother were killed during a  search  of  their  home  in  Kivu.  The
       soldiers were searching for tapes that her father held of  political
       meetings  of  the  chairman  of  Alliance  des  Patriotes  pour   la
       Refondation du Congo (APARECO).  The  appellant  was  taken  by  the
       soldiers, questioned about the tape, beaten and raped.  She  escaped
       from detention after about a week whilst her guards were drunk.


    5. The Judge sets out his findings and reasons at  paragraphs  [27]  to
       [45] of his decision.  He sets out at paragraphs [46] to [54] of the
       decision his reasons for concluding, in light of the findings  made,
       that the appellant would not face a  real  risk  of  persecution  on
       return to  the  DRC  and  why  the  appellant  is  not  entitled  to
       humanitarian protection.






 The grounds of appeal


    6. The appellant contends that the Judge  erred  when  considering  the
       risk on return by limiting his consideration only to  the  issue  of
       the appellant's profile with  APARECO  in  the  UK.   The  appellant
       contends that the Judge erred in  concluding  that  as  the  country
       guidance case of BM  and  others  (returnees  -  criminal  and  non-
       criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293 (IAC) does not specifically  refer  to
       family members of APARECO being at risk, the appellant would not  be
       at risk. The appellant contends that the Judge  failed  to  consider
       whether she would be at risk, as a family member of her father,  who
       was a person sought by the authorities due to his political opinion.
        The appellant contends that on the findings made by the Judge,  she
       and her father are known to the  authorities  in  the  DRC  and  the
       appellant is therefore at risk upon return.


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Goldstein
       on 20th October 2015.   The  matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
       whether or  not  the  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Shimmin involved the making of a material error of law.


The hearing before me


    8. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Rogers adopts the grounds of  appeal.
        She submits that the country guidance case of BM  and  others  does
       not address the risk  upon  return  to  family  members  and  it  is
       therefore not sufficient to say that the appellant is not  at  risk.
       She submits that the Tribunal in that case, was not looking  at  the
       risk that family members might be exposed  to.   Ms  Rogers  submits
       that the appellant's father was a journalist and the Judge  accepted
       that her parents were killed.   The appellant has  her  own  visible
       profile and Ms Rogers submits that cumulatively the findings made by
       the Judge in favour of the appellant, establish that she is at  risk
       upon return.  Ms Rogers submits that  the  evidence  is  clear  that
       people have been arrested in the DRC because of  the  activities  of
       members of their family.  I invited Ms Rogers to draw  my  attention
       to any objective evidence that family members are at risk in the way
       contended for by the appellant.  Ms Rogers relies  upon  the  report
       prepared by Freedom From Torture (UK) dated 2nd June 2014 that deals
       with rape as torture and sexual violence in the DRC, but beyond that
       report Ms Rogers was unable to direct me to any  objective  evidence
       to establish that family members are in fact at risk.


    9. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 9th  October  2015
       in which she confirms that the appeal is opposed.  In  the  Rule  24
       response, the respondent submits that  the  Judge  directed  himself
       appropriately and made findings that were properly open to him.  The
       Judge accepted as credible, the core of the appellant's account. The
       respondent submits that it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the
       appellant's 'modest' sur-place  activities  within  APARECO  do  not
       establish even to the lower standard, that she is fully committed to
       the organisation and that the appellant  is  using  her  association
       with it, to bolster her asylum claim.  The respondent  submits  that
       the  Judge  properly  addressed  his  mind  to  the  specific   risk
       categories identified in the country guidance case of BM and  Others
       and that it was is properly open to the Judge  to  conclude  on  the
       facts and evidence before him, that the appellant would  not  be  of
       adverse interest to the authorities if returned to the DRC.


   10. Mr Mangion adopted the rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
       Tribunal in BM and Others considered the evidence  relating  to  the
       risk to family members and identified no  particular  problems.  Any
       risk that there is, arises from what is set out in the Freedom  From
       Torture report, but the Tribunal did not consider that  the  content
       of that report identified a particular  risk  category.  He  submits
       that there is no objective evidence to support the appellant's claim
       to be at risk upon return.


 Error of Law Decision


   11. I reject the claim  by  the  appellant  that  the  Judge  erred  when
       considering the risk on return by limiting his consideration only  to
       the issue of the appellant's profile with  APARECO  in  the  UK.   At
       paragraph [28] the  Judge  found  that  appellant's  account  of  her
       claimed persecution in the DRC  for  imputed  political  opinion  was
       truthful.  His reasons for that finding are to be found at paragraphs
       [29] to [38] of his decision.  The findings are not challenged by the
       respondent.  The Judge then turned to the appellant's  activities  in
       the UK and at paragraph [45] of his decision states:


             "I find  that  the  appellant  has  established  that  she  is
             involved with APARECO meetings in the North West by setting up
             the venue for meetings  and  helping  during  those  meetings.
             She has not established that she is 'treasurer' of the  branch
             as Mr Maliko claims. Both she and Mr Mbay denied the treasurer
             role in their evidence. I find that, at its highest, she  does
             some fundraising.


   12. At paragraph [46] of his decision, the Judge goes on to consider  the
       risk the appellant faces on return to  Congo,  by  reference  to  the
       country guidance case of BM and Others.  He does so, in light of  the
       findings that he  has  made  in  the  preceding  paragraphs.   In  my
       judgement there is nothing within the Judge's analysis  of  the  risk
       upon return that suggests  that  the  risk  was  assessed  solely  by
       reference to the appellant's profile with  APARECO  in  the  UK.   At
       paragraphs [51] and [52] of his decision, the Judge states:


             "51. The appellant argues that her father's problems would  be
             visited against her if she returned to the Congo but I do  not
             accept this.  Firstly, even  if  her  father  was  an  APARECO
             leader the relatives of such persons are not a  specific  risk
             category within BM and Others.   The appellant  was  young  at
             the time of her abduction and that occurred about three  years
             ago. I find that the appellant has not  established  that  the
             authorities would still have any adverse interest  in  her  or
             her father after such a period.


             52.  Mrs Rogers reminds me that I must consider the  knowledge
             and perception of  agents  of  the  DRC.  I  have  done  this,
             combining my findings in respect of  the  appellant's  history
             and sur place activities, but I find  the  appellant  has  not
             established/even to the lower standard, that she is reasonably
             likely to be at risk on return to the Congo and  that  she  is
             within a risk category as defined in BM and Others."


   13. The Judge expressly refers to the submission made on  behalf  of  the
       appellant at the hearing of the appeal and  in  my  judgement  it  is
       plain that the Judge considered the risk upon return by combining his
       findings in respect of the appellant's  history  and  her  sur  place
       activities.


   14. At paragraph [51] of his decision, the Judge found that the appellant
       has not established that the authorities would still have any adverse
       interest in her or her father after such a period.   The  appellant's
       account, accepted by the Judge, was that her father had  been  killed
       during the search of the family home in 2012.  The  finding  made  by
       the Judge is not challenged.


   15. The Judge assessed the risk upon return by reference to  the  country
       guidance decision of BM and Others and in his decision identifies the
       relevant extracts from the headnote.  In reaching its decision in  BM
       and others the Tribunal had  before  it,  the  Freedom  From  Torture
       report that is now relied upon by the appellant and referred to by Ms
       Rogers.  As Ms Rogers accepts, beyond the  matters  set  out  in  the
       report from Freedom From Torture, there is no objective evidence that
       family members are at risk in the way contended for by the appellant.
       That report identifies rape and sexual torture experienced  by  women
       from the DRC who were detained and tortured, as  a  result  of  their
       political profile  or  that  of  a  family  member.   The  report  is
       summarised at paragraph [31] of the decision in BM and  others.   The
       Tribunal also had before it a number of strands of objective evidence
       dealing with  the  treatment  of  returnees.   The  country  guidance
       provided by the Tribunal was based upon a careful evaluation  of  the
       various strands of objective evidence before it.   The  Tribunal  did
       not identify family members of those who have a political profile  as
       being at risk upon return.


   16. On the findings made by the Judge, it was in  my  judgement  properly
       open to the Judge to find that the  appellant  has  not  established,
       even to the lower standard, that the appellant is  reasonably  likely
       to be at risk on return to the DRC and that  she  is  within  a  risk
       category as defined in BM and Others.


   17. It follows that the appeal is dismissed

Notice of Decision


   18. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
