
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04305/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    R K K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Addison & Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Nightingale  (Judge  Nightingale),  promulgated  on  13
    August 2015, in which she  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.   The  appeal  to  Judge  Nightingale  had  been  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 24 February  2015,  refusing  the  Appellant's
    application for asylum and making a decision to remove her  by  way  of
    directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. The Appellant's claim was essentially as follows.  She was  subject  to
    an arranged marriage in India.  In  due  course  her  husband  and  her
    husband's family abused her emotionally and physically. Ultimately  the
    Appellant left India for the United Kingdom, arriving here in  2010  in
    possession of a visit visa.  She claimed that whilst  in  this  country
    she had a relationship with another man.  Two children were born  as  a
    result of this relationship.  The asylum claim was made on 23 September
    2014.  The Appellant asserted that she would be at risk  on  return  to
    India as a result of the consequences of leaving her husband and having
    children from an extramarital relationship.  Article 8 was also  relied
    on.

The decision of Judge Nightingale

 3. In a thorough and well-structured decision Judge Nightingale first  set
    out the relevant evidence, the Respondent's grounds  for  refusal,  and
    the submissions of both representatives.   Her  findings  of  fact  and
    reasons begin at paragraph 52 and run to  four  pages.   She  sets  out
    numerous adverse findings on credibility, together with reasons.

 4. At paragraph 62 Judge Nightingale concluded that the birth certificates
    of the children did not in effect contain reliable evidence as  regards
    their paternity and she concluded that the children had not  been  born
    as a result of an extramarital affair, as claimed.  Taking all  of  her
    findings into account Judge Nightingale concluded that the  Appellant's
    claim was false and as a result there was no risk  to  her  and/or  her
    children on return to India.

 5. Judge Nightingale then went on and considered Article 8 outside of  the
    Rules (success under the Rules having been conceded  as  impossible  by
    the Appellant's representative).  The judge found that in light of  her
    findings of fact Article 8 would not be breached by the  removal.   The
    appeal was therefore dismissed on all grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The grounds seek primarily to attack the judge's credibility  findings.
    In addition, they assert that the judge erred in her assessment of risk
    on return and the best interests of the children.

 7. Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Simpson  in  a
    decision dated 8 November 2015.  The two points specifically  mentioned
    in the grant are the adequacy of Judge Nightingale's  consideration  of
    the birth certificates and the adequacy  of  assessment  of  Article  8
    outside of the Rules.

The hearing before me

 8. Mr Bellara relied on the grounds and  submitted  that  the  core  point
    related to the birth certificates.  He submitted that if the judge  had
    been wrong in respect of her overall credibility assessment,  including
    that relating to the certificates, then the  Appellant's  case  at  its
    highest was not bound to fail in light of the  country  information  on
    women with children born out  of  wedlock.   In  other  words,  if  the
    certificates were credible the case could succeed.

 9. Mr Staunton submitted the  country  information  suggested  that  false
    documents could be obtained in India in respect of information provided
    for the issuance of the birth certificates in this  country,  and  that
    Judge Nightingale's decision had to be looked at  as  a  whole.   There
    were a  number  of  adverse  credibility  points  made  throughout  the
    decision with adequate reasons given for the rejection of the claim.

10. By way of reply  Mr  Bellara  reiterated  his  concern  in  respect  of
    paragraph 62 and the treatment of the birth certificates.  Although  he
    accepted that credibility had to be looked at in the round,  the  birth
    certificates should, he submitted, have attracted significant weight.

Decision on error of law

11. In my view there are no material errors of law in the decision of Judge
    Nightingale.

12. I must of course look at her decision as a whole.  Having done so it is
    clear to me that she has  provided  numerous  clear  findings  of  fact
    supported by sustainable reasons.  These findings and reasons begin  at
    paragraph 52 and run all the way through to paragraph  64.   The  judge
    has given very careful consideration to the evidence  as  a  whole  and
    produced what I would describe  as  an  admirably  clear  and  thorough
    decision.  I note the striking fact that a  large  number,  indeed  the
    majority, of the findings of fact and reasons have not been  challenged
    by the Appellant (in this respect, see paragraphs 54 and 56  to  61  of
    the decision). These findings and their accompanying reasons  stand  on
    their own feet, as it were, and present a very significant obstacle  to
    the success of the appeal before me.

13. In respect of paragraph 52 of the decision, the judge was  entitled  to
    have regard to the cultural context of the claim, particularly as  this
    very issue had been raised in questioning (see paragraphs 24  and  34):
    there was no "ambush" here  in  relation  to  new  points  being  taken
    against the Appellant. Further, Judge Nightingale  made  it  abundantly
    clear that the plausibility issue was not determinative of credibility,
    but only one of a number of factors. Even if there  was  an  error,  it
    cannot sensibly be said that this was material to  the  outcome,  given
    the multiplicity of other adverse findings.

14. As regards paragraph 53, once again the judge is quiet clear: the point
    taken was not determinative, but another one of many, all of which were
    to be taken in the round.

15. Dealing with the particular issue of  the  birth  certificates,  it  is
    clear that Judge Nightingale dealt with  this  issue  as  part  of  her
    overall credibility assessment,  as  she  was  fully  entitled  (indeed
    required) to do.  She did not find the  birth  certificates  themselves
    were false documents but took the view as an element of her  assessment
    that false documents were readily available in India and  it  might  be
    that such false information had been  used  in  this  country  for  the
    registration of the children.  This finding was, as I said before, part
    and parcel of her  overall  assessment  and  cannot  be  looked  at  in
    isolation.  As a result of the numerous adverse  findings  and  reasons
    given thereto Judge Nightingale was more than entitled to conclude that
    the Appellant had not given a  truthful  account  in  respect  of  this
    aspect of her claim. She was also entitled to take country  information
    into  account  which  indicated  that  false  documents  (or  documents
    containing false information) could be obtained in India.

16. The children's 'status' was of course part and parcel of that claim and
    so their position cannot be  artificially  isolated  from  the  overall
    assessment  of  the  credibility.   Given  her  eminently   sustainable
    findings of fact contained within paragraphs 52-64,  Judge  Nightingale
    was fully entitled to find that there was no risk on return  to  India,
    whether in relation to the Appellant or the two children.

17. In respect of Article 8 it also follows that in light of  her  findings
    of fact and her perfectly lawful consideration of the claim outside  of
    the Rules in paragraphs 67 and 68, the  judge  was  fully  entitled  to
    conclude that removal of  that  family  unit  would  not  result  in  a
    violation of any protected rights.

18. In light of the above the decision of Judge Nightingale stands.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 2 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 2 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

