
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04976/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               MR ISMAIL KOTEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Bartram, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen  of  Turkey  born  on  15th  May  1993.   He
    appeals against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Nicholls sitting at Taylor House on 20th August 2015 who dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 4th March
    2015.  That decision was to  refuse  the  Appellant's  application  for
    asylum and to remove the Appellant as an  illegal  entrant  by  way  of
    directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  The Appellant's claim was that since about the age of 17  he
    had been a supporter of the Kurdish political  party,  the  BDP,  which
    campaigns for Kurdish rights.  In the course of  distributing  leaflets
    he had been arrested by the Turkish authorities who  had  detained  and
    ill-treated him.  He was detained and ill-treated on a second  occasion
    and thereafter failed to report for compulsory military service  as  he
    did not wish to take part in operations against fellow Kurdish  people.
    He left the country and since then the  authorities  had  been  to  his
    parent's home asking questions about him.

The Determination at First Instance

2.   In his determination Judge Nicholls stated at paragraph 28 that on  any
    assessment of his actions the Appellant could  not  be  thought  to  be
    playing a leading role or to be significantly involved  in  pro-Kurdish
    politics.  The Appellant's account  showed  that  he  was  acting  with
    friends delivering leaflets in an open manner on  behalf  of  a  lawful
    political party.  As far as the second detention  in  August  2013  was
    concerned the Appellant had been interrogated about  his  work  in  the
    mountains as a shepherd and whether he had information about PKK  bases
    or arrangements.

3.   The Judge continued at paragraph 28:

         "... that account suggests that the primary point of  interest  for
         the Turkish police was not the Appellant's activities on behalf  of
         the BDP but his link with the areas where the PKK were believed  to
         be  based.   The  Appellant  maintains  that  he  denied  all   the
         allegations and after being detained for  over  24  hours,  he  was
         released on both occasions without charge.   He  does  not  suggest
         that he was ever the subject  of  formal  prosecution  or  that  he
         appeared before a judicial authority.  He  maintains  that  on  the
         second occasion he was required to report  weekly  and  that  there
         were expectations that he would supply information".

4.    The  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  30  that  the  Appellant  had   been
    inconsistent about his claims that there was a warrant for  his  arrest
    in Turkey.  In interview  the  Appellant  said  that  his  parents  had
    guessed that an arrest warrant was in existence although it  had  never
    been produced to them or mentioned.  By contrast in oral  evidence  the
    Appellant had said this was not the case rather his  father  had  asked
    the police to produce the  warrant  but  they  had  not  done  so.  The
    Appellant admitted that his father had made no enquiries directly  with
    the police or through a lawyer to obtain a copy of  the  warrant.   The
    Appellant did not recall stating in  interview  that  his  parents  had
    guessed about the existence of the warrant. The Judge pointed out  that
    this was one of two answers of significance in the interview  that  the
    Appellant had said he could not recall.   The  Judge  agreed  with  the
    Respondent's comment that  the  Appellant's  claims  about  the  arrest
    warrant were "vague and implausible".

5.   The  Judge  concluded  that  there  was  a  real  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant had become the subject of minor harassment by  local  Turkish
    police when he was found distributing  BDP  leaflets  in  circumstances
    where they would suspect active support for the PKK.  Bearing  in  mind
    the generally accepted likelihood of ill-treatment whilst in detention,
    the Judge found that the Appellant had shown to the required standard a
    real likelihood that he, the Appellant, was subjected to  assaults  and
    beatings while detained.  The Judge also accepted the  likelihood  that
    the  Appellant  was  required  to  report  to  the  police  authorities
    following the second release in August 2013.  What the  Judge  was  not
    prepared to accept was that the  Appellant  had  demonstrated  a  well-
    founded fear of  persecution  in  his  home  area.   It  would  not  be
    surprising that the police would undertake enquiries of  those  working
    in the mountainous area to see if they might have information about the
    PKK but the Appellant had not demonstrated that he  would  attract  the
    adverse attention of the local security forces on the basis of being  a
    significant activist for the BDP.

6.   As it would be documented that the Appellant was  returning  to  Turkey
    from the UK he would not be  suspected  of  involvement  with  the  PKK
    during the time that  he  had  been  away  from  his  home  area.   The
    Appellant had been detained and abused in the past but the Judge had to
    assess risk on return at the date of hearing (20th August 2015).  There
    was no real likelihood that the Appellant would  be  suspected  by  the
    police authorities in his home area once they knew  the  Appellant  was
    returning from the UK.  Although he might be wanted as a  draft  evader
    following country guidance this was not likely to disclose a real  risk
    of persecution or a breach of Article 3 (although  not  stated  by  the
    Judge explicitly the authorities  confirm  that  punishment  for  draft
    evasion is more likely to be prosecution rather than persecution).  The
    Judge did not accept the likelihood of there being a  warrant  for  the
    Appellant's arrest in Turkey.  Although the Appellant may  have  failed
    to report as required, in failing to do so he  would  be  one  of  many
    thousands, particularly young men, who  failed  to  report  in  similar
    circumstances.  The Appellant had not established the likelihood of the
    existence of an arrest warrant about which he had been inconsistent and
    in respect of which he had produced no supporting evidence which  would
    be readily available to him such as from his parents or from  a  lawyer
    in Turkey.  There was no argument in relation  to  Article  8  and  the
    Judge dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Appellant appealed against this decision  arguing  that  the  Judge
    had accepted previous detentions and ill-treatment there must therefore
    be   a   serious   possibility   that   ill-treatment   would   reoccur
    notwithstanding whatever explanations and excuses for not reporting  to
    the  police  as  ordered  that  the  Appellant  might   proffer.    The
    application for permission to appeal came on the papers  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 12th October 2015.  In granting  permission
    to appeal she wrote that Judge Nichols may have erred in  that  he  may
    not have adequately considered the potential risk to the Appellant as a
    perceived rather than as an actual Kurdish activist with a  history  of
    detention and a failure to report.

8.   The Respondent replied to the grant permission  by  letter  dated  20th
    October 2015 stating that the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    directed himself appropriately and made sustainable  findings  properly
    open to him on the evidence.  Contrary to the Appellant's  grounds  the
    First-tier Judge had produced a decision that properly  considered  the
    Appellant's asylum claim of both actual and imputed  political  opinion
    at paragraphs 32 to 34 and specifically 35 of the  determination.   The
    Appellant's claim about future risk based upon  his  past  history  had
    been properly considered by  the  First-tier  Judge  who  had  provided
    adequate reasons to support his  finding  that  these  events  had  not
    disclosed a real risk of future persecution.

The Hearing Before Me

9.   In consequence the matter came before me  to  determine  whether  there
    was any error of law in the Judge's decision such that it  fell  to  be
    set aside.  If there was  not  then  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would stand.  In oral submissions  the  Appellant's  solicitor
    indicated that the findings of the Judge were not  disputed.   Although
    the Judge had not found as a fact that an arrest warrant existed, there
    was evidence from the Appellant that his family home had  been  visited
    by police on or about 6th September 2013 asking about  the  Appellant's
    whereabouts.  The last visits he had been told about had been in  March
    and June 2015.  Before that the  police  visited  every  four  or  five
    months asking about the Appellant's whereabouts which the Judge had not
    indicated was not accepted.

10.  The issue of future risk had not been  adequately  dealt  with  by  the
    Judge in the determination.  Paragraph 33 of the determination said the
    authorities would not suspect the Appellant of involvement with the PKK
    during the time that the Appellant had been away  from  his  home  area
    once they knew he was returning from the United Kingdom. That  ascribed
    to the Turkish authorities a course of conduct which one could  not  be
    certain of given the previous treatment  the  Appellant  had  received.
    The Appellant fell into all the risk categories in the case of IK.  The
    Turkish authorities were visiting the Appellant's parent's home.

11.  In reply  the  Presenting  Officer  argued  that  at  its  highest  the
    Appellant was a low-level supporter of the PKK.  He had  been  released
    from both detentions  without  charge.   The  GBTS  information  system
    referred to in the case of IK  distinguished  between  two  situations,
    arrests  and  detentions.   A  detention  did  not  involve   a   court
    intervention. The Appellant had been released without charge  and  thus
    there was no court intervention.  The Judge had addressed  both  actual
    and perceived involvement with the PKK at paragraph  35  where  he  had
    referred to the  Appellant  not  demonstrating  a  real  likelihood  of
    actions against him which would amount to persecution on account of his
    ethnicity or actual or  imputed  political  opinions.   The  Judge  had
    rejected the Appellant's claims at paragraph 34 of the existence of  an
    arrest warrant.  There would be no perceived involvement with  the  PKK
    just because of an absence from the home village because  it  would  be
    documented that the Appellant was in the United Kingdom. The Judge  had
    followed country guidance.

12.  In  reply  the  Appellant's  solicitor  said  that  if  one  looked  at
    paragraph 17 of the determination the evidence of the visits could  not
    be said to be  not  accepted.   Failure  to  report  might  lead  to  a
    perception that the Appellant had fled because he was being  asked  for
    information.

Findings

13.  The Appellant claimed to be at risk because of a perceived link to  the
    outlawed PKK.  The Judge had accepted the credibility of some parts  of
    the  Appellant's  evidence,  in  relation  to  previous  arrests,  ill-
    treatment and release without charge but had not accepted  other  parts
    of  the  Appellant's  evidence,  in  particular  that  there   was   an
    outstanding arrest warrant.  The case turned on  whether  there  was  a
    continuing interest in the Appellant from the Turkish authorities.  The
    Judge found that there was not  and  dismissed  the  appeal.   For  the
    Appellant it was argued before me that the Judge had received  evidence
    of continuing visits by the authorities  to  the  Appellant's  parent's
    home; evidence which had not been specifically rejected.

14.  That is not quite how the Judge put the matter.   At  paragraph  17  he
    recorded the evidence of the visits to the appellant's  parent's  home.
    He also recorded that the Appellant had been inconsistent  about  these
    visits.  In interview the Appellant had said that  the  last  time  the
    police visited his parents was  in  October  or  November  2013.   This
    flatly contradicted what he said in oral testimony that the police  had
    visited his parent's home every four or five months between  the  visit
    on 6th September 2013 and the visits in March and June 2015.  Asked  to
    explain this discrepancy the  Appellant  said  he  could  not  remember
    giving that answer.

15.  The Judge picked up on that point at paragraph 30 of the  determination
    when he noted that the Appellant had been unable to recall  answers  in
    interview about two significant matters.  The first was to do with  his
    parent's knowledge of an alleged arrest warrant (see paragraph 4 above)
    but the second was to do with his answer in interview that  the  police
    had visited his parent's home shortly  after  he  disappeared  but  not
    thereafter.  The Judge  was  clearly  unimpressed  by  the  Appellant's
    excuse about the inconsistency over the arrest warrant  that  he  could
    not recall giving a damaging answer in interview and could be taken  to
    be equally sceptical  over  the  alleged  continuing  interest  in  the
    Appellant.

16.  The Judge's view of the Appellant was that he was at best  a  low-level
    sympathiser with  Kurdish  rights,  had  been  arrested,  detained  and
    released without charge on two occasions. There  would  be  no  further
    interest in the Appellant.  There  was  no  real  likelihood  that  the
    Appellant would be suspected by the police authorities once  they  knew
    he was returning from the United Kingdom.  They would be satisfied that
    he had not disappeared in order to join the PKK but  had  gone  to  the
    United Kingdom for his own reasons.  The Judge was well  aware  of  the
    country guidance case of  IK  analysing  it  at  paragraph  23  of  his
    determination.  He noted that the decision was now more than ten  years
    old but summarised the relevant parts thus:

         "If a person was held for questioning at an airport on  arrival  in
         Turkey enquiries could be made of the authorities in the local home
         area  which  might  access  more  extensive  information  than  was
         available at the airport.  A Kurdish returnee might face a  greater
         risk of ill-treatment if his home area was in an area  of  conflict
         in Turkey than might be the case in other  parts  of  the  country.
         The Tribunal recognised the 'long and deep seated' use  of  torture
         by security forces in Turkey and concluded it was premature at that
         time to revise the long-established view of the potential  risk  of
         torture and detention.  ... The proper course was to assess whether
         the returnee would be at risk  and  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in his home area in the light of the individual  facts.
         If that was not the case, then the returnee would be unlikely to be
         at real risk anywhere else in Turkey".

17.  The  Appellant  had  produced  a  bundle  of  recent  news  reports  of
    incidents in  South-Eastern  Turkey  and  the  Judge  had  referred  to
    harassment and discrimination  against  Kurdish  people  in  South-East
    Turkey more recently heightened by the  tensions  around  the  conflict
    with  the  Islamic  extremists  in  Northern  Syria   (paragraph   31).
    Notwithstanding this the country guidance in IK remained authoritative.



18.  What the Judge was required to do was to apply the particular facts  of
    the case he was deciding to  the  general  background  information  and
    country guidance. This he did  adequately  explaining  his  conclusions
    which were open to him on the evidence.  The Judge had not accepted the
    Appellant's credibility in its entirety but had carefully analysed  the
    Appellant's evidence giving  cogent  reasons  why  some  parts  of  the
    evidence were accepted but other parts were  not.   The  fact  of  past
    arrests in themselves did not mean  that  the  Appellant  automatically
    would be at risk of persecution upon return.  IK did not say  that  and
    the Judge carefully explained why on the facts of this case that  would
    not be the case.  Overall the Judge gave sound reasons for his findings
    and the grounds of onward appeal amount in reality to no  more  than  a
    mere disagreement with the findings of the Judge.  I therefore  dismiss
    the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the
Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 9th day of December 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was payable and the appeal was  dismissed  there  can  be  no  fee
award.


Signed this 9th day of December 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

