
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04286/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 11th December 2015            |On the 5th January 2016               |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   MR G.T
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                        Respondent /Claimant


Representation:
For the  Appellant  (The  Secretary  of  State):   Mr  Norton  (Home  Office
Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant/Respondent: Mrs Mughal (Legal Representative)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell promulgated on the 26th  August  2015,  in
    which allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.  For  the
    purposes of clarity throughout this decision, the  Secretary  of  State
    will be referred to as "the Secretary of State" and  the  Appellant  at
    the First-tier Tribunal Mr G.T to as "the  Claimant",  given  that  the
    Appellant before the Upper Tribunal is not Mr G.T but the Secretary  of
    State.

Background

 2. The Claimant is a citizen of Turkey who was  born  on  the  8th  August
    1994. It is the Claimant's case that he is entitled to  asylum  on  the
    basis of his political opinion, as a result of his  membership  of  the
    BDP Ganziatep youth branch, and that he  is  suspected  of  involvement
    with the separatist organisation the PKK. The Claimant's initial asylum
    application was refused by the Secretary of State in an asylum decision
    dated the 26th February2015 for the reasons set out within the detailed
    reasons of refusal.  That  decision  was  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and that  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell on the 7th August 2015.

 3. Judge Mitchell allowed the Appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds.  That
    decision has been appealed to the Upper  Tribunal,  and  permission  to
    appeal has been granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Brunnen  on
    the 21st September 2015, when he found  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had arguably made an error of law in finding that  the  Appellant
    did not have a viable option of internal relocation and that the  Judge
    had failed to have regard to IK (Returnees,  Records,  IFA)  Turkey  CG
    [2004] UKIAT 00312.

 4. Within the Grounds of Appeal, it  is  argued  that  the  Judge  made  a
    material misdirection in law and that he  failed  to  engage  with  the
    Country Guidance case of IK (Returnees, Records, IFA) Turkey CG  [2004]
    UKIAT 00312 and that the Judge had failed  to  take  into  account  the
    differential  nature  of  the  risk  of  persecution  away   from   the
    Kurdish/conflict areas in the South-East of  Turkey  and  that  as  was
    noted by the Tribunal in the case of IK at paragraph 116, that  "it  is
    however implicit in our conclusions so far that the risk to a  specific
    individual in most circumstances will be at its  highest  in  his  home
    area for a variety of reasons, and particularly if it is located in the
    areas of conflict in the South  and  East  of  Turkey.  Conversely  the
    differential nature of the risk outside that area may be sufficient  to
    mean that the individual would not be at real risk  of  persecution  by
    the state or its agencies elsewhere in Turkey, even if they  were  made
    aware of the first of the information maintained in his  home  area  by
    telephone or fax enquiry from the airport, police station or elsewhere,
    or by a transfer of at least some of the information to a new home area
    on registration with the local  Mukhtar  there".   It  is  argued  that
    because the Appellant is at risk in his home area does not  necessarily
    mean the Appellant will be at risk elsewhere in Turkey.

 5. In his oral submissions before me, Mr Norton argued that the Judge  had
    made a material error of law in his assessment of the viability of  the
    Appellant internally relocating within Turkey in [23] of his  decision,
    he argued that the Judge's reasoning regarding internal relocation  was
    inadequately reasoned as to why internal relocation was  not  a  viable
    option given the short nature of the detentions to which the  Appellant
    had been subjected to, and that the evidence was that he  would  be  of
    continuing interest in his home area, possibly due to  a  land  dispute
    and that he may not be recorded on the system. He argued that the Judge
    had not adequately explained and reasoned why internal  relocation  was
    not viable.

 6. Miss Mughal in her submissions on behalf of the Claimant,  argued  that
    there was no real issue before the First-tier  Tribunal  regarding  the
    Claimant's credibility and it was accepted by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the  Claimant  had  been  involved  with  the  BDP  and  had  been
    questioned regarding his  association  with  the  PKK  and  subject  to
    mistreatment and that the Appellant  would  be  travelling  back  on  a
    travel document rather than on his own passport and that the Judge  had
    properly assessed the risk to the Claimant in [23]. She argued that the
    Judge had the Country Guidance  case  of  IK  in  mind  throughout  the
    determination.

 7. Both legal representatives submitted  that  if  there  was  a  material
    error, the case could be remitted back  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell for reconsideration as to whether or not  internal  relocation
    was a viable option.

 8. I reserved my decision on the error of law.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

 9. Having carefully considered the entirety of the Judgement of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mitchell in this case, I do not accept that the  Judge's
    findings regarding internal relocation were  inadequately  reasoned  or
    insufficient, as submitted by the Secretary of  State.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at [23] clearly had in mind the Country  Guidance  cases
    including IK (Returnees, Records, IFA) Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00312
    referred to by the Respondent, which set out the risk factors in a non-
    exhaustive list. The First Tier Tribunal Judge had spelt out  that  the
    Judge found that the Claimant  was  suspected  of  involvement  with  a
    separatist organisation  namely  the  PKK  and  that  he  had  provided
    evidence which  was  broadly  credible  of  having  been  arrested  and
    detained in the past, which the Judge found related to his  association
    with the PKK. The Judge further found that  the  authorities  obviously
    viewed him as a suspected separatist and the  Claimant  had  been  ill-
    treated in the past. The Judge further found that the Claimant and  his
    family did have connections with separatist organisations and that  the
    period of detention was a relatively short time before  his  departure.
    The Judge further found that the Claimant is of Kurdish  ethnicity  and
    that the Claimant in the past had indicated that he had been  asked  to
    give information as regards to the PKK and who would  support  them  in
    his local area. The Judge further found the Claimant was a draft evader
    and therefore would come to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities
    all that much sooner and that he would  be  detained  upon  return  and
    questioned. The Judge further found that the authorities  had  shown  a
    continuing interest in him and his  family  and  that  he  had  been  a
    political activist in a relatively minor way in  the  past.  The  Judge
    further found that the Claimant had left the country with an agent  and
    a false passport and would be returned without his own passport, but on
    an emergency travel document  which  again  he  found  will  alert  the
    authorities to be interested in the Claimant's past. Although the Judge
    found that he may or may not be recorded on any of the Turkish computer
    systems as wanted and that he may not be detained for  any  significant
    period of time upon arrival, it was likely that upon his return to  his
    home area the authorities would wish to know  where  he  had  been  and
    further detain him again which would create a real risk to him, that he
    would be ill-treated as he had been in the past because of his  imputed
    political opinion.

10. The Judge further within that same paragraph dealt with the question of
    internal relocation and found that "the Claimant does not have a viable
    option of internal relocation within Turkey. He would have to  register
    with a Mukhtar in any area he went to and it is quite probable that the
    local authority would make enquiries of his home area to see whether or
    not he was a suspected separatist  or  not.  This  is  because  of  the
    heightened interest there is in the PKK and Kurdish separatism"

11. I therefore find that the  Judge  clearly  took  account  of  the  risk
    factors that he clearly and fully set out within  the  same  paragraph,
    namely [23], which were present in the Claimant's case, in  considering
    the issue of internal relocation,  as  these  are  clearly  dealt  with
    within the same paragraph and were  relevant  factors  in  the  Judge's
    reasoning, as to not only his risk in his own area, but  upon  internal
    relocation.

12. Although it is argued that the Judge failed to engage in the case of IK
    (Returnees, Records, IFA) Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00312,  the  Judge
    clearly had that case in mind as he noted at [4] that it was agreed  by
    both representatives that the case of IK was still  extant  and  in  my
    judgement having read the decision as a whole, the  Judge  clearly  had
    the same in mind throughout his determination. He  specifically  refers
    to having considered the Country  Guidance  cases  in  considering  the
    question of internal relocation within [23].

13. Although the Judge is criticised by the Appellant of having  failed  to
    take account of the differential nature of  the  risk  outside  of  the
    Claimant's home area and that an individual  may  not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution by the state or agencies elsewhere in Turkey, even if  they
    were made aware of the thrust of information  maintained  in  the  home
    area by telephone or fax enquiry from the airport,  police  station  or
    elsewhere, or by a transfer of at least some of the  information  to  a
    new home area on registration with the  local  Mukhtar  there,  as  was
    stated at paragraph 116 of the Country Guidance case  of  IK.  However,
    immediately after paragraph 116 quoted by the Secretary of  State,  the
    Upper Tribunal in the Country Guidance case of IK went on to state:

         "117.    Some information about an  individual  is  not  reasonably
         likely to be apparent to anyone other than a few individuals in his
         home area. For example, a specific gendarme might have it in for an
         individual, whom he considers  to  be  a  local  ne'er-do-well  but
         against  whom  there  was  no  specific  information.  It  is  also
         implausible, in the current climate of zero tolerance  for  torture
         that an official would wish to record or transfer information  that
         could potentially lead to his persecution for a criminal offence.

         118.     In general terms  however  we  consider  that  one  should
         proceed, when assessing the viability of  internal  relocation,  on
         the basis that an individual's material history will in broad terms
         become known to the authorities at the airport and in his new  area
         when he settles, either through registration with the local Mukhtar
         or if he comes to the attention for any reason of the police there.
         The issue is whether that record would be reasonably likely to lead
         to persecution outside his home area.

         119.      We  have  already  identified  some   examples   of   the
         circumstances in which a person may have  experienced  serious  ill
         treatment in the past in areas of Turkey where the PKK was  or  now
         is active, but would not necessarily be at a similar risk  of  such
         treatment elsewhere  in  Turkey  where  it  is  not,  and  where  a
         differential view of his history  could  be  taken.  These  include
         examples of general intimidation by the authorities of the  Kurdish
         population to discourage support for the PKK,  or  to  clear  whole
         villages. The evidence is that anything between  some  hundreds  of
         thousands to some millions (depending on whose  figures  one  uses)
         may have been displaced within Turkey as  a  consequence  of  this.
         However, outside the areas of PKK activity there will  not  be  the
         same perceived need to undertake such  intimidation  or  clearances
         and the authorities within the receiving areas will be aware of the
         tactics that led to this mass migration and will be able to  assess
         an individual's record in light of it. Suddenly, a person  who  was
         included on Mr Dill's list of local "ne'er-do-wells", against  whom
         there was no evidence of PKK involvement, but who ran the  risk  of
         being detained for questioning whenever a PKK incident occurred  in
         his vicinity, would not be at a similar risk in another area  where
         the PKK was not active and where  such  incidents  were  much  less
         likely to occur. These are just some examples of  why  differential
         risk can arise in different areas of Turkey".

14. The Upper Tribunal in the case of IK (Returnees-Records-IFA) Turkey CG,
    therefore made it clear that in general terms one should  proceed  when
    assessing the viability of internal relocation on  the  basis  that  an
    individual's material history will in broad terms become known  to  the
    authorities at the airport and in his new area when he settles,  either
    through registration with the local Mukhtar  or  if  he  comes  to  the
    attention for any reason of the police there. The issue is whether that
    record would be reasonably likely to lead to  persecution  outside  his
    home area.

15. I find that First-Tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell has fully and adequately
    dealt with this issue in [23] of his decision. The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge set out how the Claimant was  viewed  by  the  authorities  as  a
    suspected separatist and had been subjected  to  ill-treatment  in  the
    past and who had family connections with separatist organisations  that
    he had been detained specifically relating to the  association  to  the
    PKK. Given that the Judge had fully set out the risk factors  faced  by
    the Claimant, the fact that the Claimant would have to register with  a
    Mukhtar in any area he went to and that it is quite probable  that  any
    local authority would make enquiries of his home area to see whether he
    was a separatist or not, the Judge's reasoning  for  finding  that  the
    Claimant would be  at  risk  elsewhere  in  Turkey  and  that  internal
    relocation was not a viable option for him  have  been  adequately  and
    sufficiently explained. This was a finding that was open to him on  the
    evidence.

16. I consider that the  reasoning  of  Judge  Mitchell  was  adequate  and
    sufficient in this case and that  he  has  properly  engaged  with  the
    Country Guidance case of IK, and fully and properly considered  whether
    or  not  the  Claimant  would  be  reasonably  likely  to  suffer  from
    persecution outside his home area and whether internal relocation was a
    viable option for  him.  The  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mitchell therefore does not disclose a material error  of  law  and  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mitchell  not  disclosing  any
material error of law is maintained and the decision stands;

Unless or until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Dated 14th December 2015
[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
