
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04167/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 October 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Y Q X
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells instructed by Gloucester Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Page) which allowed  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's decision taken on  19  April  2013  to
    remove her by way of directions to China following  the  refusal  on  9
    April 2013 to grant her asylum or humanitarian protection  under  paras
    336 and 339C of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

The Background

 4. The appellant is a citizen of China who was born on 3 June  1992.   She
    comes from the province of Sichuan.  She arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 3 December 2007 travelling on a false passport.  On 23 October 2008,
    she was arrested whilst illegally working.   On  1  December  2008  she
    absconded.

 5. On 14 November 2012 the appellant claimed asylum.   The  basis  of  her
    claim was twofold.  First, she claimed to  be  at  risk  because  of  a
    dispute between her grandmother and the Chinese  authorities  over  her
    grandmother's fish farm which had been requisitioned  for  development.
    Her grandmother had refused to hand over the farm and sign  a  document
    transferring the property to the government.  Secondly, she claimed  to
    be at risk as a returning single mother who had given birth to a  child
    before marriage.  Her son was born in the  United  Kingdom  in  October
    2012.

 6. Following the refusal of the appellant's claim,  she  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Page rejected the appellant's claim on  the
    basis that she was at risk on return because of the dispute between her
    grandmother and  the  government.   That  finding  is  not  challenged.
    However, Judge Page found that the appellant would be at risk of forced
    sterilisation on return and, as a result, was a refugee and her  return
    would breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make  adequate
    findings as to whether the appellant could internally  relocate  safely
    in China.  On 24 June 2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Blandy)
    granted the appellant permission  to  appeal  on  that  ground  in  the
    following terms:

         "2.  The grounds of the application argue that the  Judge  did  not
             properly consider the possibility of internal  relocation.   I
             do find this to be arguable.  Paragraph 14 of the headnote  of
             the country guidance case of AX (Family planning scheme) China
             CG [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC) does envisage  the  possibility  of
             internal relocation where, as in the case of  this  appellant,
             forcible sterilisation was found to  be  a  risk,  and  it  is
             arguable that  the  Judge  failed  to  properly  consider  the
             potential for internal relocation and failed to give  adequate
             reasons as to why internal relocation was not a viable remedy.
              The application must be granted."

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Grounds of Challenge

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Hibbs relied upon  the  grounds
    upon  which  permission  was  sought  and  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  namely  the  issue  of  internal  relocation.   However,  in
    addition he sought to raise an further ground, namely that  Judge  Page
    had failed to consider and properly apply the country guidance case  of
    AX in finding that the appellant was at risk of forced sterilisation in
    her home area.  He raised  that  ground  for  the  first  time  in  his
    skeleton argument served both on the Upper Tribunal and the appellant's
    representative, Mr Howells, on the morning of the hearing before me.

10. Mr Howells forcefully objected to the Secretary of State now relying on
    a ground which had not previously been raised.  He submitted  that  the
    appellant had, in effect, been  ambushed.   The  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds  were  exclusively  concerned  with  the  issue   of   internal
    relocation.  It was now too late, he submitted, to  rely  on  a  ground
    challenging the judge's finding that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of
    forced sterilisation in her home area.

11. In essence, I agree with Mr Howells' submissions.  Mr  Hibbs  seeks  to
    amend the grounds upon which the Secretary of State mounts a  challenge
    to Judge Page's decision.  Whilst there is no specific power  to  amend
    the grounds of appeal set out  in  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, there is a general power in the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698) at rule 5(3)(c) to
    permit the amendment of a document.  That is subject to the  Tribunal's
    case  management  powers  which  must  be  exercised  to  promote   the
    overriding objective of dealing  with  the  appeal  justly  and  fairly
    including the prevention of delay  (rule  2).   Here,  there  has  been
    considerable delay.  The First-tier Tribunal determination is  dated  4
    June 2013 and was sent to the Secretary of State shortly thereafter and
    was sent to the appellant on 11 June 2013 by the  Secretary  of  State.
    The application by the Secretary of State seeking permission to  appeal
    is dated 12 June 2013.  Permission was granted on 24 June 2013 and  the
    hearing before me was listed on 25 October 2013.  The ground  which  Mr
    Hibbs now seeks to rely upon was not, therefore, raised by the  drafter
    of the application seeking permission nor subsequently raised until the
    day of the hearing  before  me  over  four  months  after  the  Judge's
    determination was promulgated.  The procedural structure applicable  to
    appeals against decisions of the First-tier Tribunal was set out by the
    Upper  Tribunal  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others   (Decisions   affecting
    children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) at [16].   There,  in
    refusing permission to amend the grounds at the  UT  hearing,  Blake  J
    (Chamber President) said this:


         "16. ....


             i)   The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2007  (the
                  Procedure Rules) rule  22(2)(b)  and  23(1A),  the  Senior
                  President's   Practice   Statements   and   the   standard
                  directions issued by the  Tribunal  contemplate  that  the
                  notice of appeal will form the basis of the appeal in  the
                  absence  of  any  further  document  such  as  a  skeleton
                  argument amplifying the contentions in the notice.

             ii)  The Tribunal must send  a  copy  of  the  written  notice
                  granting permission and of the reasons for any limitations
                  or conditions on permission to each party  (rule  22(2)(a)
                  and 23(6)).

             iii) The respondent may provide a  response  to  a  notice  of
                  appeal within one month (rule 24)  and  an  appellant  may
                  reply to the response within one month  (rule  25(2A))  or
                  five days before the hearing whichever is the earlier.

             iv)  There is a general power  in  the  Procedure  Rules  rule
                  5(3)(c)  to  permit  amendment  of  a  document  but   the
                  Tribunal's case management powers  must  be  exercised  to
                  promote the over-riding objective including the prevention
                  of delay (rule 2(2)).

             v)   It would be incompatible with  the  overriding  objective
                  and the scheme of the Procedure Rules outlined  above,  to
                  permit a rule 25 reply to open up fundamentally  different
                  grounds of  appeal  for  which  permission  has  not  been
                  granted and indeed to challenge a  different  decision  on
                  appeal than that contained in the notice of appeal.

             vi)  What should have happened in this case, is  that  if  the
                  appellant wanted to fundamentally depart from the  grounds
                  of appeal on which permission was obtained he should  have
                  lodged an application to amend the  notice  of  appeal  in
                  good time and secured that a copy of  such  a  notice  was
                  served on the respondent.

             vii) Bearing in mind that an  application  for  permission  to
                  appeal is normally required to be made within the relevant
                  period  set  out  in  rule  21(3),  any   application   to
                  fundamentally change the grounds should be made as soon as
                  practicable  with  some  explanation  of  why  a   legally
                  assisted person did not include the amended grounds in the
                  original notice."


12. In my judgment, the ground upon which Mr Hibbs now seeks to  rely  does
    raise  a  "fundamentally"  different  ground  from  that   upon   which
    permission was sought and granted.   It  challenges  the  risk  to  the
    appellant in her home area rather than, as do the grounds  as  drafted,
    accepting that risk  argues  that  internal  relocation  has  not  been
    properly dealt with.  Mr Hibbs offered no explanation  why  the  ground
    has not been previously raised other than to state  that  he  only  had
    sight of the file shortly before the hearing date.  That, of course,  I
    accept.  The cause of the delay is not due to Mr Hibbs.   He has raised
    the matter shortly after he had sight of the file.  But that  does  not
    explain why the Secretary of State did  not  seek  to  rely  upon  this
    ground in her application in June.  The appeal has progressed, and  the
    appellant has expected it to do so, solely on the basis that the  Judge
    erred in law in failing to consider  internal  relocation.   There  has
    been a singular failure to follow the procedural route  leading  to  an
    appeal hearing in the Upper Tribunal, clearly and unequivocally set out
    in the 2008 Procedure Rules.  As Blake J pointed out  in  [16(vii)],  a
    fundamental change in the grounds required an application to amend  the
    grounds set out  in  the  original  notice  to  be  made  "as  soon  as
    practicable" and with an explanation as to why they were not previously
    relied upon.  As I have indicated, there  is  no  explanation  for  the
    delay and the fact that neither the Tribunal  nor  the  appellant  were
    given any notice of an application to amend the  ground  prior  to  the
    date of the hearing.  In agreement  with  Blake  J,  and  adapting  his
    words, in my judgment it would  be  incompatible  with  the  overriding
    objective and the scheme of the Procedure Rules  to  permit,  in  those
    circumstances, an amendment to the  ground  upon  which  permission  to
    appeal was both sought and granted so as to permit  a  challenge  on  a
    fundamentally different basis to be  made  on  the  day  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's hearing.

13. For these reasons, I refuse the Secretary  of  State's  application  to
    amend the grounds of appeal.  The  sole  ground  of  appeal  before  me
    relates to the issue of internal relocation.

14. I would only add this.  While Mr Howells (entirely  characteristically)
    sought to deal with the substantive content of the new ground,  he  was
    necessarily seeking to meet submissions (which I invited  Mr  Hibbs  to
    make de bene esse).  As I have refused the  application  to  amend  the
    grounds, it would not  be  proper  to  consider  those  submissions  in
    detail.  In my judgment, however, the  Secretary  of  State's  position
    that Judge Page wrongly departed from the country  guidance  in  AX  by
    finding that the appellant would be at risk of forced sterilisation  in
    her home province, suffers from a number of weaknesses.

15. First, the judge correctly directed himself (as I will set out shortly)
    at para 19 in terms of the risk, if any, of  forced  sterilisation  set
    out in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  determination  at  [185].   He  clearly
    recognised that a risk could arise at the time of  a  crackdown  in  an
    individual's own area.  Secondly, he considered the background evidence
    which referred to the appellant's own area and the  potential  risk  in
    circumstances where  crackdowns  had  occurred  (see  para  17  of  the
    determination).  Thirdly, nothing in AX excluded the possibility  of  a
    real risk of forced sterilisation  existing  in  an  individual's  home
    area, each case necessarily turning upon an assessment of the  evidence
    relied upon.  Fourthly, and linked to the  previous  point,  the  Upper
    Tribunal did not specifically consider the factual  situation  in  this
    appellant's home area.  The appellant in  that  case  came  from  Hunan
    Province.  The fact that she was unable to succeed said  nothing  about
    the risk, if any, to this appellant, particularly given the differences
    in their situation, namely  that  this  appellant  is  a  single  woman
    returning with one child whilst in AX that appellant  was  married  and
    was a "double-single couple" both of whom were  only  children.   Given
    that the judge  was  alive  to  the  country  guidance  in  AX  and  he
    considered the situation in the appellant's own province,  there  would
    be considerable difficulties  to  surmount  in  establishing  that  the
    judge's finding was not properly open to him on that evidence.  But, as
    I say, until the date of the hearing the possibility that he  erred  in
    reaching that finding was not relied upon by the Secretary of State and
    cannot now be raised.

Discussion

16. Turning then to the ground upon which permission to appeal  was  sought
    by the Secretary of State and granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr
    Hibbs submitted that Judge Page had found in the appellant's favour (on
    the basis of the risk of forced sterilisation in her home area) without
    considering whether internal relocation within China was open  to  her.
    He pointed out that in AX, the Upper Tribunal recognised that  internal
    relocation was  possible  at  [191(14)].   That  paragraph  is  in  the
    following terms:

         "(14)    Where a real risk exists in the 'hukou' area,  it  may  be
             possible to avoid the risk by moving to a city.   Millions  of
             Chinese internal migrants, male and female, live and  work  in
             cities where they do not  hold  an  'urban  hukou'.   Internal
             migrant women are required to stay in touch with their 'hukou'
             area and either return for tri-monthly pregnancy tests or else
             send  back  test  results.   The  country  evidence  does  not
             indicate a real risk of effective pursuit of internal  migrant
             women   leading   to   forcible   family   planning   actions,
             sterilisation or termination, taking place in  their  city  of
             migration.  Therefore, internal relocation will, in almost all
             cases, avert the risk in the 'hukou' area.  However,  internal
             relocation may not be safe where there is credible evidence of
             individual pursuit of the returnee or her family, outside  the
             'hukou' area.   Whether  it  is  unduly  harsh  to  expect  an
             individual returnee and her family to  relocate  in  this  way
             will be a question of fact in each case."

17. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had, in
    effect,  considered  all  the  circumstances   relevant   to   internal
    relocation and there was only one  possible  answer,  namely  that  she
    could not internally relocate.  Mr Howells submitted that even  if  the
    judge was in error in not expressly dealing with  internal  relocation,
    that error was not material.  Mr Howells pointed out that at para 16 of
    his determination the judge had considered the difficulties faced by  a
    single mother with a child born out of wedlock and the "social  support
    fee" which would be payable.  He also relied upon  para  19  where  the
    judge stated that:

         "The fines that she would be unable to pay do of course add to  the
         overall consequences of return as a single mother who faced  forced
         sterilisation.  They are to be viewed cumulatively and not  in  the
         alternative."

18. The judge continued in para 19:

         "Also, the financial consequences were identified  as  being  worse
         for a single mother with a child born out of wedlock.  And they may
         suffer further disadvantages in terms of access  to  education  for
         their children, medical treatment, loss of employment, detriment to
         future employment, that would not in  general  reach  the  severity
         threshold to amount to persecution or serious harm or ill-treatment
         in  breach  of  Article  3  ECHR,  but  it  is  plain  that   these
         consequences  should  be  viewed  cumulatively  with  the  risk  of
         enforced sterilisation."

19. Whist I accept that the judge does make reference to the level of fines
    that the appellant as a single mother would face, he  does  so  in  the
    context of his assessment of risk.  Indeed, para 16  is  concerned  not
    with the judge's view of the implications for the appellant as a single
    mother, but rather the respondent's position set  out  in  the  refusal
    letter.  The issue of internal relocation requires a  consideration  of
    both the risk (if any) to, and reasonableness (or undue harshness)  of,
    the appellant relocating elsewhere in China.  I am unable to accept  Mr
    Howells' submission that the  judge  has,  in  effect,  considered  all
    relevant matters to those two issues.  Even if the appellant had little
    prospect  of  establishing  that  she  was  at  risk   elsewhere,   the
    reasonableness  of  her  relocation  involved  a  deeper   and   richer
    consideration of her circumstances than was  given  by  the  judge  not
    directly in the context of a consideration of the  internal  relocation
    option.  That latter issue is not directly addressed by the Judge.

20. For these reasons, the judge did materially err in law  in  failing  to
    consider whether, given the risk to the appellant in her home area, she
    could safely and reasonably relocate within China.



Decision

21. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.

22. In my judgment, it is appropriate that the appeal be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard by Judge Page to make relevant findings
    and a decision in respect of internal relocation. The  Judge's  finding
    that the appellant would be at risk in her home area shall stand.





                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
