
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04459/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 7 October 2013                             |on 9 October 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                      SA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of Afghanistan.   His  date
   of birth is recorded as 1 January 1995.

2) The respondent accepted at paragraph 34 of a letter dated 26  April  2013
   that the appellant "provided a consistent, credible and coherent account"
   of his reasons for seeking asylum.

3) The appellant's account was that his father was a member of the  Taliban.
    He was considering leaving  them  for  the  government,  for  which  the
   Taliban shot him dead, maintaining that he had been killed by  the  other
   side.  They indoctrinated the appellant and his brother  into  acting  as
   suicide bombers.  He and his brother were at  a  roadside,  equipped  and
   willing to blow themselves up along with an American convoy which was due
   to travel by.  This plan came  to  nothing  because  a  friend  of  their
   maternal uncle, passing by chance, picked them up and  drove  them  away.
   Their uncle explained to them the Taliban's lies.  The Taliban  destroyed
   the family home and threatened to kill the appellant.  His uncle arranged
   his departure from the country.

4) Notwithstanding acceptance of that account, the  respondent  went  on  to
   hold that the appellant could  relocate,  on  the  view  that  there  was
   "little  objective  evidence  that  the  Taliban  have  a   sophisticated
   communication network" among its various factions, and that it would  not
   be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to Kabul.

5) On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant sought to support  his
   case with an expert report by Dr A Giustozzi, dated 18 May 2013.   First-
   tier Tribunal  Judge  Boyd  dismissed  the  appeal,  finding  the  report
   insufficient for him to deviate from AK Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163.
    The judge noted at paragraph 20 that at paragraph 60 of  his  report  Dr
   Giustozzi considered that the appellant would represent  a  low  priority
   target for the Taliban in Kabul, who were likely to consider him only  as
   an opportunity target if they became aware of his presence.  As Kabul has
   a population of over 5  million  and  the  Taliban  has  only  a  limited
   presence, the judge thought that the appellant would be able to  live  in
   Kabul without coming to Taliban attention.

6)  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  the  view  that  the   judge's
   conclusions might be insufficiently reasoned.

7) Mr Winter submitted as follows.   Paragraphs  6  and  8  of  the  report,
   dealing with the development of the Taliban's network, show that  it  has
   increasingly   sophisticated   intelligence   operations   and   a   very
   sophisticated ability to track down individuals.  At paragraph 15,  there
   is reference to targeting for assassination of those who defect from  the
   movement.  While the report describes the appellant as  a  low  priority,
   the real question is not whether the Taliban is actively trying to  track
   him down, but the risk of identification, and the consequences if  he  is
   identified.  The report says that he might  be  at  risk  as  a  possible
   liability to the Taliban, and there  is  also  the  obvious  possibility,
   given the nature of the Taliban, that they would not tolerate someone who
   has defied them or frustrated their plans.  AA Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT
   00016 is more relevant than AK.  In AA it was accepted for the  appellant
   that the Taliban would not actively be seeking to track him  down  within
   Kabul, but his fear  was  of  a  "chance  encounter  with  the  Taliban".
   Evidence from Dr Giustozzi in AA's case showed that to be  a  real  risk.
   At paragraph 131 the Tribunal accepted such a risk.  AA was an unattached
   child who had lost all contact with his family, which helped to make  his
   case, but it turned on a similar risk to the present appellant, not  only
   on the appellant's age.  This appellant is over 18, but not by much.  The
   summary of the facts in AA's case at paragraph 1 suggests that he was  an
   individual against whom the Taliban had perhaps less  reason  to  hold  a
   grievance than against this appellant.  The judge erred by treating  this
   case as if it turned on active targeting by the  Taliban.   It  ought  to
   have been decided on the real risk  of  a  chance  encounter,  given  the
   likely circumstances on return to Kabul, along the same lines as AA.

8) Each case turns ultimately on its own  facts  and  circumstances,  but  I
   agree that this is a case which has strong parallels with, and is perhaps
   even stronger than, AA.

9) The judge erred in his view that this  was  a  case  which  in  order  to
   succeed required departure from  AK.   AK  was  decided  on  the  general
   viability of Kabul for internal relocation.  This case, although it  does
   not deal with an unattached child, has more in common with the case of AA
   which succeeded for the reasons quoted above.

10) Based on the full concession of credibility by the Secretary  of  State,
   and on the expert report, with its evidence of  a  Taliban  network,  the
   conclusion properly to be drawn was that there was a real  risk,  not  of
   personal  tracking,  but  of  a  chance  encounter  leading  to  personal
   identification.  The appellant could  not  be  expected  to  relocate  to
   Kabul.

11) The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
   following  decision  is  substituted:  the  appeal,  as  brought  by  the
   appellant to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is  allowed  under  the  Refugee
   Convention.

12) An anonymity order was made in the First-tier  Tribunal.   Neither  side
   made any submission about that matter, and it remains in place.





                               [pic]
                                8 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal



