
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04272/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Determination Promulgated    |
|12 November 2013                              |12 December 2013             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                            The Hon Lord Matthews
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                   Between

                                MASTER B K A
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms B Smith of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose assessed date of  birth
    is 1 August 1996.  He left Afghanistan approximately  one  year  before
    his screening  interview,  which  took  place  on  28  September  2012,
    travelling from Kabul to Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Greece and Italy.   He
    eventually arrived in the United Kingdom from Calais, apparently in the
    rear of an HGV.  He was served with the form IS 151A  on  12  September
    2012 and was then released to the care of  Kent  Social  Services.   He
    claimed asylum on the same day.  As is set out in  a  determination  of
    Judge Vaudin d'Imecourt dated 5  September  2013  which  is  now  under
    appeal, the appellant's claim in short was that  he  was  a  vulnerable
    minor who had lost contact with his family in Afghanistan and  that  it
    would breach his rights under the  Refugee  Convention  to  return  him
    there at the present time.  He was at risk of ill-treatment as a member
    of a particular social group, namely a child.  It was  also  his  claim
    that he had a well-founded fear of persecution based on  his  perceived
    political opinion as a person at risk  from  the  Taliban  because  his
    father had been a serving police officer  and  the  Taliban  wished  to
    recruit him.  Shortly after his father's death the Taliban came looking
    for him and his mother  decided  that  he  had  to  leave.   They  went
    together to Kabul and she made arrangements with an  agent,  whereafter
    he was taken to Pakistan before journeying to this  country.   He  said
    his mother lived in Baghlan in Afghanistan and he had a  young  brother
    and sister who lived with their mother.  In his Statement  of  Evidence
    Form, combined interview and NINO application he said that  he  had  no
    uncles or aunts or grandparents in Afghanistan.  In his evidence at the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal however he said that his grandfather
    was still alive and lived in Kabul  although  he  also  said  that  the
    person was his father's cousin, his mother's uncle.  It appears that he
    also said that both his mother's father and his father's  father  lived
    in Kabul when he left.  We will turn to deal with this matter  in  more
    detail at a later stage.

 2. The respondent did not accept his claim that he was at  risk  from  the
    Taliban and refused to grant him asylum  but  in  accordance  with  her
    stated policy she granted the appellant limited leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom outside the Rules  as  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
    child until 1 February 2014.  He appealed against the refusal of asylum
    as  already  indicated.   For  reasons  which  are  set  out   in   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal and into which we need not  go
    in detail, the Tribunal dismissed his  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  on
    humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  on  human  rights  grounds  but
    purported to allow it on the basis that the respondent had not acted in
    accordance  with  the  law  to  trace  the  appellant's  family.    The
    respondent had not made any efforts to trace the family, citing lack of
    resources.

3.   We pause to note that it is accepted on all hands  that  the  appellant
    provided the correct address for his mother and siblings.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

4.   It is unnecessary to repeat all  of  the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    Tribunal since in the result the appeal before us was argued on  fairly
    narrow grounds.  In summary, the FtT proceeded on the  basis  that  the
    appellant's date of birth was 1 August 1996 in accordance with a Merton
    compliant age assessment.

5.   The Tribunal was also satisfied that  the  appellant  suffered  from  a
    congenital hearing defect which had made him very  vulnerable  and  had
    more than likely caused him  to  have  educational  problems.   It  was
    entirely possible that he had some learning  difficulties  although  he
    had not had a cognitive assessment  and  no  medical  report  had  been
    produced.  He was  a  young  man  with  complex  speech,  language  and
    communication difficulties  and,  although  he  was  able  to  interact
    appropriately with peers  and  teachers,  he  was  to  a  great  extent
    dependent on others for his well-being and general welfare.   He  would
    not be able to lead a totally independent life at the  moment  and  was
    incapable of caring for himself by way of cooking and making  decisions
    with regards  to  his  well-being.   His  self-help  skills  were  very
    limited.  When he had no-one to cook  for  him  he  was  not  eating  a
    healthy diet.  The judge assessed the evidence in the round bearing  in
    mind that he was dealing with a minor with a degree of disability.   It
    was found that the appellant had been able to survive for over one year
    outside his home area and family unit and had been able to make his way
    to the United Kingdom which demonstrated to an extent a degree of self-
    reliance.  He had indicated that  his  father  had  returned  from  the
    United Kingdom having been here for some four years before  being  sent
    back to  Afghanistan  and  that  was  not  disputed.   The  appellant's
    position was that his  father  joined  the  police  shortly  after  his
    arrival and was in the police for a further short time  before  he  was
    kidnapped by the Taliban and  killed.   It  was  pointed  out  that  no
    supporting evidence was produced despite the length of  time  available
    in this case and despite the judge's raising  this  matter  as  one  of
    considerable concern.  No effort was made to contact the authorities in
    Kabul, in accordance with the appellant's apparent  instructions.   The
    judge  was  conscious  that  there  was  no  requirement   to   produce
    corroboration but given the ease with which he said such evidence might
    have been obtained he did not consider  himself  bound  to  accept  the
    appellant's  bare  claim.   Reference  was  made   to   a   number   of
    inconsistencies set out in the reasons for refusal letter.   The  judge
    himself  was  concerned  about  lack  of  efforts  made  to  trace  any
    information  about  the  death  of  the  appellant's  father.   He  was
    satisfied to a very high degree of probability  that  given  the  roles
    played by the British and American forces in Afghanistan and  from  the
    available objective material referred to in the refusal  letter,  there
    would have been a record kept of deaths of  police  officers  including
    police officers serving in the Baghlan area from  where  the  appellant
    came, particularly if it had occurred in the circumstances  alleged  by
    the appellant.  He was satisfied that the objective background material
    supported the claim that if a police officer was killed it  was  likely
    to have been recorded and it showed that there  had  been  no  recorded
    incidents of a police officer having been killed in  the  circumstances
    claimed by the appellant in the Baghlan area  between  2009  and  2012.
    Paragraphs 64 to 67 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination  are  in
    the following terms:

        "64. Having heard evidence from the appellant and having  read  all
             the statements in this case, including the various reports from
             the Kent Social Services, I was  entirely  satisfied  that  the
             appellant has family living in the Baghlan area, which includes
             his mother, his brother and sister and  more  than  likely  his
             father and if not, his step father.  I was also satisfied  from
             the  same  evidence  that  the  appellant  has  at  least   one
             grandparent presently living in Kabul.  He would not have  been
             aware of this if he had not visited his grandfather  in  Kabul.
             Indeed at one stage of his evidence before me he admitted  that
             he and his family had visited his grandfather in  Kabul  on  at
             least one  occasion  in  the  past  before  he  retracted  that
             evidence.


        65.  I find that it is entirely possible that the appellant has had
             no communication with his  family  since  his  arrival  in  the
             United Kingdom, although I  note  that  he  has  a  friend  who
             appears to have gone to Afghanistan who he had asked  to  bring
             photographs back to him.  That same friend must have been  told
             where and how to contact his family.   But,  as  Mr  Smyth  has
             pointed out on his  behalf,  the  appellant  has  been  closely
             observed by the social services and has been in their  care  to
             such an extent that if he had communicated with family  abroad,
             that would have been noticed.  Nevertheless, I do not find that
             this means that the appellant has no family or relative  abroad
             to whom he could turn to for support.  No effort has been  made
             in this case to trace his family in Kabul  or  in  the  Baghlan
             area by his solicitors on his behalf  and  they  are  perfectly
             able to do so but it would appear from what I  have  been  told
             that they are instructed or have been instructed not to do  so.




        66.  I am entirely satisfied that the appellant is a  minor  and  a
             vulnerable individual who would  not  be  able  to  survive  in
             Afghanistan on his own and that he would be able to relocate on
             his own in Afghanistan.  Nevertheless, on the evidence  that  I
             have heard in this case I was also entirely satisfied that  the
             appellant has family support both in both Kabul and in his home
             area.


        67.  I was also satisfied and find that the appellant was never  in
             fear of the Taliban in his home area.  Despite his  claim  that
             his father was killed by them there is absolutely no supporting
             evidence for this  and  clearly  there  would  have  been  such
             evidence if it was true.  There is also no supporting  evidence
             that his father has ever been a member of the police  force  in
             Afghanistan and that evidence would  also  clearly  be  readily
             available  if  true.     Normally   one   would   not   require
             corroboration evidence in this type of case, nevertheless given
             the time that has gone since he has been in the United  Kingdom
             and given my serious concern raised on 5  June,  I  would  have
             expected the solicitors in this case to have traced the  father
             or at least to  have  been  able  to  confirm  the  appellant's
             account through the authorities in Afghanistan.  I bear in mind
             as a matter damaging to the credibility  of  the  core  of  the
             appellant's claim that none of this  has  been  done.   Without
             further evidence supporting the appellant's bare assertion that
             his father was in the police force and that he was kidnapped in
             the circumstances in which  he  claims,  bearing  in  mind  the
             objective background material which shows that  such  incidents
             would  have  been  recorded,  I  was  not  satisfied  that  the
             appellant is telling the truth about this matter, despite every
             possible allowance for his age."

6.   Paragraph 69 runs as follows:

        "69. Therefore, looking at the whole of the evidence in  this  case
             in the round, I do accept that  the  appellant  is  an  Afghani
             national and that he  is  a  vulnerable  minor  who  could  not
             relocate on his own in Afghanistan.  Nevertheless,  I  do  find
             that the appellant has family support in Kabul and in his  home
             area.  I find that these people can be contacted on his  behalf
             by his solicitors and by the respondent at his request,  if  he
             gives  them  the  necessary  information.   I  find  that   the
             appellant can be safely returned either to Kabul or to his home
             area where he would have family support to look after  him  and
             provide for his needs.  I find  that  the  appellant's  account
             that his father was in the police and was killed by the Taliban
             not to be a true account.  I find that the appellant is not  in
             need of international protection on the basis  of  any  claimed
             political opinion."

Grounds of Appeal

7.   The appellant raised five grounds of appeal but in the result Ms  Smith
    only argued three before us.  Most of the arguments centred  on  ground
    one which related to the appellant's potential status as an  unattended
    child and the details of which we shall turn to  shortly.   Ground  two
    was to the effect that there were inadequate reasons for rejecting  the
    core asylum claim (viz fear of the Taliban) and ground  three  attacked
    the weight attached to certain oral evidence given by the appellant  in
    circumstances to which we shall turn.

8.   It might be convenient were we to  deal  with  grounds  two  and  three
    before turning to the first ground.

Ground Two

9.   It was submitted that in relying on  the  failure  by  the  appellant's
    representatives to attempt to corroborate the death of  his  father  by
    approaching the Afghan authorities the judge  gave  no  regard  to  the
    potential risk to his safety if attempts were made to do so.  The  Home
    Office Country of Origin Report stated "that the Afghan National Police
    ...  "is  widely  viewed  with  suspicion  and  essentially  serves  to
    complicate the local security situation yet further".  The same  source
    supported that "in Laghman,  there  was  clear  evidence  of  relations
    between the police and the Taliban"  and  further  background  material
    highlighted  instances  of  the  police  betraying  colleagues  to  the
    Taliban.  It could  not  therefore  be  assumed  that  to  contact  the
    authorities and provide details of the appellant and his family in such
    a way would not place him in danger.  Even a  subjective  fear  on  the
    appellant's part would be sufficient.

10.  The judge placed particular weight, it was  said,  on  the  failure  to
    contact the authorities because of the  objective  background  material
    which showed that such incidents would have been recorded  but  he  did
    not identify which background material he was  referring  to.   Insofar
    that it might be inferred that he was referring to a  large  number  of
    reports contained at B273-B470 of the appellant's bundle he committed a
    material error of fact because those reports show that a  large  number
    of policemen had been killed by insurgents  but  did  not  provide  the
    names of the policemen or give any  indication  that  records  of  such
    names would be kept.

11.  It was submitted that the undue weight  that  the  judge  afforded  the
    failure to contact  the  authorities  to  seek  corroborative  evidence
    tainted the rest of his findings on the material before him.

12.  Mr Deller said that the judge was  aware  that  corroboration  was  not
    required and directed himself appropriately.  The Secretary of  State's
    refusal letter set up an expectation that there would be some reference
    to the claimed manner of the appellant's father's death if it happened.
     The judge had made it clear that the matter had troubled him.  He  had
    no reason to dispute that the point had been made that there  might  be
    links between the police and the Taliban but that did not diminish  the
    weight the judge was entitled to attach to the lack  of  evidence.   He
    thought the death certificate could have been asked for.  The risk  was
    not sufficiently demonstrable to provide a reason why a request was not
    made.  As far as the other matter  was  concerned  the  refusal  letter
    identified a number of links to reports of deaths of police officers in
    Baghlan but the death of the appellant's father was not  recorded.   In
    the context of the case as a whole the judge had  done  his  best  with
    what he had to work with.

13.  In our opinion nothing turns on this ground.  It was a matter  for  the
    judge to assess what  weight  to  attach  to  the  failure  to  provide
    supporting  evidence.   Even  if  there  were  good  reasons  for   the
    appellant's solicitors not attempting to obtain a death certificate the
    fact remains that there was no report of an  officer  being  killed  in
    Baghlan Province in the circumstances claimed by  the  appellant.   The
    issue is not whether officers were named but whether the  circumstances
    were reported.  It is the case, as far as we can see, that there is  no
    report of the death  of  an  officer,  even  an  unnamed  one,  in  the
    circumstances claimed by the appellant in Baghlan at the material time.
     This was an omission to which the judge was entitled to have regard.

Ground Three

14.   This  ground  was  tabled   under   reference   to   the   appellant's
    vulnerability, which was not disputed.  It is to the effect that at the
    hearing on 5 June 2013 the appellant gave lengthy oral  evidence  which
    continued after the lunch break.  An adjournment was granted  following
    a further 15-minute break  in  the  afternoon  session  and  the  judge
    indicated the following:

        "32. It was apparent to me that the appellant had had  no  problems
             understanding  questions  before  lunch  and   making   himself
             understood by the interpreter.  After the lunch adjournment the
             appellant had been mumbling and had given the  impression  that
             he could not understand questions asked of him.   As  a  result
             this application was made by Mr Smyth.  Ms  Sreeraman  for  the
             Home Office had no observation.  Very reluctantly I  agreed  to
             adjourn the case to another date in order to  ensure  that  the
             appellant had been given every opportunity to present his  case
             fairly."


15.  The judge found that A had at least one  grandparent  presently  living
    in Kabul and, as we have indicated, said that "... at one stage of  his
    evidence before me he admitted that he and his family had  visited  his
    grandfather in Kabul on at least one occasion in  the  past  before  he
    retracted that evidence."

16.  It was said that the judge erred in placing weight upon that aspect  of
    the appellant's oral evidence as it  was  heard  during  the  afternoon
    session of the hearing on 5 June 2013  when  the  appellant  no  longer
    seemed to understand the questions asked of him.  It was said that  the
    error was exacerbated  by  the  three-month  delay  between  the  judge
    hearing this evidence and the writing of his determination, albeit that
    delay was caused by the hearing being adjourned as opposed to tardiness
    on behalf of the judge.  It was also said that there  was  no  evidence
    that the judge had had regard  to  the  report  from  the  Paediatrics,
    Speech and Language Therapy Services which stated:

        "he does not have a secure understanding of single words in  Pashtu
        or English.  He also struggles to understand basic concepts such as
        "who", "where", "what" and is unable to follow simple commands such
        as "point to" and "show me".

17.  Ms Smith submitted that no weight should  be  placed  on  the  evidence
    that the appellant had a grandfather.  It was material to the claim and
    affected the whole of the case.  Reference was made to the report which
    picked up the difficulties with his language and it was said  that  his
    carers had also  picked  this  point  up.   The  appellant  could  give
    completely unrelated answers to very specific questions.

18.  Mr Deller submitted that the judge had narrated the very careful  steps
    he took to deal with the appellant's vulnerability.  In any event there
    was a finding that there were other family members  so  evidence  about
    his grandfather was of no materiality.  The fact that there was a three-
    month gap did not amount to a problem.

19.  The judge in his very careful report has narrated the  steps  which  he
    took to make sure that the appellant understood what was going  on  and
    refers to breaks which were taken.   He  was  obviously  alive  to  the
    appellant's  vulnerability.   He  narrates  that  after  the   luncheon
    interval the appellant's cross-examination continued at 2pm and it  was
    during the course of that he gave evidence, to which  we  have  already
    referred, as follows:

         "He said his grandfather was still alive and lived in  Afghanistan,
         in Kabul.  He then said that the person was  his  father's  cousin,
         his mother's uncle.  He repeated that the person was  his  father's
         cousin and he thinks that he was his mother's uncle."


         He said that when he left Afghanistan his mother's  father  was  in
         Kabul.  When asked where his  father's  father  was  when  he  left
         Afghanistan he replied that when he  was  leaving  Afghanistan  his
         father's father was in Kabul, but that since then he did  not  know
         where he was.  He said it was correct that his mother's father  and
         his father's father lived in Kabul when he left."


20.  Towards the end of close examination it is noted that his evidence  was
    as follows:

         "He said that he did go to Kabul with his mother and family  before
         he went to Kabul to leave Afghanistan.  He said that when they went
         to Kabul he and his family stayed with the agent.  He said that  he
         had not been to stay with his grandfather in Kabul."


21.  It is narrated  that  he  was  re-examined  and  paragraph  30  of  the
    determination goes on as follows:

        "30. In answers  to  questions  then  asked  by  the  Tribunal  the
             appellant stated, inter alia, as follows:

               I reminded the appellant that in his evidence  he  had  told
               the Tribunal that  his  father's  father  and  his  mother's
               father both  lived  in  Kabul  at  the  time  that  he  left
               Afghanistan, and he was asked whether that was  correct,  he
               answered that it was not like that, both lived in Kabul.   I
               then asked him what his father's name was and he said it was
               Bahran.  I asked him for his mother's name and  he  said  it
               was Zainab.  I then asked him what was the name of  Bahran's
               father and he replied that Bahran did not have a father.   I
               asked him what was the name of Zainab's father and  he  said
               Zainab's father was called Haman."


22.  It was thereafter that the Tribunal took a 15-minute break.  On  return
    Mr Smyth for the appellant said that the latter had reached his  limit.
    He said that he had a number of questions which he would  like  to  ask
    but the appellant needed an adjournment and could not continue.  It was
    in that context  that  the  judge  noted  the  difficulties  which  the
    appellant had had after the lunch adjournment.   The  judge  agreed  to
    adjourn the case to another date and it called  again  on  4  September
    2013.  At that point incidentally the judge raised the issue as to  why
    the Afghani authorities had not been contacted to establish information
    about the death of the appellant's father.

23.  In any event Mr  Smyth  indicated  that  he  had  now  had  no  further
    questions to ask.  In the meantime a number of letters had reached  the
    Tribunal on 3 September 2013, including one, as we understand it,  from
    Kent County Council dated 9 August 2013 which stated  inter  alia  that
    the appellant had been "greatly traumatised by the Tribunal"  and  that
    "the cross-examination in court would appear to have impacted upon  his
    emotional well-being potentially exacerbating his vulnerability".

24.  This no doubt prompted the comments at paragraphs  42  and  43  of  the
    determination which are in the following terms:

         "42.     I wish to record  that  my  recollection  of  the  cross-
             examination on 5 June 2013 was  one  of  a  gentle  process  of
             questioning by Ms Sreeraman, who never pressured the appellant.
              I had endeavoured to give a number of  short  adjournments  at
             convenient times so as to ensure that the appellant  was  under
             no pressure.  If I had thought the cross-examination likely  to
             "traumatise" the appellant I would have  stopped  it.   It  was
             never raised as  an  issue  on  5  June  2013  and  no  concern
             regarding the appellant's  ability  to  answer  questions  were
             raised at that time.


         43. The statement in the  letter  of  9  August  2013  comes  as  a
             surprise to me today ..."

25. Having considered the submissions in support of this ground  of  appeal
    and the relevant paragraphs in the determination we are satisfied  that
    the judge was perfectly conscious  of  the  appellant's  vulnerability,
    that he took appropriate steps to deal with it and that having seen and
    heard the appellant's evidence for himself was in a perfect position to
    know what weight to attach to it.  It is,  we  think,  of  significance
    that nothing was made of this point at the time by  the  representative
    who then acted for the appellant and it seems to us with  respect  that
    this ground is something of an afterthought.

26. We are satisfied that the findings  in  fact  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal cannot be assailed and that they should stand.   Against  that
    background we turn to consider the first point made by Ms Smith in  her
    submissions.

Ground 1

27.  It was submitted that at the date of the hearing the  judge  had  found
    that the appellant had provided his correct address, that  he  had  not
    been and was not in touch with his family and that he was dependent  on
    others  for  his  well-being.   Further,  owing   to   his   particular
    characteristics, namely his age and vulnerability, he would be at  risk
    if returned to Afghanistan alone.  At the hypothetical return  date  of
    the date of the hearing he would be returned alone.  It was not open to
    the judge having made the above findings to conclude that the appellant
    could be safely returned to Afghanistan at some  unspecified  point  in
    the future.  The appeal had to be determined on the basis  of  risk  at
    the date of the hearing.  On the basis of the findings of fact made  by
    the  judge,  the  appellant  was  a  refugee  and   was   entitled   to
    international protection.

28.  The key findings by the judge were as follows:

    1.   The appellant was a child;
    2.   The appellant was very vulnerable on  account  of  his  congenital
        hearing defect, communication difficulties, likely educational  and
        learning difficulties, very limited self-help skills and dependency
        on others for his well-being.  Reference was made to what was  said
        in paragraphs 57 and 66 of the determination.
    3.   The appellant was not in contact with his  family  in  Afghanistan
        (paragraph 65 referred).
    4.   The appellant could not relocate on his  own  in  Afghanistan  and
        would not be able to survive in Afghanistan on his own  (paragraphs
        69 and 66 referred).
    5.   The appellant had provided the correct address for his  family  in
        Afghanistan.

29.  The judge had concluded that the appellant had family in Kabul and  his
    home area and that in light of that the appellant's  solicitor  or  the
    respondent could make contact with the family after the hearing.

30.  What it came to was that the judge  found  that  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing the appellant was a member of a particular social group  as  an
    unattended child and overall was a  particularly  vulnerable  one.   It
    would not do to assess the risk to him at some future date in the event
    of contact being made by his representatives or the respondent.

31.  The judge had made a material error of law.

32.  It was clear following Ravichandran that risk must be assessed  at  the
    date of the hearing and this was endorsed in ST (Child asylum  seekers)
    Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 292 (IAC) at paragraphs 15 and 27.

33.  The Secretary of State had breached her duty to endeavour to trace  his
    family and it was not open to the judge to find that this breach  could
    be rectified in the future yet go on to dismiss the appeal.  Nor was it
    open to the judge to find that the appellant's  representatives  should
    take positive steps to alleviate the risk on return.  It was not  their
    role to arrange for the safe return of their client.   The  implication
    that the  appellant  could  do  more  to  facilitate  his  safe  return
    contradicted the finding that  he  had  already  supplied  the  correct
    address for his family.

34.  There was no finding that the appellant would be  able  to  track  down
    his family whether in Baghlan or Kabul of his own motion and this could
    not be inferred given the findings about his difficulties.

35.  Since he was not in contact with his family and would be at risk  as  a
    vulnerable minor on his own in Afghanistan the only conclusion open  to
    the judge was that at the date of the hearing the  appellant  had  made
    out his entitlement to international protection.  Reference was made to
    LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008] UKAIT  00005  (15
    March 2007) and AA (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16.

36.  The findings about the appellant's vulnerability and  lack  of  contact
    had not been appealed by the respondent.

37.  There was no evidence that the appellant was in touch with  his  family
    or any information about their current location or whether  they  could
    be contacted.  It followed that the findings of the  judge  were  self-
    contradictory.  There was no evidence to support the judge's hope  that
    the appellant's family would be contacted, were  still  living  in  the
    same location or were still alive or indeed that he would  be  welcomed
    back if contact was made.  The belief that they could be contacted  and
    would be a protective force was purely speculative.  All that was known
    was that at the material time, the date of the hearing,  the  appellant
    was not in touch with his family and  that  he  would  be  at  risk  if
    returned unaccompanied.  He  should,  therefore,  be  recognised  as  a
    refugee.

38.  If the risk changed at some point in the future it  would  be  open  to
    the SSHD to bring the matter back before the Tribunal.

39.  Ms Smith accepted that there was case law such as SHL  v  Secretary  of
    State  for  the  Home   Department   (Tracing   obligation/Trafficking)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 312  (IAC)  and  KA  (Afghanistan)  and  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  1014  which
    showed that there must be more than  a  mere  breach  of  the  duty  to
    endeavour to trace before asylum was granted but a failure to discharge
    the duty might be relevant to the determination of the asylum claim.

40.  In Ms Smith's submissions the spectrum referred to in KA was  a  slight
    distraction.  Risk had already been  established.   The  appellant  was
    found to be vulnerable.  While it was found  that  he  had  family  the
    point was whether he  was  unattended  at  the  date  of  the  hearing.
    Finding that he could be in contact with them at some point  looked  to
    the future.

41.  In response, Mr Deller did not challenge the fact that  the  respondent
    had failed to undertake her tracing obligations.  He  did  not  dispute
    that the question of whether the appellant was  a  refugee  had  to  be
    decided at the point of the hearing.  The case, however, was whether or
    not the appellant could properly be said to be unattended.   A  correct
    family address had been provided and  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    family were there.  The issue boiled down to what one made of the  lack
    of contact.  One would presume that the family would help.  The finding
    that there was a family in Kabul and Baghlan  defeated  any  suggestion
    that he had any well-founded fear of being an unattended child.  Was he
    merely unattended because he had not in fact maintained  contact?   The
    respondent's position was that that was not the case.

42.  In further submissions, Ms Smith pointed us to the reception  directive
    which defined what an unaccompanied  child  was.   Where  there  was  a
    finding that there had been no contact for a year, it was difficult  to
    know why the appellant  could  not  be  said  to  be  unattended.   The
    evidence had been that the appellant's mother had no  telephone.   Lack
    of contact meant that the appellant must succeed.

Discussion and Decision

43.  We have little difficulty in acceding to the  suggestion  that  if  the
    appellant was  part  of  the  social  group  of  unattended  minors  in
    Afghanistan then he would fall to be granted protection.  There  is  no
    dispute that the risk has to be  determined  as  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing rather than at some future date.

44.  So far so good.  Can it be said, however,  that  the  appellant  is  in
    fact an unattended child or rather would  be  an  unattended  child  if
    returned to Afghanistan as at the date of the hearing?

45.  We proceed on the basis  of  the  facts  as  found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

46.  The starting point is the finding that  the  appellant  has  family  in
    Baghlan, which is where the appellant  said  they  were.   For  present
    purposes, it matters  not  whether  there  is  also  a  grandfather  or
    grandfathers in Kabul.

47.   Ms  Smith  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
    suggestion that the family were still living in the  same  location  or
    were still alive or would welcome the appellant  back.   On  the  other
    hand there was no material before the judge which suggested that  there
    would  be  any  reason  for  them  to  move,  he  having  rejected  the
    appellant's core asylum claim.  No reason  was  given  why  the  family
    would not accept him back.  In our opinion the judge  was  entitled  to
    take the view that the family having been in Baghlan a  year  ago  were
    likely still to be there and reject any suggestion that they would  not
    welcome back the appellant since there was no evidence to support  that
    theory.

48.  It is noted that at paragraph 12 of the determination the  judge  noted
    that the appellant claimed that he had lost contact  with  his  family.
    There is, however, no finding to the effect that he had  in  fact  lost
    contact.  The findings simply make it clear  that  there  has  been  no
    contact.   Do these amount to the same thing?

49.  If there has been a loss of contact that is a matter  which  should  be
    proved by the appellant.  In this regard we refer to the case of HK and
    Ors (minors, indiscriminate violence, forced  recruitment  by  Taliban,
    contact with family members) Afghanistan CG [2010] UKUT 378 where it is
    said that where a child has close relatives  in  Afghanistan  who  have
    assisted him in leaving the country, any  assertion  that  such  family
    members are not contactable or are unable to meet the  child  in  Kabul
    and care for him on return should be supported by credible evidence  of
    efforts to contact those family members and their inability to meet and
    care for the child in the event of return.

50.  In the particular case we are dealing with, apart  from  the  reference
    to the mother having no telephone, there is really no evidence that the
    family   are   uncontactable.    Of   particular   relevance   to   our
    considerations are paragraphs 49 to 54 of HK which are in the following
    terms:

        "49. None of these boys is an orphan and none is without family  in
             Afghanistan. It was pointed out on behalf of the  Secretary  of
             State that in each of these cases  the  appellant  was  advised
             that he could seek to make contact with his  relatives  through
             the auspices of the Red  Cross  organisation.  Information  was
             provided that the Red Cross International tracing service is  a
             way for families who have been  separated  to  try  to  restore
             contact. It was noted that it is a free service and that in the
             United Kingdom contact should be made with the local Red  Cross
             Branch; if the organisation feels that it is able to  help  the
             inquirer will be asked to fill in a relevant form which will be
             sent to the headquarters in London, from whence it is forwarded
             to the appropriate Red Cross or Red  Crescent  Society  in  the
             appropriate country or to the International  Committee  of  the
             Red Cross. They can offer assistance in putting the parties  in
             contact through letter or phone.

        50.  In each case this information  was  provided  in  the  refusal
             letter to the appellant, but there was no evidence  before  the
             Tribunal in any of the cases that any efforts had been made  to
             contact relatives in  Afghanistan.  None  of  these  respective
             families lived in  areas  of  Afghanistan  where  it  might  be
             thought that they could have been displaced  by  the  conflict.
             None of the families lived in the provinces which are under the
             control of the  Taliban  or  where  there  is  regular  ongoing
             fighting which the [sic] generally displaces local people  from
             their areas. There is no reason to believe that  the  relatives
             of these three young men are living anywhere  else  other  than
             where they were previously living when each the appellants  had
             contact with them.

        51.  There is no evidence of any endeavour being made on behalf  of
             the [sic] any of the appellants  to  make  contact  with  their
             relatives still living in Afghanistan. As Mr Bedford  accepted,
             it was not in dispute that the  respective  families  would  be
             willing to collect and take care of these young men upon  their
             return".

51.  This was of course decided before KA and EU and cases in that line  but
    nonetheless we are  of  the  view  that  there  has  been  no  evidence
    presented that the family are uncontactable.

52.  Ms Smith referred to AA and in particular  to  paragraph  133  thereof.
    That is in the following terms:

       "133.  We are further satisfied that the appellant would be at  real
             risk of persecution as an unattached child from his  particular
             home area who has lost all contact with  his  family,  so  that
             family protection will not be available to  him.   We  note  in
             that regard that  the  respondent  has  not  made  any  tracing
             enquiries  as  required  by  the  Asylum   Seekers   (Reception
             Conditions) Regulations 2005.   But  as  the  Court  of  Appeal
             observed in DS (see paragraph 34 above) the  appellant's  claim
             has to be determined on its merits, whether or  not  any  steps
             had  been  taken  by  the  respondent  in  discharge  of   that
             obligation.  We would simply add that we are entirely satisfied
             on the evidence that the appellant immediately  responded  when
             his social worker told him about the Red Cross tracing service;
             but that that has not yet produced any response (see  paragraph
             109 above).  But the centrality of the question  of  whether  a
             child would have the protection of his or her family on return,
             serves to demonstrate the importance of the  discharge  by  the
             respondent of her duty to make tracing enquiries."

53.   The  Secretary  of  State's  failure  to  endeavour  to  make  tracing
    enquiries is something which has to be taken into account in  assessing
    the merits of the asylum claim but a decision  nonetheless  has  to  be
    made.  It is noteworthy that AA proceeded on the basis that  the  child
    had lost contact with  his  family.   As  appears  from  paragraph  109
    attempts had been made to contact his father on a telephone number  but
    they had not worked.  Attempts had also been made to contact the family
    through the Red Cross Tracing Service but to date  there  had  been  no
    response.  While we accept that it is not for the respondent to shuffle
    off her responsibilities to endeavour to trace a family by referring  a
    child to the Red Cross, nonetheless it is for the appellant to make out
    his case.  He has  not  made  out  a  case  that  his  family  are  not
    contactable.  On the contrary, he obviously felt  able  to  instruct  a
    friend to make contact with them.

54.  That, however, only deals with part of the problem.  It might  be  said
    of the decision we have just reached that we too  are  looking  to  the
    future.  We are predicating the lack of risk on the  basis  of  contact
    which will be made in the future, which is precisely what is complained
    of in  relation  to  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    However  we  are  not  satisfied  that  the  fact  that  administrative
    arrangements have to be made mean that the tempus inspiciendum  of  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal falls to  be  regarded  as  in  the
    future.  We refer to paragraphs 52 and 53 of HK as follows:

        "52. The Court of Appeal in the case of  HH  (Somalia)  and  others
             [2010] EWCA Civ 426 accepted that the route of  return  for  an
             appellant  should  be  looked  at.  It  was  said  that  it  is
             impossible  to  decide  whether  return  home  is  feasible  or
             relocation is reasonable without knowing how the individual  is
             going to get there. They considered that in any case  in  which
             it can be shown, either directly or by implication,  the  route
             or method of return is envisaged, the Tribunal is  required  by
             law to consider and determine any challenge to  the  safety  of
             the route or method. In that case it was  considered  that  the
             tribunal had erred in refusing to determine that appeal on  the
             basis of what was known about the route of return. It was known
             that return would be to Mogadishu airport, and it was  implicit
             that the journey onward would be by road. The Court found  that
             the  method  of  return  was  a  necessary  ingredient  in  any
             appraisal of risk. Even if they had no real  information  about
             this, they were still obliged to do as best as  they  could  to
             deal with the issue.

        53. The Tribunal finds itself with a similar dearth of evidence  in
             these cases. However, it is known that the appellants would  be
             returned to Kabul. The respondent pointed out the  availability
             of assistance through the Red Cross, to which we have  referred
             above. The respondent also made reference to the  International
             Organisation  for  Migration  which  assists  Afghan  nationals
             through voluntary returns and reintegration  into  society.  It
             was pointed out in the respective refusal letters that once  an
             application for return assistance has been  approved,  the  IOM
             sending mission makes travel arrangements and  IOM  Afghanistan
             provides reception assistance through the coordination cell  at
             Kabul airport.  Their  personnel  guide  beneficiaries  through
             immigration and customs processes. Temporary  accommodation  is
             provided  upon  request  and  returnees  are   offered   onward
             transportation and assistance to their final destination. It is
             therefore our conclusion that assistance would be available  to
             these appellants,  both  in  seeking  out  their  relatives  in
             Afghanistan,  and  in  facilitating  their  reunion   and   the
             reception of the appellants upon  return  to  Kabul.  As  noted
             above, we have no reason to believe  that  contact  with  their
             families would be impeded by the situation in Afghanistan,  and
             we have no reason to believe that the families have moved  from
             where they were previously living."


    Paragraph 54 runs as follows:


        54.  The families were all able to make arrangements for  the  boys
             to travel out of Afghanistan and to the  west.  They  travelled
             with the assistance of agents and  each  of  the  families  was
             clearly able to provide the finance for such journeys, which is
             no small amount of money. We have no  reason  to  believe  that
             their families could not travel to Kabul to meet them on  their
             return.  Therefore,  while  we  take  into  consideration   the
             evidence which has been  produced  regarding  the  dangers  for
             children in Afghanistan, particularly those who have no  family
             to turn to, we do not believe that these appellants would  face
             a real risk of such eventualities. There is no real  risk  that
             they would be homeless as they have families to whom they could
             return, and they have uncles who would be able to protect  them
             from any abuse or violence on the journey  home.  There  is  no
             reason to believe that they would have to stay in  Kabul  other
             than while in transit, and it has not been shown that the level
             of violence in Afghanistan is such that they could  not  travel
             safely from Kabul to their home areas."


55.  In relation to Sri Lanka, the case of ST referred to by Ms  Smith  made
    it plain at paragraph 29 that the judge was wrong  to  respond  to  the
    submission that the appellant was entitled to refugee status because of
    present risk by concluding that any risk of harm to the child would  be
    diminished at the unspecified time in the future  when  the  child  (or
    former  child)  might  actually  return.   What  was  required  was  an
    assessment of risk on the hypothesis that the child was being  returned
    at the time of the decision on appeal.  Nonetheless at paragraph  73(d)
    of the determination the Upper Tribunal made the following comments:

        "(d) If the Home Office were, hypothetically, to return to  Colombo
             Airport at the present time, it would be doing so under a legal
             regime of UK law that imposed  a  duty  to  safeguard  him  and
             protect him whilst he was under  their  jurisdiction.   At  the
             least this would require the provision of a suitable escort for
             the appellant on his journey  to  Colombo.   It  would  require
             suitable liaison with the High Commission, any  willing  family
             members, international organisations or local  social  services
             on his arrival.  He would not just be dumped at the airport  or
             the nearest beach."

56.  HK was a country guidance case which, as far  we  are  aware,  has  not
    been undermined in relation to the question of travel arrangements.  In
    ST, as we have just indicated, it was explicitly pointed out  that  the
    risk had to be assessed as at the date of the hearing.  Nonetheless  in
    each case it was also recognised that administrative arrangements would
    have to be put in place in the future to facilitate the return  of  the
    individual concerned.  That did not  mean  that  the  decision  on  the
    merits was flawed.




57.  With that in mind we are satisfied that the submission that the  First-
    tier Tribunal had regard to a hypothetical  future  date  in  assessing
    risk is fallacious.

Conclusions

58.  For the  reasons  already  given  the  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination is dismissed.









                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)




