
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04993/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5th August 2016                        |On 31st August 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Holt, Counsel instructed by the Coventry Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ]  1995.   The
    Appellant first arrived in the UK on 9th January 2013 in possession  of
    a valid visa and was given leave to  enter  as  a  student  until  13th
    February 2014.  She applied for asylum  on  25th  January  2013.   That
    application was refused for the reasons given in a Notice  of  Decision
    dated 10th March 2015.  The Appellant  appealed,  and  her  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  (the  Judge)  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 17th June 2015.  She decided to dismiss  the  appeal  for
    the reasons given in her Decision dated 19th June 2015.  The  Appellant
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 1st  September  2015  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's case before the Judge was  that  she  was  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka because her brother had been detained twice in 2008
    and 2010 as a suspected member of the LTTE.  The Appellant herself  was
    detained  along  with  other  members  of  her  family  in  March  2012
    concerning the  activities  of  her  brother.   On  this  occasion  the
    Appellant was detained only for one day.  The  Appellant  was  detained
    again on 13th April 2012 concerning a school friend  whose  family  was
    involved with the  LTTE.   Following  her  kidnap,  the  Appellant  was
    detained, threatened, and tortured.   The  Appellant  was  released  on
    payment of a bribe.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeal because although she was satisfied  that
    the Appellant was detained as claimed, she  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant was released upon a payment of a bribe, and  found  that  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka had no continuing interest in  the  Appellant.
    This  was  partly  because  the  Appellant  delayed  for  eight  months
    following her detention in leaving Sri Lanka.  The Judge was  also  not
    satisfied that since her detention the Appellant had not been in  touch
    with her father, and that the authorities had made enquiries about  the
    Appellant including  the  use  of  photographs  of  her  following  her
    departure.  This was because this part of the Appellant's case was  not
    corroborated and was made with a view to enhancing her claim.  However,
    the Judge  did  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence  of  her  sur  place
    activities in the UK, but the  Judge  found  these  activities  as  not
    sufficient to put the Appellant at risk on return according to the risk
    categories identified in GJ and others (post civil war: returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2012] UKUT 00319 (IAC).  In reaching these  conclusions,  the
    Judge took account of the medical evidence that the Appellant  suffered
    from moderate depression with features of traumatic stress.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Holt submitted that the Judge had erred in
    law in coming to these decisions.  The Judge erred in  law  in  finding
    that it was not credible that the authorities had made enquiries  about
    the Appellant following her departure.  It was apparent from  what  the
    Judge wrote at paragraph 32 of the Decision that she had required  this
    part of the Appellant's account to be corroborated.  The Judge had  not
    believed the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  brother  in  this  respect
    without explaining why.   The  Appellant's  brother  had  been  granted
    refugee status, and at paragraph 16 of the Decision the Judge  accepted
    his credibility.  This error was material because  if  the  authorities
    had tried to locate the Appellant  following  her  departure  from  Sri
    Lanka, she would have come within the risk categories identified in  GJ
    and others.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response and argued that
    the Judge had not erred  in  law.   She  considered  all  the  relevant
    evidence and came to a conclusion open to her on  the  evidence  before
    her.  She had made clear findings that the Appellant was not at risk on
    return despite her detention.  The Judge had made satisfactory findings
    as to the credibility of the Appellant's account.

 7. I do find an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  which  I
    therefore set aside.  Although the Judge accepted  the  credibility  of
    much of the Appellant's evidence, crucially she did  not  believe  that
    the authorities had taken an interest in the Appellant by searching for
    her after her departure  from  Sri  Lanka.   At  paragraph  33  of  the
    Decision, the Judge stated that she did not find credible the claims of
    the Appellant and her brother in this respect  without  explaining  why
    except to note that there was some delay in the Appellant  leaving  Sri
    Lanka (which the Appellant explained by claiming she spent this  period
    in hiding), and to refer to a lack of corroboration.  This  finding  is
    contradictory to what the Judge wrote at paragraph 16 of the  Decision.
    There the Judge accepted that  the  Appellant's  brother  had  given  a
    credible account of his own experiences in Sri  Lanka.   This  apparent
    change in the treatment of the evidence of the Appellant's  brother  is
    not sufficiently explained and amounts to an error of  law.   It  is  a
    material error of law for the reason given  in  his  submission  by  Mr
    Holt.

 8. I did not proceed to remake the decision  of  the  Judge.   Instead,  I
    decided that that decision should be remade in the First-tier  Tribunal
    in accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice  Statements.   None
    of the findings of the Judge as to credibility  and  of  fact  will  be
    preserved at that hearing.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons originally given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 31st August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
