
[pic]
IAC-HW-am-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04277/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AYM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton of the Specialist Appeals
For the Respondent:    Mr I Palmer of Counsel instructed by Barnes, Harrild
                    & Dyer, solicitors


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent (the Applicant) is a national of Eritrea born  in  1985.
    On 3 April 2006 he applied for entry clearance to visit his mother  who
    had been recognised as a refugee and in  December  2005  had  become  a
    naturalised British citizen.  That  application  was  refused  and  the
    Applicant's appeal was dismissed by a determination promulgated  on  12
    December 2006, to be found at pages 80-85 of the Applicant's bundle.

 2. In August 2007 the Applicant left Ethiopia overland and on 11 June 2008
    arrived clandestinely in the United Kingdom. He claimed asylum the next
    day on account of his fear on return to Eritrea of persecution for  his
    political opinions.

 3. The Appellant (the SSHD) considered the Applicant had absconded between
    26 June 2008 and 7 August 2011.  On 8 May  2012  the  SSHD  interviewed
    him.  The SSHD made no decision on the claim and the  Applicant  issued
    proceedings for judicial review which were compromised  on  4  November
    2014 on  the  basis  that  the  SSHD  would  make  a  decision  on  the
    Applicant's claim within 21 days of the sealing of  the  Consent  Order
    which happened on 15 December 2014.

 4. It was not until 4 March 2015 that  the  SSHD  decided  to  refuse  the
    Applicant leave to enter and to remove him to Eritrea.  The reasons for
    the decision were contained in  a  letter  of  17  February  2015  (the
    reasons letter).  The SSHD noted the Applicant's claim to  have  worked
    in the Information and Culture Unit of the Eritrean  Armed  Forces  and
    did not believe the substance of his account.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 5. On 13 March 2015 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section 82
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  as  amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds of appeal summarise the Applicant's account but
    otherwise are entirely formulaic and generic.  They include  references
    to Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention.  The grounds make no
    specific reference to the basis for the Applicant's claim under Article
    8.

 6. By a decision promulgated on 24 August 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Andonian allowed the Applicant's appeal on refugee grounds.

 7. On 14 September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Reid granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal because it was arguable  the  Judge  had  not
    made adequate findings on the Applicant's account and had not explained
    how he had  assessed  the  Applicant's  credibility  and  had  made  no
    reference to the country guidance determinations of MA (draft evaders -
    illegal departures -  risk)  Eritrea  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00059  and  MO
    (illegal exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190 (IAC) upon
    which the SSHD had expressly relied in the reasons letter.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. The Applicant filed a response under Rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  He submitted that  the  findings  of  the
    Judge that the Applicant had illegally left Eritrea were sustainable on
    the facts and without express reference to the country guidance  cases.
    Further in 2003 his mother had been recognised as a refugee and  indeed
    the Applicant had left Eritrea for a UNHCR  refugee  camp  in  Ethiopia
    from where he  had  applied  for  entry  clearance.   The  relationship
    between the Applicant and his mother had not  been  challenged  at  any
    time during the entry clearance application and  the  appeal  from  the
    decision to refuse it.   The  findings  to  that  effect  in  the  2006
    determination meant the point should not be re-litigated on  the  basis
    of the  jurisprudence  in  Devaseelan  (second  appeals,  ECHR,  extra-
    territorial effect) [2002] UKIAT 00702.

 9. A consideration of the determinations in MA and MO would not have  made
    any difference to the Judge's findings on the Applicant's illegal  exit
    from Eritrea.

10. On the issue of the credibility findings, the PR24 response argued that
    the facts of the Applicant's illegal exit and his being  of  draft  age
    and that he would be returning as a failed asylum seeker even  with  no
    history of political activity in the United Kingdom were in  themselves
    sufficient to establish that he is a refugee.

11. The Applicant was present with two female and one male supporters.   Mr
    Palmer confirmed he had explained the purpose of the  hearing  and  the
    likely procedure which would be adopted.

12. I raised as an initial matter the issue of the DVD referred to  in  the
    SSHD's reasons letter but which the Applicant stated had in  fact  been
    submitted: see paragraph 32 of  his  statement  of  8  June  2015.   Mr
    Staunton noted there was no DVD held by the Presenting Officer  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Mr Palmer explained the  purpose  of  the
    DVD was to show the applicant was a playwright.  It was  not  suggested
    that the content of the DVD was of a political nature.  I advanced  the
    view that I did not think the Judge's decision reflected the purpose of
    the DVD as explained by Mr Palmer.  Mr Palmer said his belief was  that
    the content and hence the relevance of the DVD had been  mis-understood
    by the Applicant's advocate.

Submissions for the SSHD

13. Mr Staunton relied on the two grounds described in the application  for
    permission to appeal.  The Judge had not engaged with the detail of the
    Applicant's case and its specifics.

14. The Judge had given undue weight to the issue of illegal exit.  He  had
    referred to the SSHD's Country of Origin Information Report of May 2015
    but in the context of illegal exit, the Applicant claimed he  had  left
    Eritrea in 2004 and the situation in 2015  was  considerably  different
    from 2004.  It was accepted the determination  in  MO  dealt  with  the
    question of exit after 2006 which was considerably closer to 2004  than
    the basis on which the COR had been prepared.  In any event, the  Judge
    had failed to give any reason why he had accepted the Applicant's claim
    to have illegally left Eritrea.

15. The reasons letter had identified  and  extensively  canvassed  several
    credibility issues.  The Judge had failed directly to  address  any  of
    these.  He had not given sufficient reasoning in his decision  for  the
    SSHD as the disappointed party to know why  the  Judge  had  found  the
    Applicant credible.  The decision contained errors of law and should be
    set aside and the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh.

Submissions for the Applicant

16. Mr Palmer relied on his R24 response.   The  principles  in  Devaseelan
    should apply to the findings made in the entry clearance  determination
    of 12 December 2006; in particular the acceptance of  the  relationship
    of the Applicant and his mother and his illegal departure from  Eritrea
    for a refugee camp in Ethiopia should be accepted.  If the SSHD  wished
    to proceed on the basis the Applicant had legally left Eritrea in  2004
    it was necessary for the SSHD to do more than rely on the determination
    in MO.

17. The Judge's failure to address all the issues  raised  in  the  reasons
    letter was not in itself a material error of law.   The  facts  of  the
    Applicant's case spoke for themselves  and  the  Judge's  decision  was
    sustainable.

Findings and Consideration

18. Failure to address every point raised in a reasons letter issued by the
    SSHD is in itself not a material error of law.  However, in  this  case
    it is doubtful whether the Judge has  addressed  any  of  the  specific
    issues raised by the SSHD and it would appear he has treated the appeal
    on a generalised basis.  He referred generically to country information
    of May 2015.  It would appear that this is the SSHD's own document  but
    the Judge did not identify it.  More  importantly,  he  has  not  taken
    account of the fact that the Applicant's claim  is  to  have  illegally
    left Eritrea as long ago as 2004.  In assessing that claim, it would be
    necessary to look to country information at or around that time  rather
    than the latest and very recent information.  The position  in  Eritrea
    as indeed it would in any State have moved on in the intervening period
    of more than a decade. Finally, I  am  satisfied  that  when  the  SSHD
    considers the Judge's decision she will not be able to  understand  why
    in the light of the points raised in the reasons letter the appeal  has
    been allowed.  This in itself is a material error of law.  Justice must
    not only be done but must be seen to be done.

19. For these reasons, I find  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contained material errors of law such that it should be  set  aside  in
    its entirety.

20. Having regard to the nature and extent of the fact-finding  which  will
    be  required  at  any  re-hearing,  s.12(2)   Tribunal's   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2(b),  I  conclude  the
    matter should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
    afresh.

Anonymity

21. An anonymity direction has already been made.  It was not addressed  at
    the  hearing  before  me  and  in  the  circumstances  I   direct   its
    continuation.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    is set aside.  The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 23. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
