


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04696/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 30 October 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AMS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Masood of Aden & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This matter comes before me following a grant of permission by myself on  12
August 2013. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State,  I  have,
for the avoidance of confusion, referred to the parties by  the  names  used
before the First-tier Tribunal, with the Secretary of State referred  to  as
the "respondent" and AMS as the "appellant".

 The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born in September 1971. He claims  to
have entered the United Kingdom on 19 or 20 January 2009 and on  23  January
2009 he claimed asylum. His claim was refused some six  years  later,  on  1
April 2013, after his file had been  mislaid  by  the  Home  Office,  and  a
decision was made on 2 May 2013 to remove him to Somalia.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal before Judge Thomas on 17 June  2013.  Judge  Thomas
found the appellant's account of events  in  Somalia  to  be  credible.  She
accepted that he was a member of the minority Ashraf clan and  that  he  had
previously lived in Hamar Weyne, Mogadishu; that his father had run  a  shop
until 2001 when it was looted and he  was  forced  to  close  it;  that  his
father and brother died as a result of that incident; that he had married  a
member of the Abgaal clan in 2001 and had had two sons and that  during  his
married life he was accepted by his wife's clan and was able to live a  more
stress free life and worked in a garage; that his sons were killed  in  2005
and 2005 when caught in cross-fire between Al-Shabab  and  others  and  that
his wife died in a similar situation in 2007; that Al-Shabab took  over  his
area after his family died; that he and his mother moved to Hamar  Weyne  in
Mogadishu in 2007 and lived in one of the refugee camps and that  he  worked
as a mechanic; and that he experienced no problems  between  2007  and  2009
until he came to the United Kingdom. The judge noted that  it  was  accepted
by the appellant that he did not qualify for refugee status  on  account  of
his membership of a minority clan and she did not accept that  he  would  be
at risk of persecution or harm under Articles 2  and  3  of  the  ECHR.  She
accordingly dismissed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

However, with regard to humanitarian protection under Article 15(c)  of  the
Qualification Directive, the judge  found,  after  considering  the  country
guidance in AMM and others (conflict; humanitarian crisis;  returnees;  FGM)
Somalia CG and the background information before her:

    "Whilst  the  latest  information  indicates  that  the  situation   in
    Mogadishu has improved following the withdrawal of Al-Shabab, given the
    continuing  difficulties  outlined  above,  I  do  not  find  that  the
    information  demonstrates  that  the  changes   resulting   from   that
    withdrawal are sufficiently durable to cause me to come to a  different
    conclusion to that of the Tribunal in  the  country  guidance  case  of
    AMM."

Accordingly, she found that  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  humanitarian
protection and she allowed the appeal on that basis.

The respondent sought permission to appeal against Judge  Thomas's  decision
on the grounds that there had been durable change  in  Mogadishu  since  the
decision in AMM and that the judge  had  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the
situation and had failed properly to engage with the question of  durability
and to consider the situation in Mogadishu as of 2013. The grounds  asserted
further that the judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  the  appellant's  own
evidence as to whether he had connections in Mogadishu.

Permission to appeal was initially refused, but was subsequently granted  by
myself on 12 August 2013 on a renewed application on the same grounds.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 30 October 2013. I heard submissions as to  the
error of law.

Ms Martin submitted that the judge had ignored the evidence in  the  refusal
letter showing that the situation in Mogadishu had changed since  2011.  She
referred to that evidence, quoted  at  paragraphs  58,  61  and  64  of  the
letter, and submitted that the judge had failed to weigh up  the  two  sides
to the evidence and to engage with the changes that had taken place. When  I
asked  her  if  she  was  still  relying  on  the  ground  relating  to  the
appellant's own circumstances, she  said  that  she  was  and  that  it  was
essentially the same point, namely the failure to engage with the  facts  of
the case and the country situation.

Mr Masood submitted that the judge had not erred in law and was entitled  to
follow the country guidance. In that respect he relied upon the case  of  SG
(Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  940  in
which Lord Justice Stanley Burton stated at paragraph 67:

    "In my judgment a Country Guidance determination of the Upper  Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) remains authoritative unless and until
    it is set aside on appeal or replaced by a subsequent Country  Guidance
    determination."

It was Mr Masood's submission that the judge had looked at all the  evidence
before her and had noted that the  reports  referred  to  the  situation  in
Mogadishu improving but that risks remained.  The  finding  the  judge  made
regarding the durability of the situation was one that was open to  her  and
was in accordance with paragraph 363 of the decision  in  AMM.  The  grounds
were no more than a disagreement with the judge's decision. With  regard  to
the appellant's own circumstances, it  was  found  in  AMM  that  clan-based
violence was no longer relevant and that following the arrival of  Al-Shabab
the majority clans who were previously powerful  were  no  longer  powerful.
The appellant's experiences related to  his  circumstances  previously  when
there was a distinction between the minority and majority clans.  The  judge
adequately addressed the appellant's personal circumstances.

Ms Martin made no further submissions in response.

Consideration and findings

It is the case  that  the  country  guidance  in  AMM,  in  particular  that
relating to humanitarian protection as regards the situation  in  Mogadishu,
is to be reviewed  in  an  appeal  listed  for  hearing  in  December  2013.
Nevertheless, AMM currently remains authoritative guidance and, as found  in
SG (Iraq), the Tribunal was entitled to follow it.

Judge Thomas was  fully  aware,  as  she  stated  at  paragraph  17  of  her
determination, that the latest information indicated that the  situation  in
Mogadishu had improved following the withdrawal of Al-Shabab. She was  fully
aware of the Upper Tribunal's view, expressed in paragraph 363 of AMM,  that
it was open to judicial fact-finders to conclude that the necessary  element
of durability had been satisfied, on  the  basis  of  new  evidence  arising
since the guidance was given. Accordingly, she  gave  careful  consideration
to that evidence and, at paragraph 16, assessed the  background  information
before her. She referred to several  reports  in  the  documentary  evidence
before her and considered not only those relied upon by the  appellant,  but
also, as is apparent from her comment at the  end  of  paragraph  16,  those
relied upon by the respondent. Whilst she did  not  quote  extensively  from
the latter, it is clear that she took into account  all  the  evidence  from
both parties. It is not the case, as asserted by the  respondent,  that  she
failed to engage with the changes that had  taken  place  in  Mogadishu.  As
such, it was open to her  to  conclude,  in  the  light  of  the  background
information to which she referred,  that  the  changes  resulting  from  Al-
Shabab's withdrawal were not sufficiently durable to  cause  her  to  depart
from the country guidance in AMM. I would agree  with  Mr  Masood  that  the
grounds of appeal are, in that respect, no more  than  a  disagreement  with
her findings on the evidence before her.

With  respect  to  the  ground  relating   to   the   appellant's   personal
circumstances, that was not a matter particularly emphasised  by  Ms  Martin
as an independent and discrete issue and indeed I  had  to  enquire  whether
that ground was pursued. It is the case that the judge did not  set  out  in
paragraph 17 an in-depth analysis of the appellant's circumstances.  However
it is plain, from her findings at paragraph 15 that that  was  a  matter  to
which she had full regard. It is also plain, from her findings at  paragraph
17, that she was fully  aware  of  the  guidance  in  AMM,  as  set  out  at
paragraph 1 of the head-note and in paragraph 594 of the main  body  of  the
decision,  and  quoted  at  paragraph  12  of  her  determination,  of   the
exceptions to the general risk of Article 15(c) harm for those returning  to
Mogadishu after a significant  period  of  time  abroad,  namely  for  those
persons connected with powerful actors or belonging to a category of  middle
class or professional persons. That was a matter to which she gave  specific
consideration and upon which she made  reasoned  findings.  Although  not  a
matter specifically referred to by the judge, Mr Masood  made  the  further,
valid point that the appellant's circumstances prior  to  leaving  Mogadishu
arose as a result of the distinction  at  that  time  between  majority  and
minority clans, a distinction that the Upper Tribunal found in  AMM  was  no
longer of significance following the arrival of Al-Shabab.  Accordingly,  it
seems to me that the judge's findings at paragraph 17  adequately  addressed
the question of risk  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  own,  individual
circumstances.

For all of these reasons I do not consider that the grounds are made out.  I
find that they amount in essence to little more  than  a  disagreement  with
the judge's findings and  that  they  disclose  no  errors  of  law  in  her
decision.

DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

The original Tribunal did not make a material error of  law.  The  decision,
to allow the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds, still stands.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I continue that
    order, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.
















                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
