
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa048992015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 April 2017                    |On 19 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     lb
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. M. Butler, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
& Co
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following the error of law decision promulgated on  22  November  2016,
    the hearing was resumed for the decision to be remade.


 2. I make an anonymity direction, continuing that  made  at  the  previous
    hearing.


 3. I heard brief oral evidence from the Appellant.   Both  representatives
    made oral submissions following which I reserved my decision.


 4. I have taken into account the documents in the  Appellant's  Bundle  A,
    Bundle B and the Supplementary bundle.  A direction had been given that
    copies of the bundles be served on the Respondent.  For some reason,  a
    new bundle had been prepared and served instead, a copy  of  which  had
    not been served on the Tribunal.  It was agreed that, as the  necessary
    documents were contained in the original bundles, referred to as Bundle
    A, Bundle B and the Supplementary bundle, it was to those bundles which
    I would refer.


Further evidence


 5. An application  had  been  made  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on  27  October  2016.   The  new
    evidence  which  the  Appellant  wished  to  produce  related  to   her
    ethnicity.  It had been found  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant could relocate to Bulawayo.  The Appellant submitted that she
    could not relocate there due to her Shona ethnicity.   This  issue  had
    not been raised at the First-tier Tribunal as it was only seen to be an
    issue by the Appellant following Judge  Easterman's  finding  that  she
    could internally relocate.


 6. I considered that it was the interests of justice to admit this further
    evidence given that  the  issue  of  relocation  was  relevant  to  the
    Appellant's appeal.  The evidence had been with  the  Respondent  since
    October 2016.


Findings and reasons


 7. The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim on the grounds that there
    were inconsistencies in her evidence.  However, the Appellant was found
    to be credible by the First-tier Tribunal judge.  "I am satisfied  that
    the so-called inconsistencies, and discrepancies are  merely  different
    ways of saying similar things." [63]  "I reiterate that I find  nothing
    particularly implausible or inconsistent about the appellant's  account
    of her sexuality." [66]  The Respondent has not  disputed  the  finding
    that the Appellant is a lesbian, and I adopt this finding.


 8. In relation to the Appellant's claim to have been assaulted by the CIO,
    the First-tier Tribunal judge stated "Thus, in my view in  relation  to
    the assault, given that I  found  the  appellant's  account  about  her
    sexuality to be credible, I  do  accept  to  the  lower  standard  that
    something took place, which involved herself and her father, which  may
    have involved C.I.O. officers, although that is less than clear on  the
    evidence" [73].  However, he did not reject any part of the Appellant's
    evidence.


 9. I have considered the evidence relating to the assault.  The  Appellant
    gave oral evidence at the  hearing  before  me.   While  this  was  not
    extensive, she answered all questions put to her and was  not  evasive.
    She was cross examined on aspects of the incident,  in  particular  how
    the men had identified themselves.  Her evidence  was  consistent  with
    her previous evidence, and with the documentary evidence.  I find  that
    her evidence can be relied on.


10. The Appellant said in her witness statement dated 31  March  2016  that
    the men identified themselves as CIO officers.  "I opened the door  and
    they said that they were CIO officers" [19].  She later repeated  "They
    had stated that they were CIO" [20].  She said at the hearing before me
    that this is how she knew that they were CIO officers.  They  were  not
    in uniform, but she stated that this was normal for  CIO  officers.   I
    find that the Appellant has been consistent, and  I  find  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that the men who assaulted her and  her  father  were
    from the CIO.


11. I find that it is apparent from the nature  of  the  assault,  and  the
    comments made by the CIO officers,  they  were  assaulted  due  to  the
    Appellant's sexuality.  In her witness statement she  said  "they  were
    saying the whole time: "why do you want to  twist  nature"  [20].   She
    said in her witness statement  that  they  had  also  referred  to  her
    ethnicity, stating "you coloureds think you  can  twist  nature"  [20].
    This was consistent with the  answers  she  had  given  at  her  asylum
    interview (Q269 and Q270).


12. I find that I can rely upon  the  Appellant's  evidence  regarding  the
    claimed assault.  I find there is  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  the
    assault took place, as was found at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  I
    find it is reasonably likely that the men who assaulted  the  Appellant
    and her father were from the CIO.  I find it is reasonably likely  that
    the assault took place due to the Appellant's sexuality.


13. No clear finding had been made in the First-tier Tribunal as to whether
    or not the Appellant would want to live  an  openly  gay  lifestyle  in
    Zimbabwe.  Before me she was asked in  examination  whether  she  would
    want to, and she said that she would.  In her witness  statement  dated
    31 March 2016 she referred to the fact that in the United  Kingdom  she
    "can openly walk, talk, touch, kiss  my  partner  openly.   It  is  not
    something where we are afraid to be who we are as we can  do  it  here.
    [....] I know that I can't go back there as I will not be allowed to be
    who I want to be. [....] I would have to hide who I am as a lesbian, as
    you cannot be a lesbian in Zimbabwe and survive" [15].  I find that the
    Appellant has been living an openly gay lifestyle in the United Kingdom
    and would want to live an openly gay lifestyle in Zimbabwe.


 14. An issue which had not come at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  but
     which the Appellant had referred to at her asylum interview and in  her
     witness statement, was her ethnicity.  At Q269 and Q270 of  her  asylum
     interview she had referred to the fact that the CIO  officers  referred
     to her as "coloured".  In her witness statement dated 27  October  2016
     she stated that  her  father  was  a  Zimbabwean  citizen  of  coloured
     ethnicity, being  a  descendant  of  Scottish  grandparents  [6].   Her
     maternal family comes from Mozambique [7].  "As a person  I  identified
     as a coloured and Shona.  I speak English  and  Shona.   I  was  taught
     Shona in school.  Most of my friends are Shona as that is the ethnicity
     of indigenous people from  Harare.   Majority  of  my  family  on  both
     maternal and paternal are Shonas." [8]


15. I find that the Appellant identifies as a person of Shona ethnicity.  I
    have accepted her account of the assault by the CIO officers and I find
    that she was then identified as being "coloured".  She has set  out  in
    her witness statement of 27 October 2016 her ethnic background and  why
    she is regarded as "coloured".  I find that the Appellant is identified
    as coloured and Shona.


16. The Appellant gave evidence at the hearing that her  family  and  close
    friends all live in Harare.  She said  that  she  did  not  have  close
    friends or family outside Harare.  She did not know anyone in  Bulawayo
    and she had not been to Bulawayo  before.   I  accept  the  Appellant's
    evidence and find that her family and friends live in Harare, and  that
    she does not have any friends or family in Bulawayo.


17. The Appellant was asked whether any of her  family  members  in  Harare
    were gay.  She said that they were not.  She was asked whether  any  of
    her friends in Harare were gay and she said she did not  know  if  they
    were living openly.  She had not been in touch with  them  for  a  long
    time.  I find that the Appellant is  not  in  contact  with  anyone  in
    Harare who is living an openly gay lifestyle.


Risk on return

18. I have found above that it is reasonably likely  that  the  Appellant's
    account is true.  I therefore  need  to  consider  risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe for a lesbian who has been identified as such in Zimbabwe  and
    has been assaulted as a result by the CIO, who wants to live an  openly
    gay lifestyle, and who identifies as coloured and Shona.


19. I have carefully considered the country guidance  of  LZ  (homosexuals)
    Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 00487 (IAC).  The headnote states:


         "(i) There has been much public expression of extreme homophobia at
         the highest levels in recent years.


         (ii) Male homosexual behaviour is  criminalised,  but  prosecutions
         are very rare. Lesbianism is not criminalised.


         (iii)  Some  homosexuals  suffer  discrimination,  harassment   and
         blackmail  from  the  general  public  and  the  police.  Attempted
         extortion, false complaints and unjustified detentions are  not  so
         prevalent as to pose a general risk. There are no  records  of  any
         murders with a homophobic element. "Corrective rape" is  rare,  and
         does not represent a general risk.


         (iv) There is a "gay scene," within limitations.


         (v) Lesbians, living on their own or  together,  may  face  greater
         difficulties than gay men.

         (vi) GALZ (Gays and Lesbians of Zimbabwe) takes a  realistic  view:
         Zimbabwe is "not the worst place in the world to be gay or  lesbian
         even though the President, government officials and church  leaders
         have whipped up a climate of hysterical homophobia."

         (vii) Applying HJ & HT [2010] UKSC 31, [2010] Imm AR 729, there  is
         no general risk to gays or lesbians. Personal  circumstances  place
         some gays and lesbians at risk. Although not decisive on  its  own,
         being openly gay may increase risk. A positive  HIV/AIDS  diagnosis
         may be a risk factor. Connections with the elite  do  not  increase
         risk.

         (viii) The police and other state agents do not provide protection.

         (ix) A homosexual  at  risk  in  his  or  her  community  can  move
         elsewhere, either in the same  city  or  to  another  part  of  the
         country. He or she might choose  to  relocate  to  where  there  is
         greater tolerance, such as Bulawayo, but the choice of a  new  area
         is  not  restricted.  The  option  is  excluded  only  if  personal
         circumstances present risk throughout the country."


20.  I  find  that  the  Appellant  has  already   faced   harassment   and
    discrimination on account of her sexuality.  Her evidence is  that  she
    was bullied and victimised at school on account of her sexuality  (Q135
    to Q139).  This has not been disputed.  I have found above that she and
    her father were assaulted by CIO officers on account of her  sexuality.
    I find that she is known by her family, her school friends and the  CIO
    to be gay.  I find that the assault which took place in September  2013
    amounts to an act of persecution on account of her sexuality.


21. While LZ found that there is no general risk to  homosexuals  returning
    to Zimbabwe, it states that "Personal circumstances place some gays and
    lesbians at risk".  I find that the Appellant's personal  circumstances
    do place her at risk.   I  make  this  finding  primarily  because  the
    Appellant has previously been subject to persecution on account of  her
    sexuality and because she would be an openly gay woman  living  on  her
    own.


22. In relation to the increased risk to the Appellant on  account  of  her
    wishing to live an openly gay lifestyle, paragraph 111 of LZ states:


    "This case does not concern an openly gay person.  Such  a  case  would
    have to be assessed on its own facts. HJ & HT makes it clear  that  the
    test is not  whether  persecution  may  be  avoided  by  behaving  more
    discreetly. A case might be based partly on habits acquired  under  the
    greater freedom of life abroad. On our findings, being openly gay  does
    not translate into a real risk, but it  might  well  be  a  significant
    factor."


23. Despite LZ finding that there was no general risk to gays or  lesbians,
    I find that  the  case  did  not  concern  an  openly  gay  individual.
    Further, it found that there had been much public expression of extreme
    homophobia (headnote (i)), that some homosexuals suffer discrimination,
    harassment and blackmail  (headnote  (iii)),  and  that  there  was  no
    protection from the police or other state agents (headnote (viii)).


24. I find that since 2011, the situation has deteriorated for homosexuals.
     The public expression of extreme homophobia has continued, right up to
    President Mugabe, and the attitude of  those  in  power  and  authority
    towards GALZ has worsened.  The Operational  Guidance  Note:  Zimbabwe,
    November 2013, 3.11.4, which post-dates LZ,  states:  "In  2011  Mugabe
    publicly blamed the LGBT community for Africa's ills and  declared  its
    members to be worse than "pigs and dogs." In February Mugabe said  that
    same-sex marriage was "insanity" and "satanic", while in  May  2012  he
    was reported as stating that "homosexuality will lead to the extinction
    of the human race".  Shortly before the  July  2013  elections,  Mugabe
    reportedly stated that if his ZANU PF party  wins  "he  will  make  the
    country a "hell" for gays and lesbians"."


25. I find that this rhetoric continued, and in February  2014  Mugabe  was
    quoted as saying that he would  not  allow  homosexuality  in  Zimbabwe
    (B180).  The US State Department Report 2014 states that in March  2014
    Mugabe declared "gays have no human rights" (B31).


26. There is further evidence of the rhetoric used by Mugabe more  recently
    in the Country Policy and Information Note Zimbabwe: Sexual orientation
    and gender identity, November  2016  (the  "CPIN  November  2016"),  in
    particular paragraphs 5.3.1 to 5.3.3.


27. LZ took into account the evidence of GALZ.  It was submitted that would
    GALZ would give different evidence now, given what has happened to them
    since 2011.  This is speculation but, given the problems that GALZ have
    encountered since 2011 at the hands of the authorities,  it  is  likely
    that they would not be so positive.


28. Paragraph 104 of LZ states:


    "Dr Phillips described to us the ways in which GALZ is very careful  to
    operate within the law. He accepted, however, that if President  Mugabe
    wished to take stern action against the organisation, or even to  close
    it down, legal niceties would not prevent him. GALZ leads an  uncertain
    existence, but it carries on within a  degree  of  tacit  official  and
    social tolerance. "


29. The background evidence provided  indicated  that  such  "official  and
    social tolerance" did not last.  Evidence was provided that its offices
    were raided and its members arrested, and that there are, or have been,
    efforts to close it down altogether.  I was referred to an article from
    the Washington Blade which states that, in August 2012, 40  members  of
    GALZ were arrested (A89).  The Human Rights Watch World Report 2015 for
    Zimbabwe states that two GALZ officials were arrested in March 2014  on
    charges  of  organising  a  media  training  workshop  without   police
    clearance (B42).  It states:

    "These attacks on LGBT people, arbitrary arrests of LGBT  activists  by
    police, and the harassment by state agents of GALZ in  previous  years,
    continue to drive many LGBT people underground."


30. In March 2014 a news article stated  "earlier  this  month,  Zimbabwe's
    President Robert Mugabe vowed to continue with legal efforts  to  close
    down GALZ.  He said: "I understand we have a group  of  homosexuals  in
    this country.  I didn't know until I was told the day before yesterday.
     So we want to check on who is in that group"  (A85).


31. I find that the evidence shows that the tolerance for GALZ as  referred
    to in LZ did not continue.  Members of GALZ were arrested in 2012,  and
    by 2014 Mugabe was  trying  to  close  GALZ  down.   There  is  further
    evidence in relation to GALZ in the CPIN November  2016  at  paragraphs
    5.4.1 to 5.4.5.


32. I have taken into account the case of DSG  &  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs  -
    departure from  CG)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  00148  (IAC)  regarding
    departure from  Country  Guidance.   I  find  that  the  situation  has
    worsened for homosexuals and gay rights groups.  I find as well that LZ
    was not dealing with an openly gay individual.  I find it is reasonably
    likely that the situation has worsened for an openly gay person  living
    in Zimbabwe.


Sufficiency of protection


33. LZ is clear that the police and  other  state  agents  do  not  provide
    protection (headnote viii).  Paragraph 112 states: "On this issue there
    is no difficulty. The sources agree, and the respondent  accepts,  that
    anyone who is at risk of persecution in Zimbabwe as a homosexual,  male
    or female, will not receive legal sufficiency of  protection  from  the
    police or other state agencies. Resort to such agencies may  even  make
    matters worse."


Internal relocation


34. I find that the Appellant could not return to her home area of  Harare.
    She has suffered persecution on account of her sexuality from  the  CIO
    in Harare.  She is known to be gay by the CIO, her family and  friends.
    It was submitted by Mr. Nath  that  the  Appellant  could  relocate  to
    Bulawayo.  He did not suggest that the Appellant could relocate to  any
    other area of Zimbabwe.


35. I find that while LZ states that relocation to Bulawayo, where there is
    greater tolerance, might be an option, this is not an  option  for  the
    Appellant owing to her Shona ethnicity.   I  have  taken  into  account
    headnote (7) of CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013]
    UKUT 00059 (IAC) which states: "Relocation to  Matabeleland  (including
    Bulawayo) may be negated  by  discrimination,  where  the  returnee  is
    Shona."  I accept that this case covered  political  asylum,  but  this
    headnote is not limited, and is  just  as  relevant  to  the  Appellant
    seeking asylum on grounds of sexuality.


36. While it is not been suggested that she could relocate to anywhere else
    in Zimbabwe apart from Bulawayo, I have nevertheless considered whether
    she would be able to relocate elsewhere in Zimbabwe.  I find  that  she
    would want to live as an openly gay woman in any part of  Zimbabwe  and
    therefore this would increase her risk on return where ever  she  went.
    Further, I find that she would be living alone given that  all  of  her
    friends and family are in Harare.  I find that she would be  identified
    as a lesbian, given that she would be open about  her  sexuality.   She
    would not have any protection from the authorities.


37. I find that it would be unduly harsh to expect her to  relocate  to  an
    area of Zimbabwe, where she had no support from any family or  friends,
    where she would be a lesbian living alone, and would be  identified  as
    such.  I find that she would struggle to support herself as  an  openly
    gay lesbian and would be likely to  experience  discrimination  in  her
    attempts to gain employment.  The CPIN November 2016 states at 2.3.10:


    "Government and religious rhetoric limits people's  ability  to  openly
    express their homosexuality or bisexuality. LGBT persons  generally  do
    not  openly  express  their  sexuality  or  gender  identity  in  their
    workplaces, or within their families. Zimbabwe is deeply religious  and
    traditional,  and  sexuality  generally  (homo-  or  hetero-sexual)  is
    inhibited  and  unlikely  to  be  publically  expressed.  LGBT  persons
    experience a climate of intimidation, stigma and  discrimination  which
    may exclude them from society, public services and job opportunities."


38. The Appellant was  previously  unemployed  in  Zimbabwe  and  has  been
    unemployed in the United Kingdom.  I find that  she  is  likely  to  be
    economically inactive.  Paragraph 79 of LZ states:


    "An economically active lesbian is at less  risk  of  perception  as  a
    lesbian because she is more likely to be able to afford to  live  in  a
    low density housing area, and so to enjoy a measure of protection  from
    public scrutiny of her  lifestyle  and  circumstances,  which  a  woman
    living in a high density housing area would not be able to enjoy."


39. I find that the Appellant would be reasonably unlikely to  be  able  to
    find safety low density housing.  Taking all of the above into account,
    I find that it would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  the  Appellant  to
    relocate in Zimbabwe.


40.  Considering  all   the   above,   given   the   Appellant's   personal
    circumstances, in particular the fact  that  she  has  been  previously
    subject to persecution by the CIO on account of her sexuality, that she
    would live an openly gay lifestyle, and that she is Shona, I find  that
    the Appellant has demonstrated that there is a real risk that she  will
    suffer persecution on return to Zimbabwe and so her claim  succeeds  on
    asylum grounds.  As I have allowed her claim on asylum  grounds,  I  do
    not need to consider her claim to humanitarian  protection.   Following
    my finding in relation to her asylum claim, I find that she would  also
    be at risk of treatment contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the  ECHR  such
    as to put the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations.  The  appeal
    is therefore also allowed on human rights grounds.


Decision


41. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


42. The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 17 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

