
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04690/2012
                                                               AA/04691/2012
                                                               AA/04692/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 September 2014                          |On 20 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                         UPPER TRBUNAL JUDGE OCONNOR

                                   Between

                                     PJ
                                     AJ
                                     KJ
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Jonathan Martin, Counsel instructed by Messrs ICS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Julie Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant and his wife and child are citizens  of  Sri  Lanka.   We
    shall refer to the first named Appellant PJ as "the Appellant" for  the
    purposes of our determination.
2.   The Appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student on  14  September
    2008 with a visa valid until January 2010.  His wife joined him  on  25
    January 2009 as  his  dependant.   The  Appellant's  student  visa  was
    extended to 23 July 2012 and during this process he was  granted  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  His wife returned  to
    Sri Lanka on 19 October 2010 in order to give birth and she  and  their
    child returned together to this country on 16 November 2011.

3.   On 3 April 2012  the  Appellant  sought  asylum  claiming  that  if  he
    returned to Sri Lanka he faced mistreatment because of the authorities'
    perceptions as to  his  political  opinions  based  on  the  connection
    between members of his family to the LTTE.  In that regard  he  claimed
    that his sister joined the LTTE in 1993 - specifically a Black  Tiger's
    suicide squad member, who was killed on 11 May 2006 by the  Sri  Lankan
    Navy.  The Appellant's brother was forcibly enlisted  in  the  LTTE  in
    1996 and killed on 24 September 1997.  His father, though not a  member
    of any political party, worked as a boatman  for  Colonel  Soosai,  the
    commander of the LTTE Black Sea Tiger Unit from its inception in  1992.
    The Sri Lankan Navy was said to have killed the Appellant's father on 7
    February 2000 during an engagement near Mullaitivu.

4.   It was the Appellant's account that he was put under pressure  to  join
    the LTTE.  He claimed to have been arrested by the Sri Lankan Police on
    30 November 2007 with three or four other men, because a bomb that  did
    not explode was found at a railway station  near  the  his  home.   The
    Appellant was held overnight and released  on  1  December  2007.   The
    Appellant claimed that whilst in detention he  was  beaten  and  pushed
    against a wall.  In  due  course  the  Appellant  brought  his  release
    document to the United Kingdom.

5.   The Appellant's account was that  he  was  not  charged  or  bailed  or
    subject to reporting conditions but he nonetheless claimed to fear that
    he would be arrested by the Army and the CID if returned to Sri Lanka.

6.   It was the Appellant's account that on 30 December 2011 his mother  was
    told by Police Officers that the  Appellant  was  suspected  of  having
    contact with the LTTE and that they were making enquiries about him.

7.   In consequence the Appellant made contact with a solicitor  in  Colombo
    a Mr Jayasinghe in order to obtain advice as to what steps  his  mother
    should take.

8.   It was the Appellant's case that on 13 February  2012  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities issued an arrest warrant for him and that a letter was sent
    from a Magistrate to  the  Controller  of  Immigration  and  Emigration
    stipulating that the Appellant was in the United Kingdom but that if he
    returned to Sri Lanka he should be taken into custody.

9.   At interview the Appellant stated that the information  came  from  his
    United Kingdom solicitors on 16 February 2012.  On 29 February 2012 the
    Appellant's British solicitors wrote to Mr Jayasinghe  requesting  that
    he obtain any documents relevant to the case.   On  16  March  2012  Mr
    Jayasinghe made an application to the relevant court and in consequence
    various papers were provided on 19 March 2012.  Mr Jayasinghe wrote  to
    the Appellant's  British  solicitors  on  20  March  2012  enclosing  a
    certified copy of a report and certain other documents  that  had  been
    provided to the court by the Police together with a cash receipt for 30
    rupees (the cost of obtaining the copy documents).  The contents reveal
    that the authorities in Sri Lanka had linked  the  Appellant  with  the
    2007 bombing that they refer to as a "bomb case" at Wellawatta  Railway
    Station and that he was to be arrested on arrival in Sri Lanka.

10.  The Appellant submitted additional documents in support  of  his  claim
    for asylum including a photocopy  of  his  father's  death  certificate
    stating that he died on 7 February  2000,  the  cause  of  death  being
    "Death while the attack of  Sri  Lankan  Navy"  (sic),  a  "receipt  of
    arrest" dated 1 December 2007, an arrest warrant in his name  dated  19
    March 2012 and a letter from Mr Jayasinghe.

11.  In the event by letter dated 2 May  2012  the  Appellant  was  informed
    that his asylum application was refused and in giving reasons for  such
    refusal the Secretary of State concluded that the  documents  submitted
    by the Appellant did not advance his case.  In that regard reliance was
    placed in a letter from the British High Commission in Colombo dated 14
    September 2010  that  addressed  the  issue  of  fraudulently  obtained
    documents.  The letter referred to the high level of corruption in  Sri
    Lanka "and the unscrupulously actions of government  officials  at  all
    levels,  (that)  somewhat  undermines  the  issuing  process  for  many
    official documents".

12.  Notably however the letter included the following:

         "Formally it is difficult for the accused to be able  to  obtain  a
         copy of his/her own arrest warrant.   When  an  arrest  warrant  is
         issued, a copy is kept on the legal file and the original is handed
         to the police.  An accused cannot apply for  copies  of  an  arrest
         warrant  to  the  relevant  court.   However  in  practice   forged
         documents   are   easily   obtainable   throughout    Sri    Lanka.
         Additionally,  given  ongoing  and  well-documented  concerns  over
         corruption in the police it would probably not prove  difficult  to
         obtain a copy of an arrest  warrant,  although  it  would  probably
         require prior contacts within the police service".

The Proceedings

13.  It is right to say that the history  of  these  proceedings  have  been
    extensively considered by the Court of Appeal in PJ (Sri Lanka)  v  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.

14.   At  the  hearing  before  their  Lordships  followed  the  Appellant's
    unsuccessful appeal before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Appellant
    having subsequently and successfully obtained the grant  of  permission
    to appeal that decision, it was  heard  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 20 December 2012 and was  determined  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination disclosed  no  error  of  law  that
    justified setting their decision aside.   It  is  of  note  however  to
    record the Upper Tribunal in their determination nonetheless criticised
    the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  for  having  doubted  the  professional
    standing of Mr Jayasinghe, in circumstances when it was  argued  before
    the  Upper  Tribunal  that  since  the  same  documents  were  obtained
    separately by two lawyers "compelling reasons" needed to be provided if
    they were to be rejected as unreliable.  Notwithstanding that the First-
    tier Tribunal had described the document produced by the  Appellant  as
    being worthless and lacking in any validity, the Upper Tribunal in  all
    the circumstances determined there  had  been  no  error  of  law  that
    justified setting aside their decision, particularly when the  judgment
    was read as a whole.

15.  Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal was granted on  16  October
    2013 by Sir Stanley Burnton who was  of  the  view  that  the  possible
    consequences of an individual on return to Sri Lanka who was  suspected
    of involvement in  a  bombing  meant  that  there  was  a  sufficiently
    compelling reason for the appeal to  be  heard.   Sir  Stanley  Burnton
    observed inter alia:

         "It seems to me that when the documents do come from  a  lawyer  in
         Sri Lanka, who  purports  to  confirm  their  genuineness  and  who
         effectively does say that the genuineness or not of  the  documents
         can be checked by the High Commission in Sri Lanka, it may be  that
         a different approach to the documents was appropriate."

16.  In PJ at paragraph 17 their Lordships recorded  the  submission  of  Mr
    Martin (who also appeared before us) that he had based  his  appeal  on
    the proposition that as the documents were genuine then  the  Appellant
    was a refugee.  They recorded his submission in that regard as follows:



         "Both lawyers produced copies of a court  file  obtained  from  the
         Magistrates' Court in Colombo.  The documents in that file included
         a report made by S S K Dharmaratne Inspector of the Police  Station
         in  Colombo  North,  CID  which  stated  that  the  Appellant   has
         previously been arrested, that he was known to  have  three  family
         members with close LTTE connections and  that  he  was  wanted  for
         questioning  'to  decide  whether  he  had  been  engaged  in  LTTE
         terrorist activities'.  A further document on the file was a letter
         from the Magistrate to the Controller of Immigration and Emigration
         stating that the Appellant is in the UK and that he should be taken
         into custody on his return to Sri Lanka".

17.  Their Lordships further recorded  Mr  Martin's  submission  that  there
    needed to be a reason of real substance in order to doubt the  veracity
    of the documents obtained from the court.

18.  It was pointed out that once the  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's
    claim for asylum the Appellant's United Kingdom solicitors wrote  on  9
    May 2012 to a more senior Sri Lankan lawyer, Mr Weerasooriya requesting
    that he repeat  the  process  of  ensuring  that  the  relevant  papers
    originally came from the court and were not forgeries.  He was asked to
    provide another set of the relevant materials as a  matter  of  urgency
    including the  "Magistrates  Minutes"  and  the  "Notification  to  the
    Controller of Immigration and Emigration dated 19 March 2012".   On  23
    May 2012 Mr Weerasooriya replied stating that his junior had obtained a
    complete certified copy of the documents that matched those produced by
    Mr Jayasinghe.  For self-evident reasons they now bore a  rubber  stamp
    from the Magistrates' Court dated 23 May 2012 (as opposed to  19  March
    2012, the date when Mr Jayasinghe undertook this work).

19.  Before their Lordships Mr Martin was recorded as submitting  that  both
    lawyers had provided evidence of their Bar Association  membership  and
    they were entered on the Supreme Court role.  Moreover the British High
    Commission in Colombo provided confirmation, first that Mr Weerasooriya
    was a lawyer in Sri Lanka and second that it was possible  for  lawyers
    to obtain court files.  Critically, it was submitted that the  risk  of
    forgery greatly diminished if the  documents  came  directly  from  the
    court.

20.  It will suffice for the purposes  of  this  determination  to  set  out
    below the conclusions of Fulford LJ who gave a  leading  judgment  with
    which McFarlan LJ and Arden LJ agreed at paragraphs 41 and 42 below:

         "41. In my judgment, Judge Woodcraft doubted the validity of  these
             documents (certainly to a material extent) on a  significantly
             false basis.  Thereafter, Judge Kekic - having  accepted  that
             Mr Jayayasinghe's status as a lawyer - failed to  address  the
             key issue that then arose given the suggested source of  these
             documents (a court in Sri Lanka) and the route by  which  they
             were obtained (two independent lawyers who sent them  directly
             to the Appellant's solicitor in the United  Kingdom).   Whilst
             it is undoubtedly the case that  false  documents  are  widely
             available in Sri Lanka,  once  it  was  established  that  the
             documents in questions originated from a Sri Lankan  court,  a
             sufficient justification was required for the conclusion  that
             the  Appellant  does  not  have   a   well-founded   fear   of
             persecution.  Prima facie,  this  material  reveals  that  the
             Appellant has previously been arrested in  connection  with  a
             bomb, three members of his family had close  LTTE  connections
             and he is wanted for questioning 'to  decide  whether  he  had
             been engaged in LTTE  terrorist  activities'  but  perhaps  of
             greatest significance there is a letter from the Magistrate of
             the relevant  court  to  the  Controller  of  Immigration  and
             Emigration stating that the Appellant is in the United Kingdom
             and that he is to be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka.   In
             the absence of a sufficient reason for  concluding  otherwise,
             the inescapable conclusion to be drawn from  this  material  -
             retrieved independently, it is to be stressed, by two  lawyers
             from the Magistrates' court on separate occasions  -  is  that
             the Appellant will be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as a
             result of links with the LTTE  and  their  activities.   Judge
             Kekic suggested that the interference to  be  drawn  from  the
             evidence that Mr Jayasinghe had 'obtained false evidence'  and
             that  'the  Appellant  had  forgotten  the  account   he   had
             previously  given  when   these   falsified   documents   were
             prepared'.   However,  in  my  view,   without   an   adequate
             explanation, it is difficult to understand how  the  Appellant
             could have falsified a  letter  from  the  Magistrate  of  the
             relevant court to the Controller of Immigration and Emigration
             ordering the Appellant's arrest which he then  placed  in  the
             court records so that it  could  later  be  retrieved  by  two
             separate lawyers.  At the very  least,  this  feature  of  the
             evidence required detailed analysis and explanation.


         42.  These documents lie at  the  centre  of  the  application  for
             protection,  and  I  consider  that  Judge  Kekic  misdirected
             herself when she concluded that they had been falsely prepared
             without providing any reasoning as to how the Appellant  could
             have infiltrated  forged  material  into  the  court  records,
             particularly since there is no suggestion that the lawyers had
             been  involved  in  any  discreditable  conduct".    (Emphasis
             added).

21.  The Lordships thus decided to allow the appeal but remit  the  case  to
    the Upper Tribunal for a rehearing.

22.  Thus the appeal came before us for this purpose on 30  September  2014.



23.  At the outset of the hearing Mr Martin  handed  to  us  copies  of  two
    documents comprising; a letter from  the  British  High  Commission  in
    Colombo addressed to the UKBA and dated 28 January 2013 sub-headed "Sri
    Lankan Cases with Lawyers' Letters" and; a  document  headed  "Document
    Verification Report" dated 10  October  2013  by  Mr  S  Jayasuriya  an
    Attorney- at-Law of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka.

24.  In summary the letter from the BHC Colombo confirmed the bona fides  of
    Mr Weerasooriya noting that he was registered with the Bar Association.

25.  Further, the letter which was  generic  in  form  and  not  necessarily
    specific to this particular case confirmed that an  official  from  the
    Bar Association  of  Sri  Lanka  had  advised  that  court  files  were
    available to lawyers and this would include copies of  any  handwritten
    notes.  The DVR of Mr  Jayasuriya,  who  had  been  instructed  by  the
    Appellant's British solicitors to yet further verify  the  authenticity
    of the documents produced, included the following verification:

         "Our investigations/enquiries at the Bambalapitiya  Police  confirm
         that the above name (PJ) was arrested by the  Bambalapitiya  Police
         in a search operation of  a  house  in  ..  Wellawatta  Colombo  on
         30/11/2007.  He was arrested together with four  other  persons  in
         relation to the above case.


         Police records confirm that Mr PJ was released on  Police  bail  by
         the Bambalapitiya Police on 01/12/2007.  Bambalapitiya Police lock-
         up records were checked and Mr PJ's name is on record.


         Notification  of  arrest  of  PJ's   Bambalapitiya   Police   dated
         01/12/2007 is genuine and issued by the Bambalapitiya  Police  when
         he was released on the said date.


         The Court records  were  checked  at  the  Magistrates  Court,  Mt.
         Lavinia and we  confirmed  that  the  case  records  including  all
         attached 'B' reports, airport notification and journal entries  are
         authentic.  There is a file on case number B4852/2007 on record  at
         the Mt. Lavinia Magistrates' Court.


         Police records at the Bambalapitiya Police also confirmed that  the
         'B' reports was filed in the MC, Mt. Lavinia.


         The court records were  checked  at  the  Chief  Magistrates  Court
         Number 3 at  Colombo-12  and  we  confirm  that  the  case  records
         including  all  attached  'B'  reports,  airport  notification  and
         journal entries and authentic.  There is  a  file  on  case  number
         B8144/3/2012 on record at the Chief Magistrates Court at Hulftsdrob
         in Colombo-12.


         Police records at the Modara  Police  also  confirm  that  the  'B'
         reports were filed in the Chief Magistrates Court at Hulftsdrob  in
         Colombo-12.  I did not request detail of the  investigation  as  my
         task  is  limited  to  verification  of  the  authenticity  of  the
         documents sent for verification and not to make a judgment  on  the
         contents.


         Notice to Controller of Immigration and Emigration -  We  conducted
         investigation under Bandaranayake International Airport and confirm
         that the notice issued by the Magistrate requesting the  arrest  of
         the suspects  is  genuine  and  on  record  at  the  Controller  of
         Immigration and Emigration.  As the suspects are said to be evading
         arrest by repatriating abroad the notice has been  issued  ordering
         the arrest on return to Sri Lanka.


         I also contacted Mr Asoka  Weerasooriya,  Attorney-at-Law  who  had
         provided  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr   Ambananden   Sooben,   ICS
         Solicitors, stating that he had instructed his junior and  filed  a
         motion and obtained the same certified copies of the court records.
          Mr Weerasooriya confirmed that he had issued the letter  and  also
         reconfirmed the findings  of  investigation.   I  do  not  know  Mr
         Weerasooriya personally but I have heard of his work as an Attorney-
         at-Law by repute.  He is a well-known and respected lawyer  in  Sri
         Lanka who was attached to the Attorney  General  Department  before
         starting private practice in Sri Lanka.


         Opinion


         Based on the information received it is my  opinion  the  documents
         (Case Ref's: B4852/2007 and B8144/3/2012) sent for verification  is
         authentic".

26.  Ms Isherwood informed us that the DVR had only been seen  and  received
    by her that morning.  She told us that the Respondent had  an  interest
    in verifying documents.  She accepted that nothing had been done by the
    Secretary of State to try and verify the documents produced apart  from
    the BHC letter of 28 January 2013 (see above) and asked to confirm that
    Mr Weerasooriya had registered at the Bar in Sri Lanka.

27.  Ms Isherwood stated that she wanted to take instructions  although  she
    was "not sure what on yet" we granted her request that we  should  rise
    while she made her enquiries.

28.  Upon our return to the  hearing  room  Ms  Isherwood  informed  us  the
    Respondent had been in contact with Colombo and  understood  that  they
    could obtain a response/report hopefully within fourteen days as to the
    veracity of the documents upon  which  the  Appellant  relied,  but  Ms
    Isherwood continued the difficulty was the amount of corruption in  Sri
    Lanka.  However, at this point we reminded her that this had  been  the
    standpoint of the Secretary of State in this case from  the  outset  it
    was addressed by their Lordships in PJ.  Two lawyers  independently  of
    each other whose status was not questioned by the  Secretary  of  State
    had already made it clear that the documents were genuine and reliable.
     We thus queried of Ms Isherwood why in such  circumstances  a  further
    delay in this case would be justified?

29.  When further pressed to explain our what basis Ms Isherwood  sought  to
    persuade us that it was  in  the  interests  of  justice  to  grant  an
    adjournment mindful of the wealth of evidence  already  before  us,  Ms
    Isherwood explained that if as a result of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    further enquires she found that she could  herself  place  reliance  on
    them then it would be the Respondent's position that she  would  accept
    that the Appellant was at risk.

30.  Not surprisingly, Ms Isherwood's  adjournment  request  was  vigorously
    resisted by Mr Martin who inter alia pointed out the Secretary of State
    had had two and a half months in which to make her enquiries since  the
    promulgation of the decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  PJ.   The
    Respondent might have also thought it sensible if so  minded  to  check
    the veracity of the documents given they had  been  in  her  possession
    since April 2012.  The Appellant's life  had  been  on  hold  for  long
    enough.  Mr Martin submitted that the just and timely disposal of  this
    appeal warranted that it should proceed to its  conclusion  today.   It
    was simply too late in the day to seek an adjournment.

31.  We refused Ms Isherwood's adjournment request.  We considered  that  Mr
    Martin's observations were well-founded.  The documents  concerned  had
    indeed been in the Secretary of State's possession  since  April  2012.
    There had been ample opportunity to make appropriate enquiries but  the
    Respondent had failed to do so.  Promulgation of the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in PJ took place in July 2014 over two months previously.   We
    concluded that for those reasons and given  the  evidence  cumulatively
    before us but quite apart from  their  Lordships'  observations  in  PJ
    included reports of the two  lawyers  originally  involved  and  now  a
    further report from a third lawyer  there  was  in  the  circumstances,
    ample evidence before us to consider and determine the outcome of  this
    appeal.

32.  We further observed that the letter from the BHC dated 10 October  2013
    was a document that featured in the  hearing  in  PJ  and  was  in  the
    possession  of  the  Treasury  Solicitor.   The  fact   that   internal
    difficulties meant that Ms Isherwood  was  not  in  possession  of  the
    document until today was in such circumstances not  a  factor  that  we
    could take into account in her favour.   This  case  had  been  in  the
    appeal track for some considerable time.  The  just  disposal  of  this
    appeal and the  interests  of  justice  warranted  the  refusal  of  Ms
    Isherwood's adjournment request.

33.  There was common ground between ourselves and  the  parties'  that  the
    outcome  of  the  appeal  turned  upon   our   consideration   of   the
    documentation before us and the weight that we  decided  to  attach  to
    those documents.  In that regard we asked Ms  Isherwood  if  she  could
    clarify the Respondent's position specifically as  to  whether  if  the
    Tribunal found the documents to be reliable such as significant  weight
    could be attached to them, was it the  Secretary  of  State's  position
    that in such circumstances it would  be  accepted  that  the  Appellant
    would be at real risk if now  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   Ms  Isherwood
    responded that whilst she appreciated the significance of  our  enquiry
    the position remained that she would continue to rely on the  Secretary
    of State's Letter of Refusal 2 May 2012.

34.  We were informed by Mr Martin that  he  did  not  intend  to  call  the
    Appellant to give oral evidence before  us  and  the  parties  were  in
    agreement  that  the  hearing  should  now  proceed  on  the  basis  of
    submissions only.

35.  At the conclusion of their  respective  submissions  we  were  able  to
    inform them that we had no difficulty in concluding  that  this  appeal
    should be allowed for the  reasons  that  would  follow  in  this,  our
    determination.

Assessment

36.  Our starting point has been the findings of their Lordships in  PJ  not
    least those expressed by Fulford LJ at paragraphs  41  and  42  of  his
    judgment (above) who, considered of "greatest significance" the  letter
    from the  Magistrate  of  the  relevant  Court  to  the  Controller  of
    Immigration and Emigration stating that the Appellant was in the United
    Kingdom and that he was to be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka.  His
    Lordship had continued that "In the absence of a sufficient reason  for
    concluding otherwise, the inescapable conclusion to be drawn from  this
    material - retrieved independently, it is to be stressed by two lawyers
    from  the  Magistrates'  court  on  separate  occasions,  is  that  the
    Appellant will be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as  a  result  of
    links with the LTTE and their activities".

37.  His Lordship's observations have  been  reinforced  by  the  production
    before us of the letters handed in by  Mr  Martin  comprising  the  BHC
    Colombo letter of 28 January 2013 and the Document Verification  Report
    of the Attorney-at-Law in Sri Lanka Mr S Jayasuriya not least in  terms
    of those aspects of each of those documents  that  we  have  identified
    above.  Taking this we have had no  difficulty  in  such  circumstances
    mindful of the overwhelming accumulation of evidence  in  support  that
    the documents concerned are reliable and are such that  we  can  attach
    significant weight to them.  It follows that we find that the Appellant
    not least to the lower standard of proof has  convincingly  established
    the truth of his account.  Indeed and as an  example,  the  Appellant's
    account of his arrest and  detention  following  the  discovery  of  an
    unexploded bomb near  his  home  has  been  clearly  confirmed  by  the
    documents and reaffirmed in the DVR of 10 October 2013 submitted by  Mr
    Jayasuriya.

38.  It was notable and indeed to Ms  Isherwood's  great  credit,  that  she
    accepted that the bona fides of  Mr  Jayasinghe  and  Mr  Weerasooriya,
    lawyers in Sri Lanka, was  not  challenged.   She  accepted,  that  the
    evidence clearly established that such documents did indeed  appear  in
    the court records.

39.  In particular whilst it was her submission that although the  documents
    in their form might  be  genuine  their  content  might  be  false,  Ms
    Isherwood recognised that the issue of as she put it "the  content  and
    weight to  be  placed  on  it"  was  a  highly  significant  factor  in
    determining whether or not this Appellant would be at real risk if  now
    returned to Sri Lanka.

40.  In that regard Ms Isherwood recognised that  whatever  the  genuineness
    of the content of those documents given her acceptance that  they  were
    on  the  evidence  on  the  court  records,  that  if  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities found them they would not question that the  Appellant  was
    the subject of an arrest warrant and indeed that he was required to  be
    arrested upon return to Sri Lanka.

41.  We therefore enquired of  Ms  Isherwood  as  to  where  that  left  the
    Secretary of State's case.  If the Respondent was not  challenging  the
    bona fides of  the  lawyers  and  not  suggesting  that  the  documents
    concerned were not on the court records then  it  would  surely  follow
    that the Appellant would upon arrival at Sri Lanka Airport be found  to
    be on a "Stop List" and in such circumstances a person who would be  at
    real risk of persecution.

42.  It is right to state that Ms Isherwood's brief response  was  that  she
    continued to rely on the Reasons for Refusal Letter.

43.  Whilst that  letter  made  reference  to  the  availability  of  forged
    official documents in Sri  Lanka  was  notable,  as  indeed  Mr  Martin
    pointed out in his closing submissions that  at  paragraph  24  of  the
    Respondent's Letter of Refusal she had cited a letter from the  BHC  in
    Colombo dated 14 September  2010  concerning  forged  and  fraudulently
    obtained documents and that the passages relied upon from  that  letter
    claimed inter alia that it was  common  knowledge  that  persons  could
    obtain an ID card or passport in any  identity  they  wanted  with  the
    right contacts.   The  Visa  Section  regularly  saw  forged  education
    certificates  and  bank  statements  and  employment  references.   The
    passages cited did not however identify the documents  upon  which  the
    Appellant in the present case relied  in  the  category  of  forged  or
    identify.  There was no reference in that letter to  documents  on  the
    Court record or letters from Magistrates  of  relevant  Courts  to  the
    Control of Immigration Emigration.

44.  We have reminded ourselves that in HK [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 it was  held
    inter alia that instead of asking whether  an  account  was  inherently
    implausible, one should look at the evidence and  ask  oneself  whether
    for example it is consistent  with  the  background  material  and  any
    expert evidence in support whether such evidence was of  good  quality.
    That is the approach that we have taken in  our  consideration  of  the
    credibility of the Appellant's account and claims.  Our  assessment  of
    his  credibility  has  been  helped  considerably  by  the  documentary
    evidence that the Appellant has been able to produce in support of  his
    claims that are indeed consistent with his account such that not  least
    the lower standard of proof concluded that the Appellant's  account  is
    credible.

45.  That however is not the end of the story because  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's credibility was in question  the  issue  that  we  have  to
    determine is whether in his particular circumstances  he  would  be  at
    real risk if now returned to Sri Lanka.  For this purpose we have taken
    full and careful account of the guidance of  the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) a
    decision subsequently approved by the Court of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829 that we have applied against the  backdrop  of  the
    facts as we have found them.

46.  The Tribunal  in  GJ  concluded  that  the  focus  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    government's concern has changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.
     The LTTE in Sri Lanka itself was a spent force and there had  been  no
    terrorist incident since the  end  of  the  civil  war.   The  Tribunal
    identified  the  current  categories  of  persons  at  real   risk   of
    persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka whether in detention
    or otherwise.

47.  In that regard and at  (7)(d)  of  their  headnote  the  following  was
    stated:

         "(d) A person's whose name appears on a  computerised  'stop'  list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name appears  on  a  'stop'  list'  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities in pursuance of such order or warrant".

48.  In light of our findings and in common  with  the  views  expressed  by
    their Lordships in PJ we too have come to the "inescapable  conclusion"
    to be drawn from not least the documentary material before us retrieved
    independently by two lawyers from the relevant  Magistrates'  Court  on
    separate occasions and subsequently reaffirmed by yet a third lawyer Mr
    Jayasuriya, that in the Appellant's circumstances he would  undoubtedly
    be arrested on his returned to Sri Lanka as result of  links  with  the
    LTTE and their activities in consequence of his family connections with
    the LTTE.  We find in  common  with  their  Lordships  those  documents
    indeed lie at the centre of the application for protection  and  as  we
    have already stated for the above reasons they are documents  to  which
    we can attach significant weight.  As found by the Tribunal in GJ those
    on a stop list are those in respect of whom arrest  warrants  had  been
    issued and/or court orders.  We am satisfied that an arrest warrant has
    indeed been issued in relation to this Appellant that he  is  therefore
    undoubtedly at real risk of detention and ill-treatment at the point of
    return.

49.  For the above reasons, the Appellant's appeal is therefore  allowed  on
    asylum grounds and under Article 3 of the ECHR.  No separate Article  8
    ECHR argument was advanced.  The Appellant is not entitled to the grant
    of humanitarian protection.


Conclusion

50.  We remake the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  it  on  asylum  and
    human rights (Article 3 ECHR) grounds.


Signed                                  Date 20 October 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
