
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice,     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Belfast                               |                                      |
|On 26 July 2017                       |On 21 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     S B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart instructed by R P Craford & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox promulgated on 8  August  2016,  dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the respondent made on  27  February
    2015 to remove her from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant and to
    refuse her consequent on a refusal of her claim for asylum.

 2. The appellant's case as put to the Secretary of State and to the First-
    tier Tribunal is that, having overstayed in the United Kingdom after  a
    family visit which began on 12 July 2011 that she became  pregnant  and
    had a child born on 9 October 2014.  Her case is that she feared  being
    killed by her parents having giving birth to a  perceived  illegitimate
    child outside of marriage.

 3. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter of  27  February
    2015.  In summary, the respondent did not  find  the  appellant  to  be
    credible concluding that there was in place in Morocco a sufficiency of
    protection for her.  She therefore refused the application pursuant  to
    the Refugee Convention.

 4. The respondent also concluded that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and refused her claim on that basis.

 5. At her appeal on 5 July 2016 the appellant gave evidence as did KI, the
    father of her child and of her second child born on 15  December  2015.
    KI has leave to remain in the United Kingdom and has another child  who
    is a British citizen in respect of whom there is a residence  order  in
    his favour; the mother (not the appellant) has a contact order.

 6. The judge found neither the appellant nor KI to  be  credible  for  the
    reasons set out at [12] to [28].  The judge specifically  rejected  the
    appellant's case that she had been threatened by her  parents  and  did
    not accept the explanation given for the delay in claiming asylum.

 7. The judge found that KI had lied to the Registrar of Births and  Deaths
    about the birth of his daughter Y, maintaining that he  had  only  done
    the appellant a favour by allowing his name to be added  to  the  birth
    certificate to avoid any stigma that might be perceived to an unmarried
    mother yet the DNA report confirms that he is the  father.   The  judge
    concluded that both the appellant and KI  had  known  that  he  is  the
    father of her child [27].

 8. The judge found that: -

      i) the appellant was an economic migrant who had fabricated her  claim
         to enter the United Kingdom;

     ii) KI was neither a credible nor a reliable witness [31];

    iii) there was a sufficiency of protection for the appellant in  Morocco
         and that she could relocate if required [36] to [38];

     iv) there were two children whose best interests need to be taken  into
         account [46], being the appellant's child  and  the  child  of  KI,
         there being no birth certificate for the appellant's  second  child
         [47];

      v) there was no relationship between the appellant and KI  [50];  and,
         that if there was one it was not an emotional one as  he  lived  in
         Craigavon/Lurgan and the appellant lives in Belfast;

     vi) that  there  are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  appellant
         returning to Morocco with her daughter it  not  being  demonstrated
         that the father was actively involved in the child's maintenance or
         to her wellbeing or upbringing;

    vii) little weight was to be attached to the relationship if it  existed
         given that it had started when the appellant's status in the United
         Kingdom was precarious [53];  and,  that  the  appellant's  child's
         father could travel to Morocco at any time to visit  her  [55]  and
         keep in touch by modern means of communication;

   viii) that the removal of the appellant was proportionate [58] given  the
         weight to be attached to the public interest.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal with respect only to the Article 8  case.   There  is  no
    challenge to the asylum decision nor to  the  credibility  findings  in
    respect of either the appellant or KI.  It is, however, submitted  that
    the judge erred:-

      i) In finding that there was no birth certificate in  respect  of  the
         appellant's second child as this was in  fact  in  the  appellant's
         bundle, that birth certificate confirming that KI is the father  KI
         [3];

     ii) in concluding that KI lived in Craigavon as it was  stated  in  his
         statement that he lives in Belfast but works in Lurgan [4];

    iii) in making two material errors upon which he had taken into  account
         in finding that the relationship between the appellant and  KI  was
         neither sustainable nor genuine;

     iv) in failing to  have  any  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
         appellant's second child.

Discussion

10. Mr McVeety accepted that the judge had made two errors both about where
    KI lives and as to the birth of the second child.   He  submitted  that
    nonetheless the mistake  was  not  capable  of  affecting  the  outcome
    relying particularly on what the judge had said  at  [50]  although  he
    accepted that much of the credibility finding was on the basis  of  the
    findings in respect of the asylum claim.

11. Despite Mr McVeety's submissions I am satisfied that the failure of the
    judge to take into account the birth certificate of  the  second  child
    which was clearly in the bundle of material before him, and to  mistake
    to where the appellant's partner lived are mistakes of fact  to  amount
    to an error of law. That is because they are central to  the  issue  of
    whether the relationship is subsisting.

12. It is of concern that the judge does not appear to be sure whether  the
    appellant's second child had been born or not.   That  is  despite  the
    fact that the child's birth certificate and indeed the DNA test results
    confirming the parentage of the child wer before him.  Neither of these
    are matters are affected by the credibility of  the  appellant  or  her
    claimed partner;  there is no challenge to the authenticity  either  of
    the DNA test or of the birth certificate.

13. I am satisfied also that there is no proper basis  for  doubting  where
    KI lives and works as his address  and  place  of  work  appear  to  be
    corroborated by the other documents.

14. Whilst the judge does at [50] refer  to  the  credibility  findings  to
    doubt the genuineness and subsistence of the relationship, in doing  so
    he has not factored into account the important  fact  that  the  couple
    have had a second child together.  That is I consider indicative of the
    relationship subsisting.

15. Further, having ignored the existence of the second  child,  the  judge
    cannot have taken into account that child's best interests.  The  judge
    appears also not to have appreciated the particularly complex nature of
    the family relationships in this case.

16. It is evident that KI has a family life with his child who is a British
    citizen; it is also evident that that child has a family life with  his
    mother with whom  he  has  contact.   It  is  also  of  note  that  the
    respondent has  granted  KI  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his child.   There  is  no  proper  analysis  of  the
    possibility that there does exist a family life between KI and his  two
    children by the appellant.   There  is  thus  potentially  a  chain  of
    relationships which would be affected by  removing  the  appellant  and
    children, capable of amounting to an interference in  her  family  life
    and the family life of the children.

17. For these reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  the  errors  identified  are
    material to the outcome and that that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside in part.   There  is  no  challenge  to  the
    findings of credibility nor for that matter to the findings in  respect
    of the asylum and Article 3 claims.  Those findings are preserved.

18. I am, however, concerned that there will need to be a complete remaking
    of the Article 8 claim given the complexity of the relationships  which
    appear to exist and in respect of which further evidence is required.

19. I make an anonymity order in this case to protect the identity  of  the
    minor children not least of KI's child who is  the  subject  of  family
    court proceedings.

Summary of Conclusions

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  on  an
    error of law.  I set it aside in part.

2.   The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 case.  The findings with respect to the appellant
    and her partner's credibility are preserved  as  are  the  findings  in
    respect of the asylum and Article 3 claim.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

3.   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date:  18 August 2017

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

