

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/04663/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Determination Sent       |
|On 28th April, 2014                    |On 8th  May, 2014        |
|                                       |                         |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                               ELIZABETH bERE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Nicholson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                         FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW


1.    The appellant was born on  26th  March,  1970  and  is  a  citizen  of
    Zimbabwe, She originally came to the United Kingdom as a nurse in 2001.
     Her visa was extended in 2006 until 2011.  She returned to Zimbabwe in
    2005 on holiday briefly.  Again, in 2009 she went back to Zimbabwe  but
    returned during the currency of her existing visa in 2011.

2.    On  her  return  the  appellant  made  application  for  asylum.   The
    appellant appealed the decision of the Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department taken on  26th  April,  2013  to  give  directions  for  the
    appellant's removal.

3.    The appellant appealed that decision  and  her  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 27th November, 2013.

4.     The  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum  appeal  humanitarian
    protection appeal and human rights appeal.  In doing so no where in her
    determination does the judge record the appellant's immigration history
    and the fact that apart from 2009 to 2011 the appellant has been in the
    United Kingdom since 2001 as  a  nurse.   Those  facts  were  important
    because they were on taken into account  be  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge when she  considered  the  appellant's  Article  8  appeal  under
    Article 8 jurisprudence.

5.    Before me, Mr Nicholson conceded that the appellant  could  not  bring
    herself with the Immigration Rules.   No  challenge  was  made  to  the
    asylum, humanitarian protection or Article 3 claims.

6.    He suggested that the determination could not stand because the  First
    Tier Tribunal Judge misdirected herself at paragraph 29 by referring to
    "truly exceptional" in the context of the appellant's medical condition
    and that was clearly wrong.  She also failed to take into  account  the
    appellant's length of residence in the United Kingdom and the fact that
    even though she left in 2009 and did not return until 2011, she did not
    lose her leave and in performing the Article 8 balancing  exercise  the
    First Tier Tribunal Judge failed to consider  that  the  appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom working and making a valuable  contribution.
    These were all relevant to a proper Article 8 consideration (see Akhalu
    (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC))

7.    Mr Harrison sought  to  persuade  me  that  the  determination  was  a
    careful and thorough document in which the First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    does take particular care  to  weigh  the  evidence.   He  did  however
    express  some  concern  that  the  word  "truly  exceptional"  were  in
    quotation makes suggesting that  perhaps  the  judge  was  looking  for
    something exceptional.

8.   I have concluded that I must set  this  determination  aside.   Without
    properly considering the appellant's immigration history one cannot  be
    sure that the judge has taken properly into account the length  of  the
    appellant's stay, the fact that she had leave or the  fact  that  since
    2001, apart from holidays, she was working up to time she left in  2009
    and that when she returned the appellant still had  leave.   The  judge
    does not explain why the interference is justified.

9.    At the hearing before me Mr Nicholson  and  Mr  Harrison  both  agreed
    that the findings could not stand.

10.   Mr Nicholson told me that his instructing solicitors had told  him  of
    a recent change in medication  which  would  require  and  up  to  date
    medical report.

11.   I drew their attention  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement which provides as follows:

             "7 Disposal of appeals in Upper Tribunal

           7.1 Where under section 12(1) of the 2007  Act  (proceedings  on
           appeal to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper Tribunal finds that  the
           making of the decision concerned involved the making of an error
           on a point of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside the decision
           and, if it does so, must either remit the case to the First-tier
           Tribunal under section 12(2)(b)(i)  or  proceed  (in  accordance
           with relevant Practice Directions) to re-make the decision under
           section 12(2)(b)(ii).

           7.2 The Upper Tribunal  is  likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
           proceed to re-make     the decision, instead  of  remitting  the
           case to the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that:

               (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
               before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
               opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
               considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

               (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which
               is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
               re-made is such that, having regard to the overriding
               objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
               the First-tier Tribunal.
          7.3 Remaking rather than remitting will nevertheless constitute
          the normal approach to determining appeals where an error of law
          is found, even if some further fact finding is necessary. 7".


12.   I indicated to the representatives, that I was minded, for reason set
    out in paragraph 13 below, to remit this appeal to the First Tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  Both representatives agreed and neither
    sought to persuade me otherwise.

13.   I am satisfied with that this is a case which  falls  squarely  within
    paragraph 7 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,  given  the
    length of time the parties would have to wait  for  the  matter  to  be
    relisted before me in Manchester once the appellant has a fresh medical
    report detailing her new medication and that it  could,  conversely  be
    heard relatively speedily by the First Tier Tribunal and in view of the
    overriding objective informing the onward conduct  of  this  appeal,  I
    have decided that  this appeal be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for hearing afresh before a First Tier Tribunal Judge, other than First
    Tier Tribunal Judge AK Simpson.
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
