
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04115/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 18 November 2016                  |On 22 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Habiba Uunshe Alasow
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Ms M Thirumaney, instructed by Shervins Solicitors
For the appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill promulgated 27.6.16,  dismissing  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds, but  allowing
    on immigration grounds the claimant's appeal against  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse her  asylum,  humanitarian  and  human
    rights claims.  The Judge heard the appeal on 16.6.16.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission to  appeal
    on 27.10.16.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 18.11.16 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found such  error  of  law  in  the
    making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  require  the
    decision of Judge Cockrill to be set aside and the decision  remade  by
    dismissing the appeal.

 5. The decision of the Secretary of State appealed against  was  taken  as
    long ago as 23.2.14. The claimant's appeal came before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 16.12.15 and was allowed on asylum grounds.  The  Secretary
    of State appealed that decision to the Upper  Tribunal  which  set  the
    decision aside and remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal, where it was
    heard by Judge Cockrill.

 6. There has been no cross appeal by the claimant against the decision  of
    Judge Cockrill to dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection
    and human rights grounds and thus that part of the decision must stand.
    The  only  issue  is  in  relation  to  the  appeal  being  allowed  on
    immigration grounds.

 7. Judge Cockrill allowed the appeal under the  Adult  Dependent  Relative
    provisions of Appendix FM E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5. However, as  should  have
    been  clear  to  the  Tribunal  those  provisions  only  relate  to  an
    application for entry clearance from outside the UK, or an  application
    for further leave to remain where leave to enter was granted under  the
    same Adult Dependent Relative provisions. These provisions do  not  and
    cannot apply to the claimant, as she  is  in  the  UK,  having  entered
    illegally concealed in a vehicle in January 2014. She has and never had
    any lawful basis to be or remain in the UK.

 8. Even if the Adult Dependent Relative provisions applied, which they  do
    not, the  First-tier  Tribunal  neglected  to  consider  the  specified
    evidence requirements of Appendix FM-SE, requiring independent  medical
    evidence.

 9. Further, in assessing the Adult  Dependent  Relative  requirements  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the correct test to the  claimant's
    circumstances. Having found that the claimant's circumstances were 'not
    especially serious' and that her symptoms  were  'uncomfortable  rather
    than dangerous,' and that there had been a 'degree of  exaggeration  of
    her symptoms,' it is difficult to understand  how  the  Tribunal  could
    conclude that the claimant could meet the  requirements  of  the  Rules
    that, "as a  result  of  age,  illness  or  disability  (the  claimant)
    requires long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks,"  and  that
    she was "unable even with the  practical  and  financial  help  of  the
    sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where they
    are living, because (a) it is not available and there is no  person  in
    that  country  who  can  reasonably  provide  it;  or  (b)  it  is  not
    affordable." However, this consideration is no more than  academic,  as
    the claimant is not entitled to claim leave to remain under  this  part
    of the Immigration Rules, for the reasons set out above.

10. It follows, given that there are no other provisions of the Rules under
    which is it asserted the claimant can qualify, the appeal  should  have
    also been dismissed on immigration grounds and her appeal  should  have
    been dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal. The claimant has no basis to
    remain in the UK.

Conclusions:

11. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making  of  an  error  on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it on
                    all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions  were  made  on  the  issue.  Given  the
circumstances, I make no anonymity order.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable in this case and thus there can be no fee award.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
     Dated
