
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)Appeal  Number: AA043492015
                                                                 AA039662015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 28th April 2016                   |On 27th May 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     DAV
                                     MRV
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Garrod, Counsel instructed by Marsh and Partners
Sols
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First Appellant is a male national of Sri Lanka born in  1984.  The
    Second Appellant is his wife, born in 1987. They have permission[1]  to
    appeal against  a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Ransley) to dismiss their linked appeals against  decisions  to  remove
    them from the United Kingdom under s10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999. Those decisions followed the Respondent's rejection of  their
    asylum and human rights claims.

    Background to Appeal

 2. The First Appellant claimed asylum on the 19th September 2013. He  told
    interviewing officers that he had arrived in the UK that day, hiding in
    a car. His claim was that he has a well founded fear of persecution  in
    Sri Lanka for reasons of his political opinion.  He claims that he  was
    twice arrested for suspected involvement with the LTTE. The first  time
    was in 2006. After  he  was  released  he  went  to  live  in  an  area
    controlled by the Tigers.  The second detention was in 2013 when he was
    arrested after being identified by a captured LTTE operative  as  being
    involved with the organisation. CID came and questioned him and quickly
    released him. A week later they came to his home at night and took  him
    in for interrogation.  He was subject to serious harm over a number  of
    days.  He managed to escape. He found out that in his absence the  Army
    had come to his home and his wife had been raped by four soldiers.  The
    couple soon left Sri Lanka with the assistance of an agent.

 3. The Respondent did not accept any of this account,  bar  the  assertion
    that the Appellants are Sri Lankan Tamils.  The  Respondent  found  the
    account to contain numerous discrepancies such that  it  could  not  be
    accepted, even to the  lower  standard  of  proof.  Further  the  First
    Applicant's claims about the  behaviour  of  the  Sri  Lankan  security
    services were found to be inconsistent with the findings made about the
    country situation in GJ and  Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  The focus of  the  government  was  no
    longer on pursuing any Tamil with links to  the  LTTE.  The  focus  for
    their concern was now Tamils in the diaspora who were actively  seeking
    the  destabilisation  of   Sri   Lanka.   Their   investigations   were
    intelligence led and there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  First
    Appellant would have been of interest to them in  2013.   Finally,  the
    Respondent invoked s8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants etc) Act 2004, since it was believed that the Appellants must
    have passed through at least one safe country before reaching the UK.

 4. So it was that when the  linked  appeals  came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the central matter in issue was credibility.

    The Determination

 5. The First-tier Tribunal  heard  oral  evidence  from  both  Appellants.
    Having done so they were found not to have  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof. The determination sets out a number of reasons why the witnesses
    were disbelieved: the First Appellant had given internally inconsistent
    evidence and the two witnesses had contradicted each other.

 6. Photographs  relied  upon,  purporting  to  show  scars  on  the  First
    Appellant's  back,  were  given  little  weight  since  they  were  not
    accompanied by a medical report and it could not be  ascertained  whose
    back it was; further he had made no mention of having any scars when he
    attended the asylum interview in November 2013.

 7. The  Second  Appellant  relied  on  a  report  prepared  by  Consultant
    Psychiatrist Dr Robin Lawrence. Dr Lawrence concluded that  the  Second
    Appellant  was  suffering  from  PTSD  and  severe  depression  and  he
    attributed that to her having been raped in Sri Lanka.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found it to be unsatisfactory that Dr Lawrence had not set out
    how he had come to give the Appellant the 'scores' he did on  the  Beck
    Depression Inventory.   The diagnostic interviews  had  been  conducted
    through a Tamil  interpreter  who  was  described  as  a  "third  party
    informant": this lady was variously described  as  a  friend  from  the
    Second Appellant's village and someone  whom  the  family  had  met  in
    Crewe. The Tribunal draws adverse inferences from  the  fact  that  the
    consultation took place without a  qualified  independent  interpreter,
    and from the fact that the witnesses had given inconsistent accounts of
    who this woman was. Further the report  itself  describes  the  answers
    given by the Second Appellant as "vague" but does not set out what  she
    said or whether that vagueness was taken into  account  when  assessing
    her account given and the claimed sequalae.  Finally Dr  Lawrence  made
    no attempt to consider whether there might be other causes for the PTSD
    that he had found the Second Appellant to have.   In  respect  of  this
    matter the determination records the HOPO's submission that the witness
    had become very upset and tearful when talking about the  children  she
    had left behind in Sri Lanka: it was possible that  she  was  depressed
    because of this separation and the failure of Dr Lawrence  to  consider
    such matters undermined his diagnosis.

    Error of Law

 8. The ground of appeal, and supporting skeleton, are long,  detailed  and
    repetitive.  The Appellants' case can however be summarised as follows.
    The Tribunal erred in its approach  i)  to  the  claim  of  the  Second
    Appellant, ii) to the medical evidence relating to her, and iii) in its
    conclusions on the credibility of the First Appellant.   The three  are
    inextricably linked. If a material error can be established in  respect
    of any one of these areas of concern,  then  the  entire  determination
    must be set aside, since the credibility findings  on  both  Appellants
    inevitably overlap.   The only reason ever given by the Respondent  for
    disbelieving that the Second Appellant had  been  raped  was  that  her
    husband had not proved his case; conversely if it had been accepted, on
    the lower standard of proof,  that  she  had  been  raped,  this  would
    necessitate a review of the First Appellant's evidence.

 9. Mr McVeety agreed with this proposition. He accepted than a fundamental
    error, if established, would infect the other findings and  the  entire
    decision would need to be remade.  He did not however accept  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in any of the ways alleged and  mounted  a  rigorous
    defence of the determination,  particularly  in  the  approach  to  the
    medical report.

10. Due to the complexity of the grounds I reserved my  decision  following
    the error of law hearing. For the reasons set out  in  detail  below  I
    find there to be no merit in grounds ii) or iii).  The  medical  report
    was unreliable, and  the  Tribunal  gave  perfectly  good  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence of the First Appellant.  Given  the  cogent  and
    sustainable manner in which the Tribunal dealt with that evidence it is
    with regret that I have concluded that the decision as a whole must  be
    set aside.  The error in approach is  established  in  respect  of  the
    Second Appellant's evidence.  I set out my reasons on the unmeritorious
    grounds first.

    The First Appellant

11. The Tribunal did not believe the First Appellant.    The  grounds  make
    various complaints about this conclusion, including that the Judge took
    an "incorrect approach", that she speculated, and that  she  failed  to
    view the evidence from the perspective of the actors  involved,  rather
    than her own, contrary to established principles of asylum law.

12. At paragraph 38-39 the Tribunal appears to draw adverse inference  from
    the fact that the Second Appellant had made a handwritten amendment  to
    her witness statement. The typed version said that her husband had been
    arrested on "three" occasions.  This would have been inconsistent  with
    his evidence that he was detained twice. Before the  hearing  the  word
    "three" was crossed out and replaced with the word "two".  Before me Mr
    McVeety conceded that this was not a permissible approach.  The  Second
    Appellant's evidence before the Tribunal said that her husband had been
    arrested twice, and this was all that mattered. The fact that there had
    been an error in the earlier  draft  was  an  immaterial  matter  which
    should not have been taken into account. That was not however the  only
    difficulty found with the First Appellant's testimony.

13. The determination identifies a number of inconsistencies in  the  First
    Appellant's evidence: about the extent of  his  involvement  with,  and
    ideological support for, the LTTE;  in respect of  his  2006  detention
    where he was detained and with whom; in respect of his  2013  detention
    why the authorities would first have questioned him and then let him go
    if they were acting upon information that he was an LTTE  member.   The
    grounds take issue with these finding on the  basis  that  the  learned
    Judge has failed to consider whether or not these  defects  could  have
    been caused by the First Appellant's claimed memory loss.  This  ground
    has absolutely no merit. The Judge expressly considers the  claim  that
    he suffers from memory loss. She rejects it  on  the  grounds  that  he
    managed to answer 176 questions at his  asylum  interview  without  any
    apparent difficulty. Secondly, as  she  rightly  noted,  there  was  no
    medical evidence at all.   These were perfectly good reasons to  reject
    the claim that the First Appellant was suffering from  memory  loss.  I
    would add that there appears  to  be  little  correlation  between  the
    claimed memory loss and the answers given: presumably the witness would
    not have forgotten his ideological commitment to the LTTE. If the First
    Appellant could not remember something he would have  said  so,  rather
    than just saying something that was not correct.

14. The grounds take issue with the determination's reference to the  First
    Appellant's  evidence  being  "evasive".  It  is  submitted  that   any
    appearance of evasion resulted from  the  poor  quality  of  the  cross
    examination rather than the evidence given. I do  not  understand  this
    ground. Where the evidence is thus described, examples are  given:  see
    for instance at paragraph 41.  The Tribunal was  entitled  to  describe
    evidence as evasive if the witness did not give a straight answer to  a
    question put. The Judge was entitled to draw  adverse  inferences  from
    that.

15. An explanation offered for the inconsistencies in  the  evidence  about
    the couple's ideological support for the LTTE was that when  they  were
    under the control of an agent they were advised by someone not  to  say
    that they were in the LTTE otherwise they would be  sent  back  to  Sri
    Lanka. One of the reasons that Judge Ransley gives for  rejecting  that
    evidence was that she did not accept that the First Appellant would  do
    as he was advised by a complete  stranger.  The  grounds  rely  on  the
    Kasolo principle to submit that the  Judge  is  here  supplanting  what
    another - a vulnerable migrant under the control of an agent - might do
    with her own view of what conduct would  be  reasonable.  There  is  no
    merit in this ground.  The grounds have omitted to set out the entirety
    of the reasoning:

         "I do not believe  that  the  husband's  denial  at  the  screening
         interview and the asylum interview that he was  a  member/supporter
         of the LTTE was due to his reliance on the advice of a 'Tamil lady'
         as alleged. I say so because the core  of  the  Appellants'  asylum
         claim is that the husband had carried out activities as  an  active
         supporter of the LTTE..."

    It was in this context that the Tribunal made the comments that it  did
    about the unknown lady. That was a rational finding that  was  open  to
    the Tribunal on the evidence before it.

16. I  conclude  that  the  findings  on  the  First  Appellant,  taken  in
    isolation, were all open to the Tribunal on the evidence before it.

    The Medical Evidence

17. As I note above, the First-tier Tribunal was  not  impressed  with  the
    psychiatric report prepared by Dr Lawrence on the Second Appellant. The
    Appellants now take issue with her findings on a number of fronts.

18. I  deal  first  with  the  points  made  about  the  interpreter.   The
    determination notes that discrepant explanations were given as  to  who
    this woman actually was. The First Appellant said that she was  unknown
    to the family before they came to the UK and they had seen her for  the
    first time in Crewe. The Second Appellant had said that because she and
    her husband knew no-one in the UK her mother had sent her  this  lady's
    number. She was from her village in Sri Lanka.   The Tribunal describes
    these accounts as irreconcilable. The grounds take issue with that  and
    submit  that  the  two  statements  are,   properly   read,   perfectly
    consistent. It is possible that the First Appellant was not aware  that
    his  wife  was  from  the  same  village  as  the  lady  who  acted  as
    interpreter, or that it was his  mother-in-law  who  had  put  them  in
    touch.  I find this ground  to  be  entirely  without  merit.  The  two
    accounts are completely different, and it is unlikely  in  the  extreme
    that the First Appellant would not have been aware  if   his  wife  had
    some connection with this woman. This was a finding that  was  open  to
    the First-tier Tribunal on the evidence that was given.

19. What is undoubtedly far more significant is the uncontested  fact  that
    this woman was not a qualified  interpreter.  Whilst  it  may  be  that
    community  interpreters  are  not  held  to  the   same   standard   of
    qualification as those who work for the courts service, the  clinician,
    and Tribunal, must be satisfied as to the interpreter's competence, and
    objectivity. It is not possible in this case  to  be  satisfied  as  to
    either.   Dr  Lawrence  describes  this  woman's  involvement  in   his
    consultation with the Second Appellant as follows:

         "A friend from her village in Sri Lanka who has lived in the UK for
         10 years came and  acted  as  an  interpreter  and  a  third  party
         informant. This woman was intelligent, her English  was  very  good
         and I found her to be a credible and reliable witness"

20. This is an extremely troubling turn of phrase.  An interpreter  is  not
    there to act as a "third party informant", nor to act as  a  "witness".
    The doctor was not called upon  to  evaluate  the  credibility  of  any
    party, much less the interpreter. In these circumstances  the  Tribunal
    was not only entitled to express concerns about the independence of the
    interpreter; it would have been an error of law if it had failed to  do
    so.  The fact that a third party of uncertain identity or connection to
    the Appellants was described by Dr Lawrence as  an  "informant"  and  a
    "witness" is sufficient in itself to cast doubt on the  conclusions  of
    the entire report. In the absence of evidence that Dr  Lawrence  speaks
    Tamil,  it was not possible for him to discern what evidence came  from
    the Second Appellant, and  what  might  have  been  added,  omitted  or
    embellished by  the  'interpreter'.    The  Tribunal  would  have  been
    entitled to decline to place any weight at all on the report  for  that
    reason.

21. As it happens, other reasons were given. They are  twofold.  First  the
    Tribunal finds it to be "material and unsatisfactory" that  the  doctor
    has not explained how he reached the scores he did  on,  for  instance,
    the Beck Inventory. Secondly it  is  noted  that  the  doctor  has  not
    considered that there are other possible causes  for  the  symptoms  of
    depression and PTSD. In respect of both reliance is placed on R (on the
    application of Minani) v IAT [2004] EWHC 582 (Admin). It  is  submitted
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  doubted  the  competence  of  the
    examining physician without good reason.

22. The point in Minani was that the court had there rejected the diagnosis
    of a doctor because it was simply based on what that  doctor  had  been
    told. The High Court held that the opinions of doctors had to  be  read
    in light of their professional qualifications. It could be assumed that
    the clinician made a holistic assessment and that  he  did  not  simply
    believe was he was told. Medical reports cannot rationally be  rejected
    on that ground alone. In this case  the  Tribunal  has,  as  summarised
    above, give three reasons for declining to place weight on the  report.
    In my view the point about the interpreter would in  itself  have  been
    sufficient. Whilst the report does make  reference  to  the  diagnostic
    criteria in respect of, for  instance,  PTSD,  it  does  not  expressly
    connect the Appellant's self reporting  to  those  objective  measures.
    Given the concern already expressed about interpreter, it was important
    that the Tribunal was able to understand where the doctor's conclusions
    came from. The information that the Appellant scored 75 on the  "Impact
    of Events Scale" was, without more, meaningless to the Tribunal.

23. The final point concerned the possible  other  causes  for  the  Second
    Appellant's distress. The Tribunal and HOPO  had  observed  at  hearing
    that she began to "sob" when talking about her children. The report  of
    Dr Lawrence addresses other possible causes thus:

         "I have considered if any other trauma than the  trauma  that  [the
         Second Appellant] describes is a possible cause and  I  think  that
         this is unlikely. I have concluded that it is more likely that  she
         is traumatised by  the  events  she  describes  for  the  following
         reasons:

               i) Her descriptions of the trauma, and the way the trauma  is
                  described are both consistent with the  trauma  being  the
                  cause of her Post Traumatic Stress Disorder

              ii) She has a physiological response to any  reminder  of  the
                  trauma (the memory of being raped)

             iii) She does have Post Traumatic Stress Disorder  and  if  the
                  trauma she describes were not its cause we would  have  to
                  postulate, and discover, another cause"

24. It is apparent from this extract that  the  doctor  has  not  expressly
    considered whether dislocation  from  her  homeland,  house  and  young
    children might have caused the Appellant  any  distress.  The  comments
    made at paragraph 54 of  the  determination  were  therefore  perfectly
    justified.

25. Whilst it may be that the Second Appellant is suffering from depression
    and/or PTSD, I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  was  quite  right
    not to have placed weight on this medical report.

    The Second Appellant's Evidence

26. On the 10th October 2013 the Second Appellant claimed asylum.  She  was
    interviewed that day and in that short 'screening'  interview  asserted
    that she was suffering from headaches and skin itching because she  had
    been raped in Sri Lanka.  She said that on the  night  of  25th  August
    2013 she had been raped by four men and  had  been  thrown  unconscious
    into a forest.   The  Second  Appellant  was  subsequently  interviewed
    again, a year to the day, on the 10th October 2014.  She described  how
    on the night in question soldiers had come and knocked on the door. Her
    mother-in-law had answered. They came in and asked  where  her  husband
    was. That was how she had come to understand that he had  escaped  from
    custody.  The soldiers searched the house. The  Second  Appellant  told
    them that she did not know where he was. One of them held  her  by  her
    hair. Both women were screaming. One of the soldiers pointed his gun at
    the Second Appellant's mother-in-law and said "if you  shout,  we  will
    shoot you". They covered the Second Appellant's mouth and  dragged  her
    outside to a waiting 'Hi-Ace' vehicle. The house was in a  jungle  area
    and they drove for about 2 miles. They took her  out  and  dragged  her
    into a dilapidated building. When they asked her where her husband  was
    she told them "I don't know - you took him".  They  said  that  he  had
    escaped and that she must know where he is.  The  interviewing  officer
    records the evidence that followed [Q69]:

         "Tell us where you have sent him. I told them, he did not come home
         and I do not know where he is. Then the 4 of  them  did  what  they
         wanted to do and raped me  and  left  me  there  (Applicant  starts
         crying). They took turns and held my hands, they pointed the gun at
         my forehead and my mouth. They put their penis in my mouth"

27. The record shows that the interviewing officer at  this  point  offered
    the Second Appellant a  break,  which  she  took.  When  the  interview
    resumed the officer checked if she was ok to  continue,  and  she  said
    that she was. The officer recommenced the interview by  reassuring  her
    that she would not be asked to give any more details  about  the  rape.
    The Appellant added that she had been hit on her  ear  and  had  fallen
    unconscious. She had woken in the morning to find herself alone in  the
    jungle:

         "It was dawn. I covered myself with torn  clothes  and  sat  there.
         This man was taking the cattle for grassing. When he  came  towards
         me, I started to scream. He is from a neighbour village. He told me
         'what happened to you, tell me?'

         He said 'I can't leave you like this and  go'.  He  was  wearing  a
         turban on his head. He tied that on  his  waist  and  gave  me  his
         sarong to cover myself.

         He told me to wait there and wait at the  main  road.  He  saw  the
         priest pass that way. He told them, the priest stood at a  distance
         and looked at me, he didn't come. Then he went and told my father."



    This part of the interview concludes with the Appellant explaining that
    she could not go to the police in case it was in the papers; if it  was
    in the papers she would have to commit suicide, like other  women  from
    her village had done.  She described her injuries after  the  event  as
    scratches caused by the trees, and  the  "scratch  marks  of  nails  on
    chest". She said that she has been affected in lots of ways,  and  that
    not a day has gone by when she has not shed tears.

28. That was the detailed evidence of the Second Appellant which was at the
    heart of the linked appeals.  It is  summarised  in  the  determination
    under the heading 'The Wife's Evidence'[at 23]:

         "The wife's case is that in Sri Lanka she was  raped  by  the  army
         people who came to the marital home to look  for  her  husband  and
         because of this episode she suffered from PTSD".

29. The evaluation of this evidence is confined  to  paragraph  67  of  the
    determination which reads:

         "...  the  cumulative  effect  of  the   credibility   issues   and
         inconsistencies in the evidence is that even on the lower  standard
         of proof I conclude that the Appellants have not told the truth.  I
         do not believe that the husband was a supporter of the LTTE in  Sri
         Lank, or that the wife was raped by four army officers due  to  the
         husband's activities".

30. The grounds raise two issues about this. First, it  is  submitted  that
    the finding set out above it unclear: is  the  evidence  that  she  was
    raped rejected in its entirety, or is  it  the  given  reason  for  the
    attack that is disbelieved?  Second, it is  submitted  that  in  making
    this finding unsupported by reasons the Tribunal has failed to  address
    this central allegation of past persecution on its own merits.  It  has
    failed to make any findings on the evidence  of  the  Second  Appellant
    herself.

31. I find these grounds to be made out.  This was  an  appellant  who  had
    claimed  asylum  in  her  own  right.  She  had  been  served  with  an
    immigration decision and had lodged her own appeal.  She  was  entitled
    to a proper analysis of her evidence.  Mr  Garrod  submitted  that  the
    Second Appellant cannot read this determination and understand why  her
    evidence - as opposed to that of her husband or  doctor  -  might  have
    been rejected. I accept that this is so. There are no reasoned findings
    on the evidence in the asylum interviews, compelling  as  it  is.   The
    heading 'The Wife's Evidence' suggests that she has been treated  as  a
    dependent upon her husband's claim.  If  that  is  so,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal can be forgiven for having gained that impression: I note that
    the Appellants' representatives did not prepare a witness statement for
    the Second Appellant and simply sought to rely on  the  medical  report
    which I have addressed above.  Given the nature of the  evidence,  this
    was wholly  unsatisfactory.   It  remained  the  case  that  there  was
    detailed evidence before  the  Tribunal  in  the  form  of  the  asylum
    interview record.  It would have been possible for  the  report  to  be
    rejected, but for the Appellant's own testimony to  be  accepted.   For
    that reason, the determination of the Second Appellant must be remade.

    Conclusions

32. Taken together the grounds and skeleton were a good  deal  longer  than
    the determination they seek to  challenge.   For  the  reasons  I  have
    given, the grounds were  in  the  main  without  merit.  I  am  however
    satisfied that the determination in respect  of  the  Second  Appellant
    must be remade. Mr McVeety agreed that any findings on her evidence  in
    a new decision must also touch upon the evidence given by her  husband.
    It is not possible to extricate the two accounts and it may be  that  a
    different Tribunal, assessing all of the evidence  in  the  round,  may
    find the burden of proof to be discharged.  It follows that the  appeal
    of the First Appellant must also be revisited. Due to  the  nature  and
    extent of the fact-finding required it is  appropriate  to  remit  this
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Decisions

33. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.

34. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

35. Having regard to the nature  of  the  evidence  I  make  the  following
    direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders.

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellants are granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellants and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               23rd May 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 29th September 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Wellesley-Cole

