

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04221/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 30th January 2015                |On: 6th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pratt, Waddell Taylor Bryan solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Iran date of  birth  10th  June  1992.
       She appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
       Cruthers) who on the 30th July 2014 dismissed her  asylum  and  human
       rights appeal[1].


    2. The matter in issue before Judge Cruthers was whether  the  Appellant
       was at risk  in  Iran  for  reasons  of  her  religious  belief.  The
       Appellant claimed to have converted to Christianity.


    3. Her appeal before Judge Cruthers was not her first. In  January  2013
       Judge Pickup of the First-tier Tribunal had heard  and  dismissed  an
       asylum appeal on essentially the same grounds. It had been  contended
       before him, inter alia, that the Appellant was  a  genuine  Christian
       who could not reasonably be expected to conceal her faith should  she
       be returned to Iran. Her case was supported by members of the Church,
       including a Reverend Andrew Lythall, who attended and  gave  evidence
       on her behalf.  Judge Pickup had not doubted the sincerity of any  of
       the supporting witnesses. He had however concluded that the Appellant
       had not shown, even to the lower standard  of  proof,  that  she  had
       genuinely converted to Christianity. His  reasons  for  that  finding
       were,  in  summary,  that  she  had  been  unable  at  interview   to
       demonstrate even basic knowledge  about  Christianity  (such  as  the
       difference between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments);  there  were  "a
       significant number of gaps in the appellant's  understanding  of  the
       Christian faith"; her explanation for her lack  of  knowledge,   that
       she did not know  that  she  could  read  the  bible  in  Farsi,  was
       contradicted by the evidence that she had been presented with a Farsi
       bible upon her baptism;  she had sought to portray herself as someone
       interested in Christianity by 'liking' and posting various  items  on
       Facebook, but  the  fact  that  this  was  only  in  a  short  period
       immediately prior to her asylum interview suggested that this  was  a
       cynical attempt to generate  positive  evidence;  there  had  been  a
       significant delay in claiming asylum after  the  claimed  conversion.
       Judge  Pickup  therefore  rejected  the  Appellant's   evidence   and
       dismissed the appeal.


    4. The Appellant was not removed from the United Kingdom. She  continued
       to attend church and on the 25th May 2014 she successfully managed to
       persuade the Secretary of State to treat  her  representations  as  a
       'fresh claim' for asylum.  She relied on evidence from members of her
       church that she had indeed been attending services regularly, and  on
       evidence from her vicar, Reverend Canon Elizabeth Chegwin  Hall.  The
       Respondent again refused asylum, relying heavily on  the  conclusions
       of Judge Pickup.


    5. When the matter came before Judge Cruthers  he  correctly  identified
       the decision of  Judge  Pickup  to  be  his  "starting  point".  That
       principle derives from the Upper Tribunal decision  in  Devaseelan[2]
       and in the context of this appeal it meant that  Judge  Cruthers  was
       bound to treat Judge Pickup's findings as determinative of matters as
       they stood in January 2013; he was obliged to closely examine the new
       evidence of religious adherence and commitment and to assess whether,
       on the lower standard of proof, it  showed  the  Appellant  to  be  a
       genuine Christian,  contrary  to  those  original  findings.   Having
       referred himself to that  principle  Judge  Cruthers  summarises  the
       findings of Judge Pickup. He then sets out the  new  evidence.  As  I
       note above, this included further evidence from the  Appellant  about
       her involvement in the Church since January 2013, evidence from Canon
       Chegwin Hall about her contact with the Appellant, and evidence  from
       other members of the church, including the Appellant's aunt.


    6. Judge Cruthers had no hesitation in accepting the  sincerity  of  the
       evidence of the "church  witnesses"  who  spoke  to  the  Appellant's
       attendance at services.   He specifically notes Canon Chegwin  Hall's
       evidence that she had personally spoken to the Appellant on  numerous
       occasions and had "repeatedly elicited that she has had a  conversion
       experience to Christianity".  He notes that the Canon had  not  given
       evidence in such an appeal before and that she expressed doubts about
       another person whom she knows to be making a  similar  asylum  claim.
       She  is  a  senior  and  experienced  member  of  the   Church.   The
       determination then sets out the evidence of the Appellant's aunt, who
       claims  that  she  and  her  two  sisters  have  all   converted   to
       Christianity  and  that  she  believes   that   her   influence   was
       instrumental in the Appellant having converted herself.    Under  the
       heading  "my  assessment"  the  determination  draws  the   following
       conclusions from the evidence:


             a) The fact that the Appellant has continued to  attend  Church
                could be a sign of her persistent faith, but could "equally"
                be a sign of her commitment to pursuing a false asylum claim
                [para 84];


             b) There was still no satisfactory explanation for the delay in
                claiming asylum. The Appellant was baptised  in  March  2012
                and had given evidence that she knew at that point that  she
                could not return o Iran - she had not however claimed  until
                October 2012 [85];


             c)  It is "extremely telling"  that  the  Appellant's  Facebook
                page contained no references to Christianity at all prior to
                the 17th October 2012, the day before her  asylum  interview
                [86].


    7. On the basis of those  findings  the  appeal  was  dismissed  in  the
       following terms [at 88]:


           "... assessing all  the  evidence  as  best  I  can,  it  is  my
           conclusion that events since 21  January  2013,  even  with  the
           extra evidence  adduced,  are  not  sufficient  to  displace  Mr
           Pickup's principle conclusion as to the appellant  not  being  a
           genuine Christian convert, i.e. taken overall, the evidence does
           not establish, even on the reasonable likelihood standard,  that
           the applicant is someone genuinely committed to Christianity, as
           opposed to being someone claiming to be committed to that  faith
           for the purposes of pursuing an asylum claim"






       The Submissions


    8. The Appellant now  has  permission[3]  to  appeal  on  the  following
       grounds:


        i) Having accepted Canon Chegwin Hall as an experienced and  senior
           member of the clergy who had had several conversations with  the
           Appellant about her conversion experience, the Judge  then  gave
           no reasons why he did not consider this evidence weighty  enough
           to displace the findings in the first determination;


       ii) This  failure  to  give  reasons  left  the  Appellant  with  no
           understanding as to why she had lost:  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
           decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC).


    9. Whilst the Respondent agrees that the  "assessment"  section  of  the
       determination is brief, it is submitted that the Tribunal  has  given
       adequate reasons for its conclusions. The Tribunal  was  entitled  to
       find that the  new  evidence  was  not  sufficient  to  displace  the
       findings of Judge Pickup.


       Error of Law


   10. This was a difficult case. As both Judge Pickup  and  Judge  Cruthers
       identified, attempting to discern whether or not a claimant has  made
       a genuine religious conversion is one of the most challenging tasks a
       judge in this jurisdiction is faced with.  Outward  signs  of  faith,
       such as wearing a crucifix, are relatively easy to achieve.  In  this
       case  the  Appellant  relied  on  what  might  be   considered   such
       superficial gestures: just because someone chooses to  wear  a  cross
       and attend church every Sunday does not mean that he or she is  truly
       a  Christian.  She  also  however  relied  on  the  evidence  of   an
       experienced member of the church. Judge Cruthers states in terms that
       he has no reason to doubt  the  sincerity  or  objectivity  of  Canon
       Chegwin Hall: why then  did  he  not  accept  her  conclusions?   The
       present appeal turns  on  whether  adequate  reasons  were  given  in
       respect of her evidence.


   11. The section of the determination  headed  'my  assessment'  does  not
       directly address the evidence of Canon Chegwin Hall that she has used
       her  many  years  of  experience  in  the  Church  to  evaluate   the
       Appellant's "conversion experience" as being a genuine  and  credible
       one.  It is possible however, to find Judge Cruthers' conclusions  at
       paragraph 77:


           "I accept that Reverend Chegwin Hall does not believe  that  the
           appellant is "hoodwinking" her as regards the genuineness of her
           commitment to Christianity. My task, however, is to weigh up all
           the evidence before me and I do  not  know  how  acquainted  (or
           otherwise) Reverend Chegwin Hall is with all  the  reasons  that
           have been given for disbelieving the appellant's claims relating
           to Christianity (i.e. those  given  by  the  respondent  and  Mr
           Pickup)"


   12. The determination has, at that point, already set out  those  reasons
       in full. The Appellant's knowledge was found  to  be  lacking,  there
       were discrepancies in her evidence and the chronology  gave  rise  to
       two concerns: the unexplained delay between the  Appellant's  baptism
       and asylum claim, and her "self-serving" and brief foray into posting
       overtly Christian material on  Facebook.  Those  latter  issues  were
       evidently of great concern to Judge  Cruthers,  since  he  reiterates
       them in his "assessment" section.  Reading  the  determination  as  a
       whole, however, it seems to me that paragraph 77 is at the  heart  of
       his findings. He accepts that Canon Chegwin Hall is  experienced  and
       sincere. She is not however the decision maker in this appeal, and he
       has not been satisfied that she knew all of the reasons why the claim
       had earlier been refused. Implicit in this comment is the  suggestion
       that if she had done, she may not have reached the  conclusions  that
       she did. The "assessment" section is brief but I do not believe  that
       the Appellant  can  be  ignorant  as  to  why  her  appeal  has  been
       dismissed. The reasons are set out in full  by  Judge  Pickup,  whose
       conclusions Judge Cruthers expressly adopts. There is no  requirement
       in Devaseelan that the second tribunal  gives  a  whole  set  of  new
       reasons for its findings.  The task of  the  second  tribunal  is  to
       assess all of the evidence and see whether different conclusions  can
       be reached. Judge Cruthers has done this.


   13. At the hearing I expressed some concern about  paragraph  84  of  the
       determination:


           "[the outward signs of the Appellant's faith]...could  be  signs
           that the appellant has persisted with a  genuine  commitment  to
           the Christian  faith,  despite  her  first  appeal  having  been
           dismissed on 21 January 2013.  But,  equally,  those  signs  are
           compatible with the appellant having  decided  to  persist  with
           using Christianity as a vehicle to secure leave to remain in the
           UK..."


           [emphasis added].


   14. The burden  of  proof  in  asylum  appeals  is  a  low  one.  If  one
       explanation is "equally" as  valid  as  another,  the  appellant  has
       discharged the burden of proof. Having read the  determination  as  a
       whole however, I am satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  has  applied  the
       correct standard of  proof.  The  correct  standard  is  set  out  at
       paragraph 7, and in two  places  is  applied  to  the  same  question
       considered in paragraph 84. In 86:


           "... it seems to me appropriate to describe many of the  crucial
           activities of this appellant here as  "self-serving"  -  in  the
           sense that they are very likely to be activities  undertaken  to
           support the appellant's bid  for  refugee  status,  rather  than
           genuine   expressions   of   the   appellant's   commitment   to
           Christianity"


       And 88:


           "... i.e. taken overall, the evidence does not  establish,  even
           on the reasonable likelihood standard,  that  the  applicant  is
           someone genuinely committed to Christianity, as opposed to being
           someone claiming to be committed to that faith for the  purposes
           of  pursuing an asylum claim"


   15. The use of the word "equally" at 84 is unfortunate  but  having  read
       the determination as a whole I  am  satisfied  that  Judge  Cruthers'
       findings did not stop there. He finds that one explanation  might  be
       as "equally" plausible as another, but then goes on to  give  reasons
       why the balance tips away from the Appellant to the extent  that  she
       fails to discharge even the lower standard of proof.


       Decisions


   16. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  an
       error of law and it is upheld.


   17. The First-tier Tribunal made a direction for  anonymity.  Having  had
       regard to  Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 and the UT(IAC) Presidential Guidance Note 2013 No 1:  Anonymity
       Orders I continue that Order.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           3rd February 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Appeal brought against a decision dated 11th June 2014 to remove from
the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999

[2] Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702*
[3] Granted by Judge Bartlett of the First-tier Tribunal on the 18th August
2014

