
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04664/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     AL
                              (ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. F. Kadia, A de Ruano, Legal Representatives
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal of AL a  minor  and  a  citizen  of
    Albania against the respondent's decision to refuse his application for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.

Background

 3. The appellant was born on 19 August 2000.  He applied for asylum in the
    United Kingdom on 21 August 2014.  The respondent refused that claim by
    way of a decision dated 2 March 2015.  The appellant was granted  leave
    to remain until 2  September  2017  as  the  respondent  could  not  be
    satisfied that there were safe and adequate reception arrangements  for
    him in Albania as a minor.

 4. The appeal against the  decision  to  refuse  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection came before First-tier Tribunal Judge C. H.  Bennett  on  19
    August 2015.  In a decision promulgated on 16 October 2015, the  appeal
    was dismissed.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on grounds  which
    can be summarised as follows:  that  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to
    consider humanitarian protection as an  available  ground  in  this  an
    'upgrade  appeal';  and  that  the  Judge  misinterpreted  the  Refugee
    Convention reason of Particular Social Group.

 6. The appeal came before me.

Ground 1

 7.  The  Judge  made  detailed  findings  including  in  relation  to  the
    background country information.  Those findings of fact have  not  been
    challenged and were not at issue.  Contrary to the Rule 24 Notice,  the
    appellant's grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    contend that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  the  issue  of
    Humanitarian Protection.  Mr Duffy accepted that this was the case.

 8. Mr Duffy conceded at the beginning of the appeal that given the Judge's
    findings: that the respondent had accepted that the appellant had  been
    maltreated  and  neglected  by  his  parents;   that   there   was   an
    insufficiency of protection available in Albania for  children  against
    exploitation and against the actions of abusive or  neglectful  parents
    (at [17]); that the test in Horvath [2000] UKHL 37; [2001] 2 AC 489 was
    not satisfied ([17]); and that the  respondent  (having  accepted  that
    reception arrangement  for the appellant were  inadequate  and  unsafe)
    had failed  to  demonstrate  that  there  was  adequacy  of  protection
    available for children generally or  specifically  in  the  appellant's
    case  (also  at  [17]);  the  appellant  was  therefore   entitled   to
    Humanitarian Protection.

 9. The respondent had considered in accordance with paragraph 339C of  the
    Immigration Rules whether the appellant was  entitled  to  a  grant  of
    Humanitarian Protection.  I considered the jurisprudence, including  ST
    (Child asylum seekers) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT  292  which  confirms  the
    availability of humanitarian protection as a  ground  of  appeal  where
    limited leave to  remain  has  been  granted  in  accordance  with  the
    respondent's policy on discretionary leave relating to minors.

10. Mr Duffy was of the view therefore  that  the  appellant's  appeal,  in
    relation to Humanitarian Protection was bound to succeed (in the  event
    that the appeal did not succeed on asylum grounds).  I indicated at the
    hearing that I was satisfied that this was the case.



Ground 2

11. It  was  Ms  Kadia's  submission  that  the  Judge  had  misinterpreted
    Particular Social Group and that again on  the  basis  of  the  Judge's
    findings of facts the appellant belongs to a particular social group in
    Albania and is therefore a refugee.  Ms Kadia submitted that a  child's
    age is an immutable  characteristic  and  relied  on  DS  (Afghanistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 305 and LQ (Age: immutable characteristic)  Afghanistan
    [2008] UKAIT 00005.

12. Mr Duffy argued that the categories in the cited  cases  were  narrower
    applying effectively to Afghani street children/orphans.

13. The Judge made unchallenged findings that there would  be  no  adequate
    arrangements for the appellant on return (and the Judge had  considered
    the evidence including of other potential family  members).  The  Judge
    found that there were no adequate reception facilities in  Albania  and
    no adequate protection to support  at-risk  children  and  families  in
    Albania.

14. The Judge at [13] found that the abuse of the appellant was not for the
    convention reason of particular social  group  as  the  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that their parents abused  their  other  children.   However,
    although  the  Judge  made  findings   that   the   appellant   as   an
    abused/neglected Albanian child would not  be  able  to  seek  adequate
    protection  in  Albania  and  I  accept  that  age  is   an   immutable
    characteristic (LQ (above)  applied),  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant  has  demonstrated  that  the  characteristic  of  being   an
    abused/neglected Albanian child is immutable as such circumstances  can
    change. As such it has not been shown that  an  abused/neglected  minor
    child in Albania could be a member of a particular social  group.   Any
    error by the Judge, in relation to his consideration of the appellant's
    parents' lack of abuse  of  their  other  children,  is  not  therefore
    material.

Decision:

15. The appeal is allowed.  The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved an error of law and is set aside to  the  extent  set
    out above.  I preserve the Judge's findings of fact and in relation  to
    the Refugee Convention.  I remake the decision allowing the appellant's
    appeal under the Qualification Directive.  The appellant is entitled to
    Humanitarian Protection.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 8 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

