
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04530/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27 June 2017                     |On 18 July 2017                       |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    [A K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel, instructed by Kasar & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

     1. This is a remade decision following the identification of  material
        errors of law in the decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Boyd (FtJ), promulgated on 29 August 2014, and pursuant to a signed
        consent order sealed by  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  7  April  2017
        ordering that the matter be  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
        reconsider the appeal against the FtJ's decision.


     2. The FtJ dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal against a  decision
        to remove him dated 3 July 2014 but allowed his appeal on article 8
        grounds. Both parties appealed this decision to the Upper Tribunal,
        the Appellant on the basis that the FtJ materially erred in law  in
        his assessment of the Appellant's protection claim, the  Respondent
        on the basis that the FtJ erred in law in his article 8 assessment.




     3. The matter came before Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Monson on
        26 June 2015. In a decision promulgated on 13 July 2015 the  Deputy
        Judge dismissed the asylum ground of appeal concluding that the FtJ
        had not materially erred  in  law  in  making  adverse  credibility
        findings based on evidence relating to  the  asylum  claim  of  the
        Appellant's brother, which  had  not  been  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal. The Deputy Judge allowed the Respondent's appeal  finding
        that the FtJ materially erred in his approach  to  article  8.  The
        Deputy Judge reserved his decision and did  not  canvass  with  the
        parties the possible outcomes should a material error be identified
        in respect of the Respondent's appeal. Having determined  that  the
        First-tier Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  the  Deputy  Judge
        proceeded, without a further hearing, to assess  and  then  dismiss
        the article 8 appeal.


     4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal.
        Although refused permission by the Upper Tribunal, and then by  the
        Court of Appeal on the papers, on  2  December  2016  Lady  Justice
        Black granted permission to  appeal  on  all  grounds  following  a
        renewed oral hearing and the  matter  was  remitted  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal by consent.


     5. At the remitted hearing  on  11  May  2017  there  was  significant
        agreement between the parties  in  respect  of  the  basis  of  the
        consent order and the scope of the remittal to the Upper  Tribunal.
        Having heard submissions  from  both  representatives,  and  having
        regard to the reasons given by the Court of Appeal in the accompany
        note to the consent order, I found that the FtJ materially erred in
        law in making  adverse  credibility  findings  based  partially  on
        details of  the  Appellant's  brother's  asylum  claim  and  appeal
        without having a sufficient evidential basis before him to  support
        those  adverse  findings.  I  additionally  found  that   the   FtJ
        materially erred in law by failing to  give  adequate  reasons  for
        rejecting the Appellant's claim in respect of his age  and  relying
        solely, and without any  explanation  other  than  it  was  'Merton
        compliant', on the local authority age  assessment.  There  was  no
        dispute that the FtJ materially erred in its article 8 assessment.


The Appellant's claim

     6. The Appellant claims he was born on 11 November 1997,  although  an
        age assessment undertaken by Kent Social Services  determined  that
        his date of birth was 11 November 1995. The Appellant's father  co-
        owned a currency exchange business with (HAG) and  the  Appellant's
        brother, (AK) also worked there. The shop was located in  a  market
        in Lashkarga City, in Helmand Province. Towards  the  end  of  2006
        their father was asked by Taliban members, who visited the shop, to
        transfer a large amount of money to Dubai. The  Appellant's  father
        refused and was later abducted  by  the  Taliban  from  the  family
        house. The Taliban threatened to kill him  unless  the  Appellant's
        brother transferred the funds. AK reported  the  abduction  to  the
        Afghan police on the advice of  HAG.  In  their  investigation  the
        police attended the family home shortly after the Taliban returned.
        A firefight ensued. The Appellant's father was  killed  along  with
        some members of the Taliban and some police officers. The Appellant
        and his brother fled. The Appellant and AK feared the Taliban would
        seek revenge for the death of their members, and  that  the  police
        would target them in the mistaken belief that they were part  of  a
        plan to lure the police to an ambush. AK made his way to the UK and
        claimed asylum on 26 November 2006. The Appellant stayed  with  HAG
        for almost 3 years and they moved home  several  times  because  of
        visits from the Taliban. AK's asylum application was refused and an
        appeal and reconsideration against that appeal  dismissed  in  2008
        and he was returned to Afghanistan in 2011. 3 years or so after the
        firefight incident the Appellant left Afghanistan (around  November
        2009) and made his way to the UK  where  he  claimed  asylum  on  6
        January 2010. He was placed with foster carers in Tunbridge  Wells,
        Kent.

     7. In refusing the Appellant's asylum claim the Respondent noted  that
        his brother's asylum claim had been dismissed and that AK's account
        had not been accepted as credible by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
        The Respondent noted inconsistencies between AK's account and  that
        of the Appellant. These included inconsistencies in respect of  the
        manner  in  which  they  each  escaped  from  the   family   house,
        inconsistencies as to what happened when the  Taliban  returned  to
        the house, whether the Appellant remained with his brother  at  the
        Iranian border for 2 weeks following the  firefight  incident,  and
        the Appellant's failure to mention in  his  interview  and  initial
        statement that his village had been bombed the same  night  as  the
        firefight. The Respondent did not find it plausible that the police
        would blame the Appellant's brother in the mistaken belief that  he
        set a trap for their ambush. The  Respondent  considered  that  the
        Appellant would be able to access sufficient  protection  from  the
        authorities and that he could, in any event, avail himself  of  the
        internal relocation alternative. The Respondent additionally  noted
        that the Appellant could contact the Refugee Action Choices  Scheme
        which could provide financial support to him should  he  decide  to
        voluntary return to Afghanistan. The Respondent considered  whether
        returning the Appellant to Afghanistan  would  cause  a  breach  of
        articles 2 and 3 ECHR and whether he was entitled  to  Humanitarian
        Protection under the Qualification Directive (Dir  2004/83/EC)  but
        concluded that there would be no  breach.  The  Respondent  finally
        considered whether the Appellant's removal would breach  article  8
        but found that he did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  or
        paragraph 276ADE of the immigration rules.  In  so  concluding  the
        Respondent was not satisfied that the education undertaken  by  the
        Appellant in the UK and his length of residence were sufficient  to
        outweigh the public interest in his removal.

Documentary evidence

     8. There were two bundles of documents provided by the Respondent. The
         Respondent's 1st bundle included, inter alia, Reasons For  Refusal
        Letters dated 30 June 2010,  4  February  2011  and  3  July  2014,
        statements from the Appellant dated 19 January 2010  and  23  April
        2013, a copy of the Appellant's asylum  interview  conducted  on  9
        February 2010, the age assessment conducted by Kent County  Council
        dated  26  January  2010,  statements  from  [TB]  and  [PB]   (the
        Appellant's foster carers), a letter  from  a  number  of  teachers
        including Dr Daniel  Kennedy  (who  taught  the  Appellant  English
        throughout  his  GCSE  studies),  a  letter  from  Gillian  Martin,
        Independent Reviewing Officer at Kent County Council dated 25 March
        2013, a letter from Sally Salter, designated  LAC  teacher  at  the
        Bennett Memorial Diocesan School dated 26 February 2013,  a  letter
        from Bart  Gumbrell,  senior  practitioner  and  registered  social
        worker with Barnardos dated 27 February 2013, and a letter from the
        Rev Rachel Knapp, dated 26  February  2013.  Also  included  was  a
        letter from the British Red Cross dated 18 October 2013  indicating
        that enquiries had begun on the Appellant's  case.  The  Respondent
        provided a supplementary bundle consisting of the  refusal  letter,
        dated 19 January 2007, in respect of AK's  asylum  claim,  and  the
        decisions of Immigration Judges R G Walters and Parker, promulgated
        on 19 March 2007 and 23 January 2008 respectively, dismissing  AK's
        asylum appeals. The supplementary bundle also included a refusal to
        grant permission to appeal to the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal
        (AIT) in respect of the decision of Judge Parker.


     9. The Appellant's bundle of documents included, inter alia, a further
        witness statement from the Appellant dated 22  June  2017,  further
        witness statements from [TB] and [PB], dated 23 June  2017  and  24
        June 2017 respectively, a statement from [AB] (the daughter of [TB]
        and [PB]) dated 23 June 2017, a statement from Bart Gumbrell  dated
        23 June 2017, a statement from [MR] (the husband of [AB]) dated  26
        July 2014, the statement of [AN] (the sister of [TB]) dated 29 July
        2014, a further statement from Sally Salter dated 17 July  2014,  a
        number of photographs showing the Appellant with the [B family]  on
        several occasions including Christmas, photos of the Appellant with
        friends from school and playing cricket, photos of the Appellant at
        college, a letter from the British Red  Cross  dated  23  May  2014
        confirming that the Appellant's brother was removed to Kabul on  13
        October 2011 and that the organisation was not able to  initiate  a
        trace in Afghanistan without further  information  on  his  current
        location. The bundle  additionally  included  several  certificates
        issued to the Appellant  including  certificates  relating  to  ICT
        (information and  communication  technology)  and  Pearson  Edexcel
        Functional skills in mathematics, Bronze certificates issued  under
        the  Duke  of  Edinburgh  Award  Scheme,  and  a  Basic  First  Aid
        Certificate issued by St John's Ambulance.  Also  included  were  a
        number of letters in support including those from  the  Appellant's
        college tutor (Pearl O'Keeffe), and a letter from Brian Gasking  of
        the Linden Park Cricket Club dated 3 March 2012. The final  section
        of the bundle consisted of a number of news articles,  some  public
        statements from Amnesty  international,  an  Internal  Displacement
        Monitoring  Centre  Global  Report  on  internal  displacement   in
        Afghanistan dated May 2017, a European Asylum Support Office (EASO)
        Country Report on Afghanistan's security situation dated 21 January
        2016, and the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines stated on 19 April 2016.
        There were  additionally  articles  relating  to  Helmand  Province
        issued by the Institute for the Study of War and the Institute  for
        War and Peace Reporting, and the Independent newspaper.


    10. At the hearing  Mr  Clarke  obtained  a  copy  of  the  Appellant's
        statement dated  28  October  2010.  I  received  helpful  skeleton
        arguments from both  Ms  Brown  and  Mr  Clarke  and  a  number  of
        authorities to which I will refer when appropriate.

The hearing

    11. I maintained a detailed record of the evidence given in submissions
        made at the hearing. The following is a summary of  that  evidence.
        The Appellant adopted his statements. In examination in  chief  the
        Appellant stated that he had obtained a diploma (BTEC) at  Level  3
        and that he had two unconditional offers  to  undertake  a  BSc  in
        Civil Engineering from the University of Kent and the University of
        East London, and two conditional  offers  from  the  University  of
        Brighton and Kingston University. Although no documentary  evidence
        was provided in support  of  these  assertions  the  Appellant  did
        produce on his mobile phone an email from UCAS  confirming  one  of
        the unconditional offers, and Mr Clarke did not take issue with the
        Appellant's assertions in respect of his academic achievements  and
        his offers from University. The Appellant completed his studies  at
        college in June 2016 but was unable  to  commence  his  studies  at
        University in September 2016 because  of  his  immigration  status.
        During his study of the Level 3 BTEC  the  Appellant  learnt  about
        buildings, health and safety, building sustainability, technologies
        within   the   construction   industry,   architecture,    building
        regulations in the UK, civil engineering and project management.


    12. The Appellant currently  lived  with  another  asylum  seeker  from
        Afghanistan. He was unable to work  and  spends  his  time  playing
        sports and with friends from school and playing  cricket.  He  also
        spends time with a friend from Afghanistan. He claimed he  saw  his
        former foster carers at weekends.


    13. In cross-examination it was pointed out that in AK's asylum  appeal
        he referred to the Appellant as being 8 years old when  his  father
        was killed and that this was inconsistent with the Appellant's 2017
        statement where he said he was 10 years old  at  the  time  of  his
        father's  death.  The  Appellant  confirmed  that  his  father  was
        abducted by the Taliban on the same  day  that  the  Taliban  first
        visited his father's shop. He did not  know  why  he  said  in  his
        asylum interview that his father had been  abducted  the  following
        day. The Appellant confirmed that, on the evening of the firefight,
        the Taliban had already entered the house with his father and  were
        talking to his brother and that AK told  the  Appellant  to  go  to
        another room. The Appellant did not know  why  his  brother  stated
        that the fighting broke out outside his house without anyone having
        entered the house. The Appellant was asked about  several  apparent
        inconsistencies between  his  evidence  and  that  of  his  brother
        including their descriptions of their escape from the  family  home
        and where they went immediately after their escape, and why AK said
        that they spent 2 weeks together at the  Iranian  border.  HAG  was
        able to hide the Appellant because he  was  younger  than  AK  and,
        because of his youth, he would be able to stay in  the  house  with
        females.


    14. The Appellant explained that he was targeted  by  the  Taliban  who
        wanted to use him as a means of getting his brother. The  Appellant
        explained, by way of example, that if he had been captured  by  the
        Taliban they would threaten to use him as a suicide  bomber  unless
        his brother gave himself up. The Appellant did not see his  brother
        when he fled to HAG's house because, although the  land  was  flat,
        there were trees and buildings and he was too scared. When  it  was
        put to the Appellant that his brother's  evidence  was  that  their
        father had been killed during aerial bombing but that the Appellant
        said their father was shot, the Appellant claimed that he used  the
        Pashtu word 'fighting' rather than 'shot' and that  the  references
        to his father being shot should have been references to his  father
        being killed during fighting.


    15. The Appellant  believed  he  would  be  recognised  in  Afghanistan
        because the Taliban have very strong connections  and  wherever  he
        went in the country he will be asked about his background  and  his
        father's name. He  believed  the  Taliban  would  have  an  adverse
        interest in him because they would want revenge for what his family
        did. The police would still  be  interested  in  him  because  they
        wanted to know where his brother was. In Afghanistan if one commits
        a crime then the authorities can take other family members in order
        to get to the criminal. The Appellant claimed he could not read  or
        write in Pashtu and in order to get a job a person needs to read or
        understand Pashtu or Dari. The Appellant had not  tried  to  locate
        HAG because he did not want to cause further problems for him  with
        the Taliban. The Appellant was so frustrated that he forgot to give
        his brother his contact details when he eventually  saw  him  in  a
        detention centre very shortly before AK was removed to Afghanistan.


    16. In response to questions from me the Appellant did not know why HAG
        did not give him  his  own  contact  details  in  Afghanistan.  The
        Appellant claimed that the Taliban sought him a few times  when  he
        moved with HAG to a town called Grishk. The Taliban would  come  at
        midnight and knock on the door and the  Appellant  was  immediately
        hidden inside a tandoor in the kitchen or hidden  in  carpets.  The
        Taliban would not come inside the house because of  their  culture.
        They wouldn't care once there was fighting but, in the  absence  of
        fighting, they did not want people to think that  they  were  being
        unhelpful. The Appellant also confirmed that the Taliban came 2  or
        3 times to look for him, again at midnight, when he and  HAG  moved
        to a town called Musa Qala. Throughout this time HAG  continued  to
        conduct his money transfer business from the  market  in  Lashkarga
        City. This had not been destroyed in any bombing. The  Taliban  did
        not visit HAG at his shop because this was in an area controlled by
        the government and was full of money changers.


    17. In re-examination the Appellant indicated that he might be targeted
        by the Taliban because they may think that  he  had  given  up  his
        religion because he lived in a non-Muslim country and had become  a
        kafir (an Arabic term meaning unbeliever). The Appellant's  brother
        had apparently been living in Tunbridge Wells  as  well  and  at  a
        mosque in Tunbridge Wells the Appellant met somebody  who  knew  AK
        and who, 6 to 8  months  later,  informed  the  Appellant  of  AK's
        location. The Appellant still  attended  the  mosque  in  Tunbridge
        Mills which was attended by many Afghans.


    18. [TB] adopted her statements. In them she  explains  that,  although
        the Appellant was rehoused 2014, he remains her de facto son.  Over
        the years she came to think of him as another of her  children  and
        considered that his relationship with [PB]  was  akin  to  that  of
        father and son. The family's relationship with  the  Appellant  was
        closer than any they had with the other children they had fostered.
        Although she agreed that the Appellant was independent, bright  and
        capable, she worried that people did not see  his  vulnerable  side
        and she did  not  know  how  he  would  cope  in  Afghanistan.  The
        Appellant was a scared little boy when he  first  arrived  and  had
        nightmares and trouble sleeping. [TB] placed the Appellant as being
        younger than 14 years old in her mind when he  came  to  live  with
        them. The Appellant is also a member of the extended family and  is
        loved by all his aunts, uncles and grandparents. The Appellant  was
        described as a genuinely decent person and  a  charming  young  man
        with a sense of humour that is becoming more "British".


    19. In examination in chief [TB] was not sure where the  Appellant  had
        been offered places at university but believed it was somewhere  in
        London. She knew he was going  to  study  construction.  In  cross-
        examination [TB] "vaguely recalled" that HAG had looked  after  the
        Appellant for just under 3 years  before  he  came  to  the  United
        Kingdom. She did not know why no attempt had  been  made  to  trace
        HAG. In response to a query from me as to whether her family  would
        be able to provide the Appellant with some funds to enable  him  to
        establish himself if removed to Afghanistan [TB] said that this had
        not been discussed. Two of her sons were working, she  was  working
        and her husband was working although he had recently taken a salary
        cut. She did not expect her sons to be able to give  any  financial
        support because  they  were  saving  for  their  own  futures.  The
        Appellant attended mosque at least once a week, he  did  not  drink
        alcohol and there were lots of other Afghans  at  the  mosque.  She
        confirmed that the Appellant still spoke Pashtu but did  not  think
        that he wrote it well. She confirmed that the Appellant was in good
        health. In re-examination she indicated that she  would  not  visit
        Afghanistan because it was not safe.


    20. [PB] adopted his statements. He thinks of the Appellant as his  son
        and their  relationship  developed  over  7  years.  The  Appellant
        remains a very devout Muslim but always joined in  at  dinners  and
        parties. The Appellant was a genuinely good person and  was  always
        trying to help people, for example when  he  arranged  to  help  an
        elderly couple to move their furniture.  [PB]  confirmed  that  the
        Appellant got on well with all members of the family and that  Alex
        acted as his big sister. Their family would not be the same without
        the Appellant.


    21. In examination in chief [PB] said he would  not  visit  Afghanistan
        because it was  a  dangerous  place.  He  did  not  know  at  which
        universities the Appellant had been accepted but believed  that  he
        was going to study construction. [PB] was not aware  that  HAG  had
        looked after the Appellant for the  2  to  3  years  prior  to  his
        leaving Afghanistan. [PB] had never heard that name. [PB] confirmed
        that his children living with him were  aged  31,  30  and  21.  On
        average the family sees the Appellant once every couple of  months.
        When asked whether he would be able to assist the Appellant with  a
        small amount of  money  to  enable  him  to  establish  himself  in
        Afghanistan [PB] said that the family would try to assist  him  and
        would try to help him as best they could. Three out of four of  his
        children worked, his oldest worked in the brokerage firm Lloyds  of
        London, his youngest was doing an apprenticeship,  his  middle  son
        was looking for work and Alex was a journalist.


    22. [AB] adopted her statement. The Appellant is  like  a  son  to  her
        parents, and she regards him as a  brother.  It  would  be  a  real
        struggle to maintain their close bond if the Appellant was returned
        to Afghanistan. The family would also be  very  worried  about  his
        welfare. In examination in chief [AB] indicated that she would  not
        visit Afghanistan if the Appellant was returned. She knew  that  he
        last attended a college in London but did not want  to  guess  what
        course he studied and she did not know what he wanted to  study  at
        university. When they talked it was about religion and family.  Her
        present relationship with the Appellant could not be replicated  by
        remote forms of communication if he was  returned  to  Afghanistan.
        When asked in cross examination whether she was prepared to  assist
        in providing the Appellant with short-term funds in the event  that
        he was removed [AB] indicated that she was expecting a baby and was
        not in a financial state to be able to assist much.


    23. Bart Gumbrell adopted his statement and his letter. In  examination
        in chief he indicated that he had been in regular contact with  the
        [B family] and talked about the Appellant on a  regular  basis.  In
        cross-examination he confirmed that the information he had to  hand
        about the Appellant's lack of family in  Afghanistan  was  obtained
        from foster meetings.


    24. Both representatives relied on their skeleton arguments. Mr  Clarke
        submitted that, whilst the Appellant's  account  and  that  of  his
        brother did overlap, when the accounts were  considered  in  detail
        there was significant inconsistencies. My attention  was  drawn  to
        the  various  inconsistencies  outlined  in  Mr  Clarke's  skeleton
        argument. Notwithstanding the Appellant's age when  he  arrived  in
        this country his evidence  was  incredible.  When  approaching  the
        determination in AK's asylum  case  I  was  invited  to  adopt  the
        approach indicated in AA (Somalia) v SSHD  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  1040.
        Notwithstanding the credibility issues, Mr  Clarke  submitted  that
        the events described by the Appellant occurred 10 years  ago,  that
        the Appellant was not party to any of the dealings, and that it was
        not credible that the Taliban would use their resources to try  and
        target him. The Appellant had never had any personal dealings  with
        the police. Taking the case at its highest there was no risk to the
        Appellant.


    25. Mr Clarke submitted that the background evidence  provided  in  the
        Appellant's bundle, and in particular the EASO report, did not meet
        the high threshold necessary to demonstrate a breach of Article 15C
        of the Qualification Directive. Although there may be  difficulties
        in  the  Appellant's  former  foster  family  providing   long-term
        assistance they indicated that they would be able to assist in some
        way. I was reminded of the absence of any reference to HAG  in  the
        Appellant's interaction with the British Red Cross.  The  Appellant
        could also be entitled to funds under the  Assisted  Return  Scheme
        but he would have to make a  formal  application.  The  educational
        qualifications obtained by the Appellant in the UK placed him in an
        advantageous position and he was unlikely to find himself destitute
        on return to Afghanistan. The Appellant would be able to  establish
        a private life in Afghanistan given that  he  lived  there  for  at
        least 12 years and  given  that  he  speaks  Pashtu.  Although  the
        Appellant did enjoy a good relationship with his foster family  the
        evidence given at the hearing was that they last  ate  together  at
        Christmas and that the Appellant visits them  once  every  1  to  2
        months. I was invited to take account of the fact that some members
        of the foster family did not know the identity of key actors in the
        Appellant's life in Afghanistan or the details of where he  studied
        and what he wanted to study at university. There are said to be  no
        emotional or financial dependency given that the Appellant was  now
        an adult.


    26. Ms Brown submitted that the Appellant's  age  was  still  important
        because this  had  a  direct  impact  on  the  credibility  of  his
        evidence. I was reminded that he was around 9 or 10 years old  when
        the incident with the Taliban and the authorities occurred and that
        events that  are  witnessed  by  a  child  may  be  perceived  very
        differently by an adult. The reference  at  paragraph  9  of  Judge
        Parker's decision to  a  letter  written  by  AK's  representatives
        stating that he was giving so much detail in his answers  that  the
        interviewing officer had to ask him to  slow  down  suggested  that
        there may have  been  issues  with  AK's  interview.  Although  the
        Appellant was unable  to  give  an  explanation  for  some  of  the
        inconsistencies between his evidence and that of his  brother  this
        was not a reason to reject the Appellant's account. I  was  invited
        to find that the claims by the brothers overlapped to a significant
        degree. I was referred to the background  evidence  indicating  the
        level of insurgent activity in Helmand province in 2006, which  was
        relevant when assessing the credibility of the accounts.


    27. It was submitted that, in assessing risk on return, I had  to  look
        at what would happen if the  Appellant  were  returned  to  Helmand
        province. It was highly likely that the Appellant  would  be  asked
        about his identity, which  would  entail  disclosing  his  father's
        identity. The Appellant's claim that the Taliban would  target  him
        because they would need to  "save  face"  and  ensure  that  people
        continued to be scared of them was  credible  and  was  similar  in
        nature to a blood feud. Applying the UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines
        there was unlikely to be a sufficiency of protection  available  in
        Helmand province.


    28.  When  assessing  the  availability  of  the  internal   relocation
        alternative Ms Brown submitted that the Appellant would  be  unable
        to rely on any support from HAG, even if he was found,  because  we
        know nothing of his current circumstances  and  HAG  paid  for  the
        Appellant to leave Afghanistan  because  he  was  in  fear  of  the
        Taliban himself. Ms Brown submitted that the skills  and  education
        obtained by the Appellant over 7� years will mark him out as  being
        different. Although Ms Brown accepted that there  was  no  judicial
        authority indicating  that  someone  who  is  perceived  as  having
        Western values would be at risk in Afghanistan she  submitted  that
        this was a relevant factor in determining internal  flight.  I  was
        invited to find that the elements of the Appellant's  private  life
        were  particularly  strong  such  that  they  could  outweigh   the
        requirement to attach limited weight to a private life  established
        in precarious circumstances under section 117B. I  was  invited  to
        consider the renewed application of ZN  (Afghanistan)  [2014]  EWCA
        Civ 735  which  considered  article  8  relationships  with  foster
        carers.


    29. Having directed both representatives  to  provide  further  written
        submissions as to the applicable version of the  immigration  rules
        within 2 days, I reserved my decision.

The law

  30. In a protection claim the burden rests on the Appellant to prove  that
      he is at 'real risk'  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  sufficiently
      serious to amount to a breach of article  3  ECHR.  This  is  a  lower
      standard of proof. Where age is disputed in the context of  an  asylum
      appeal  (in  contrast  to   age   assessments   in   judicial   review
      proceedings), the burden is on the Appellant and the standard of proof
      is as laid down in R v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  Ex
      parte Sivakumaran [1988] AC 958 and R  (Karanakaran)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2000] EWCA  Civ  11  (see  Rawofi  (age
      assessment -  standard  of  proof)  [2012]  UKUT  00197  (IAC)).  When
      assessing whether there is an interference with article 8  the  burden
      rests on the Appellant and the standard of proof  is  the  balance  of
      probabilities. Once an interference has been establish the  Respondent
      must demonstrate that her decision is proportionate.


  31.  In assessing the Appellant's evidence I take account of his  minority
      when the firefight is said to have occurred and when he entered the UK
      and underwent his screening and substantive asylum interviews. I  have
      taken specific account of paragraph 351 of the immigration rules  when
      assessing  the  Appellant's  claim,  and   the   Respondent's   policy
      'Processing Children's Asylum Claims', which indicates that in certain
      circumstances the benefit of the doubt will need to  be  applied  more
      generously when dealing with a child, particularly where  a  child  is
      unable to provide detail on a particular element  of  their  claim.  I
      have considered and applied the guidance provided in  KS  (benefit  of
      the doubt) [2014] UKUT 00552  (IAC)  when  assessing  the  Appellant's
      credibility in respect of his age.

Findings and conclusions

The Appellant's age

  32. The Appellant maintains that he was born on 5  November  1997,  making
      him 19 years old. He has been aged assessed with a  date  of  birth  5
      November  1995,  making  him  21  years  old.  The  Appellant  has  no
      documentation relating to his age or indeed his identity. He maintains
      that he once saw his brother making documents at their home which made
      him curious as to his age. His father told him that he was born  on  5
      November 1997.


    33. The Appellant  has  not  challenged,  by  way  of  judicial  review
        proceedings, the decision by Kent County Council that his  date  of
        birth is 11 November 1995. In his statement dated 23 April 2013 the
        Appellant claims his previous solicitors failed to discuss with him
        the local authority's age assessment and that if he knew  he  could
        have challenged the decision he would have done so. No evidence has
        been provided in respect of the failure by the previous  solicitors
        to discuss the age assessment with the  Appellant.  There  is,  for
        example, no evidence that the previous  representatives  have  been
        asked to comment on their alleged failure (HG (Conduct of  previous
        solicitor - Procedure) Turkey  [2004]  UKIAT  00066)  and  no  late
        application seeking an extension of time  to  challenge  the  local
        authority's decision by way  of  judicial  review  has  been  made.
        Although the Appellant's brother confirmed his age  to  his  foster
        parents I note that AK was found to be incredible by the First-tier
        Tribunal.

    34. I have considered in detail the 19 page age  assessment  undertaken
        in 2010 by two social workers, both with  considerable  experience.
        Although the  Appellant  challenges  the  conclusions  of  the  age
        assessment no issues were identified with the lawfulness of the age
        assessment itself. I remind myself that the mere fact that  an  age
        assessment was lawfully completed does not mean that the  Appellant
        is the age decided by the age assessors, and I am not bound by  the
        findings of a Merton compliant age assessment. I must determine for
        myself whether the Appellant is the age he claims to  be.  The  age
        assessment is nevertheless a relevant factor in my assessment.


    35. The age assessment  considered,  in  addition  to  the  Appellant's
        educational background and health, his  emotional  and  behavioural
        development,  his  family  and  social  relationships,  his  social
        presentation  and  self-care  skills.  The  report  considered  the
        Appellant's interaction with other children and with  a  number  of
        other social workers. It is clear that  a  range  of  factors  were
        considered by the age assessors.

    36. The Appellant was put in a school in year 9 (ages 13 to  14)  which
        was consistent with the age determined by Kent County Council. None
        of the letters from  the  school  suggested  that  the  Appellant's
        inclusion in year 9 was inappropriate, and the majority of  letters
        from his teachers indicated that he was a mature individual.

    37. Although [TB] was unclear of his age when the Appellant first  came
        to stay with her, and that she placed him as younger than a 14-year-
        old in her mind, she has not provided any cogent explanation as  to
        why she believed the Appellant was younger  than  14.  She  claims,
        from personal  observations,  that  Afghan  boys  look  older  than
        Caucasian  boys  but  that  the  Appellant  looked  smaller,   less
        developed and younger than her son Arthur who was 14 years old  the
        time. There has however been no independent or  objective  evidence
        to support [TB]'s view that Afghan boys generally look  older  than
        Caucasian boys, and she has not provided any further details as  to
        how Afghan boys general look older or details as to her  experience
        with Afghan boys. This view, in any event,  is  based  on  physical
        appearance and demeanour, yet physical appearance is a  notoriously
        unreliable basis for assessment of chronological age (NA  v  LB  of
        Croydon [2009] EWHC  2357  (Admin)).  Although  she  described  the
        Appellant as being  very  unsettled  and  restless  when  he  first
        arrived, and claimed that this was what one expected from a younger
        child of around 12 years old, his restlessness could be  attributed
        to the difficult  journey  undertaken  by  the  Appellant  and  his
        natural anxiety in being placed in an  alien  environment.  I  note
        that [TB] is a  specialist  teacher  for  the  Specialist  Teaching
        Service. Although no details have been provided of  the  nature  of
        her teaching or the age range she teaches this may give her greater
        insight into the behaviour of children of a certain age, but  there
        is no evidence that she has any first-hand  knowledge  of  teaching
        individuals with the Appellant's background in Afghanistan. She has
        had the opportunity to observe the Appellant for  far  longer  than
        the social workers who conducted the age assessment, and in a  more
        informal setting, but I note that no other member of the [B family]
        has commented on the Appellant's age, and none of his teachers have
        suggested he is young by 2 years than the age ascribed to him.


    38. Finally, albeit in  the  context  of  an  age  assessment  judicial
        review, the Administrative Court in MVN v LB Greenwich [2015]  EWHC
        1942 observed that it is permissible to have regard to  credibility
        more generally when determining age, as long as the  primary  focus
        is not forgotten. I additionally  remind  myself  that  an  adverse
        credibility finding with respect to the Appellant's asylum claim is
        not determinative of his claimed age, and vice versa[1].

    39. It is therefore appropriate, before making a conclusive finding  on
        the Appellant's age, to consider the credibility of his account. In
        so doing I bear in mind the guidance identified  at  [31]  of  this
        decision.

The Appellant's account

    40. In AA (Somalia) [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 the Court of Appeal considered
        the approach that should be adopted when considering what weight to
        attach to a finding of fact in  one  person's  asylum/human  rights
        appeal  when  those  findings  are  relevant  in  another  person's
        subsequent   asylum/human   rights   appeal.   After   a   detailed
        consideration of authorities on the issue the Court of Appeal held,
        at [21], that, "The second  tribunal  should  have  regard  to  the
        earlier decision but only as a starting point." At [29]  the  Court
        stated, "In cases where  the  parties  are  different,  the  second
        tribunal should have regard to the factual conclusions of the first
        tribunal but must evaluate the evidence and submissions as it would
        in any other case. If, having considered the factual conclusions of
        the  first  tribunal,  the  second  tribunal   rationally   reaches
        different factual conclusions, then it is those  conclusions  which
        it must apply and not those of the first tribunal."


    41. I  take  as  my  starting  point  that  the  asylum  claim  of  the
        Appellant's brother was refused and that his appeal  was  dismissed
        on the basis that he was not credible. I take those  findings  into
        account. I appreciate from the Appellant's  most  recent  statement
        that he cannot explain why AZ gave only a vague explanation of  how
        the money transfer business worked, that the Appellant did not know
        that the money may have been linked to drug production, or why  the
        Taliban would want his father to  transfer  the  money  instead  of
        another money exchanger. I  accept  that  the  last  point  is  not
        something  within  the  Appellant's  realm  of  knowledge.  It  was
        submitted  by  Ms  Brown  that  Judge  Parker  had  engaged  in  an
        unwarranted degree of speculation in suggesting  that  the  Taliban
        would only use trusted and sympathetic money exchanges to  transfer
        large sums of money. I find that the conclusions  of  Judge  Parker
        were  reasonably  open  to  her  and   that,   whilst   necessarily
        speculative, her conclusion was based on a logical premise.  Having
        taken her findings into account I remind myself that I am in no way
        bound by the findings of Judge Parker.


    42. Although Mr Clarke was unable to  obtain  AZ's  statements  or  his
        interview record, the Upper Tribunal has now been provided with the
        Reasons  For  Refusal  Letter  issued   against   him   and,   most
        significantly, the decision of Judge  Parker.  Ms  Brown  submitted
        that I should  exercise  very  great  caution  in  relying  on  any
        discrepancy between the Appellant's evidence and that  recorded  in
        Judge Parker's determination and that no evidence from AZ  has  yet
        been served. Ms Brown pointed out  that  AZ's  representative  made
        submissions concerning the interview  record  and  argued  that  no
        weight should be attached to it in respect of AZ's allegedly  vague
        evidence  regarding  the  money  transfer  business.  Judge  Parker
        however explained that no issue had been raised with  the  accuracy
        of the AZ's interview record. I additionally  note,  based  on  the
        refusal of permission to appeal to the AIT, that no  issue  appears
        to have been raised with the accuracy of the evidence  recorded  by
        Judge Parker. Unlike Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Boyd  and
        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson,  both  of  whom  were  entirely
        reliant on factual assertions relating to AZ's claim  contained  in
        the Appellant's  Refusal  Letter,  I  have  the  benefit  of  Judge
        Parker's full  decision.  She  heard  oral  evidence  from  AZ  and
        recorded all his evidence. I have no reason to doubt  the  accuracy
        of the evidence as recorded by Judge Parker and Ms Brown was unable
        to identify any other reason for doubting  the  accuracy  of  Judge
        Parker's record of AZ's  evidence.  In  these  circumstances  I  am
        satisfied that Judge  Parker's  decision  accurately  reflects  the
        evidence given by the Appellant's brother and that I  can  properly
        consider the evidence given by the Appellant against that given  by
        AZ.


    43. In comparing the  Appellant's  evidence  with  that  given  by  his
        brother I have taken express account of the  Appellant's  age  when
        the pivotal events are said to  have  occurred  and  that,  in  any
        event, is it natural for  some  inconsistencies  to  arise  due  to
        events  being  recounted  from  different  perspectives   and   the
        significant passage of time. Even taking account of these factors I
        have  found  that  the  following   inconsistencies   between   the
        Appellant's  account  and  that  of  his  brother   undermine   the
        reliability of their account.

    44.  In his asylum interview, which was conducted on the basis that  he
        was a child, and  with  the  presence  of  a  support  worker,  the
        Appellant explained, at questions 17 to 21, that the Taliban  first
        visited his father's  shop  one  morning  and  an  argument  ensued
        following his refusal to transfer the money. The Appellant's father
        returned that  evening  to  the  family  home  and  described  what
        happened to the  Appellant.  His  father  then  returned  the  next
        morning to his shop and, on the evening of that second day, at  the
        family house, the Taliban kidnapped  the  Appellant's  father.  The
        Appellant's evidence in this regard was quite clear. The  questions
        he was asked were put in straightforward terms and his answers  was
        detailed and unambiguous. This  evidence  is  consistent  with  the
        Appellant's statement dated 19 January 2010 where he described,  at
        paragraph 8, that the Taliban came to the family home the day after
        they first visited the money exchange shop. It is  also  consistent
        with the Appellant's statement dated April 2013 when  he  confirmed
        that the Taliban came the next evening  (see  paragraph  13).  This
        account of events is inconsistent with the evidence  given  by  the
        Appellant's brother, as recorded in Judge  Parker's  determination,
        that their father was abducted by the Taliban  the  very  same  day
        that the Taliban first visited  the  shop.  Further,  in  his  oral
        evidence the Appellant stated that his father was taken hostage  on
        the same evening of the day that  the  Taliban  first  visited  the
        money exchange shop, which is in stark contrast to his own  written
        evidence. When  asked  to  explain  the  inconsistencies  not  only
        between his evidence and that of AZ but within  his  own  evidence,
        the Appellant was unable to do so. I take  into  account  that  the
        Appellant was  a  minor  when  he  was  interviewed  and  when  his
        statement was taken in 2010. There is however nothing  to  indicate
        that the Appellant was asked any inappropriate question during  his
        interview, and the interview record, as described above,  indicates
        that the questions were clear and  straightforward.  Nor  is  there
        anything to indicate that the statement, presumably  taken  by  the
        Appellant's   legal   representatives,   was   taken   in    rushed
        circumstances.  Having  taken  full  account  of  the   Appellant's
        minority and the passage of time I am nevertheless  satisfied  that
        there  is  no   reasonable   explanation   for   this   significant
        inconsistency. Given the significance and seriousness of the events
        as described by the Appellant I do not find  it  credible  that  he
        would make a mistake  as  to  when  the  Taliban  took  his  father
        hostage. I find this  inconsistency  significantly  undermines  the
        Appellant's credibility.


    45. In her determination Judge Parker recorded the evidence from AZ  to
        the effect that he heard gunfire  outside  the  family  house  and,
        although he did not see the fighting, he "assumed" it  was  between
        the armed men and the authorities.  This  evidence  sits  in  stark
        contrast to that given by the Appellant both in his 2017  statement
        and his oral evidence at the hearing. In  his  2017  statement  (at
        paragraph 10) the Appellant claimed there were 5 Taliban men in the
        room with his father and they were talking to  his  brother  before
        the  shooting  commenced.  In  his  oral  evidence  the   Appellant
        confirmed that the Taliban were in the  room  and  that  they  were
        talking to his brother and that he was sent to another room by  his
        brother. There would have been no need for any 'assumption'  by  AK
        given that some of the Taliban were inside the  property  with  the
        Appellant's father. This account  is  also  inconsistent  with  the
        Appellant's evidence in his asylum interview, at question 45, where
        he was asked whether any of the Taliban actually entered the  house
        and he answered, "I didn't see that but when I looked I've seen the
        large door was open." There is yet a further inconsistency in  that
        the Appellant's brother learned that his father had been brought by
        the armed group to the village and had been killed in  the  bombing
        only when informed by HAG.  Yet  on  the  Appellant's  account  his
        brother would have been aware that their father was present at  the
        house. These inconsistencies undermines  the  reliability  of  both
        accounts and the weight that I can attach to them.


    46. It  was  AZ's  evidence  that  their  village  was  bombed  by  the
        authorities in an attempt to quell the fighting, and that the local
        villagers blamed AZ and his family for the atrocities caused by the
        bombing. In his asylum interview and his statement of January  2010
        the Appellant made no mention of the village  being  bombed  by  (a
        possibly British) plane. This was only mentioned for the first time
        in the Appellant's statement of 23 April 2013.  In  that  statement
        the Appellant said he did not mention the bombing  because  he  was
        not asked and because there were bombardments in his village  on  a
        daily basis. This explanation however sits uncomfortably with  AZ's
        account. If the village was subject to daily bombings  there  would
        be no reason to believe that the bombing  on  that  night  was  the
        result of the firefight, or that the Appellant's  family  would  be
        blamed  by  the  villagers  for  something   that   occurred   very
        frequently. No evidence has been produced that there were  bombings
        on this village or any other village on a daily  basis.  I  do  not
        accept that there would be bombings of such frequency as  described
        by the Appellant. The use of aeroplanes to bomb positions is likely
        to be very expensive and a strain on military  resources.  Although
        the background evidence indicates that between 2004 and 2006  there
        was Taliban and other  insurgent  activities  in  Helmand  province
        nothing in that background evidence suggests that  the  authorities
        reacted by the frequent or daily bombing of particular villages.  I
        find that his omission of any reference to a bombing  on  the  very
        same night as the firefight undermines the Appellant's  account  of
        those events.


    47. In his asylum interview the Appellant stated that HAG informed  him
        and his brother that their father had been shot  in  the  fighting.
        This is consistent with  the  Appellant's  January  2010  statement
        where, at paragraph 13, HAG informed him and his brother that their
        father had been hit in the shooting and died in  his  house.  There
        was no suggestion that there had been any misunderstanding or error
        in interpretation either during the asylum interview  or  when  the
        statement was taken. It was however AZ's evidence that he had  been
        informed that their father had been  killed  as  a  result  of  the
        aerial bombing. At the hearing  the  Appellant  suggested  for  the
        first time that he informed  the  Pashtu  interpreters  during  his
        asylum interview and when his January 2010 statement was taken that
        his father had been killed during 'fighting' and that  he  had  not
        said his father had been shot. There  was  however  no  independent
        evidence presented to me that the Pashtu word for 'fighting'  could
        be confused with  the  word  for  'shot'.  The  Appellant's  asylum
        interview record and his January 2010  statement  clearly  recorded
        that  HAG  informed  him  that  his  father  had  been  shot.  This
        inconsistency between the accounts undermines their reliability.

    48. It was AZ's evidence that he and the Appellant remained for 2 weeks
        together on the Iranian/Afghan border following  the  firefight  at
        their home. The Appellant maintains that this  did  not  occur  and
        that he did not see his brother since they fled from opposite exits
        in  their  home.   This   inconsistency,   without   any   apparent
        explanation, also undermines the reliability of both accounts.


    49. Judge Parker recorded AZ as having said that he left via  the  back
        of the family compound when the firefight ensued.   In  his  asylum
        interview the Appellant said that he escaped via the back  door  of
        the property and that his brother escaped through the 'large door'.
        When asked how many doors there were into the house  the  Appellant
        said there were 2. Later, in a drawing attached to his statement of
        April 2013, the Appellant described his  house  as  having  a  main
        gate, 4 rooms, a further guest room, a kitchen and 2 exits  at  the
        rear. In his 2013 statement the Appellant describes his house as  a
        'qala', like a fort, and that it had 2 doors or exits at the  back.
        This however is inconsistent with his  initial  evidence  that  the
        property only had 2 doors in total. The Appellant was asked  during
        his asylum interview on several occasions to describe  how  he  and
        his brother escaped and he gave clear evidence  that  the  property
        only had 2 doors, and that AZ escaped through the 'large door'. The
        Appellant's later evidence, that there  was  a  main  gate  to  the
        property and an additional two further exists is inconsistent  with
        his earlier evidence.


    50. In his asylum appeal AZ claimed he had spoken to HAG 3 to 4  months
        before the hearing (which  would  have  been  around  September  or
        October 2007). According to the Appellant's account he  would  have
        been  living  with  HAG  at  this  time.  It  is  therefore  almost
        inconceivable  that  HAG  would  not  have  informed  AZ  that  the
        Appellant was residing with him, or informed the Appellant that  he
        had spoken to his brother and indeed sent documents,  including  an
        arrest warrant, to AZ.


    51. AZ was informed by HAG that it was dangerous for him to stay at his
        (HAG's) house and advised AZ to hide at [DK]'s  home.  Yet  in  his
        2017 statement the Appellant said he did not know  how  or  why  AZ
        went to [DK]'s home. Given that the Appellant  also  ran  to  HAG's
        home and would naturally have been anxious about his family  it  is
        simply not plausible that HAG would not have informed the Appellant
        that his brother had gone to [DK]'s home,  or  the  reason  why  he
        went. Moreover, if both the Appellant and his  brother  fled  their
        compound when the fighting started and both went to HAG's house, it
        is very unlikely that they would not have seen one another.

    52. There are further aspects of the Appellant's  account,  unconnected
        with that of his brother, that give rise  to  significant  concerns
        relating to his credibility. In his  oral  evidence  the  Appellant
        explained that the Taliban did not search HAG's residence each time
        they came looking  for  him  because  it  was  contrary  to  Afghan
        culture. They would only do so in the event of war or  conflict.  I
        find this explanation to be wholly implausible. If the Taliban came
        to HAG's residence on several occasions in search of the  Appellant
        it defies logic and common sense that they would not search  inside
        the premises. The Taliban are a vicious terrorist organisation  who
        have carried out a  significant  number  of  atrocities,  including
        using children as suicide bombers. If they went to  the  effort  of
        identifying where HAG was living, and if  they  believed  that  the
        Appellant was living with him, they would extensively search  HAG's
        premises. I was not referred to any background evidence  suggesting
        that the Taliban would not conduct a vigorous  search  of  premises
        simply  on  the  basis  of  cultural   factors.   The   Appellant's
        explanation lacks any credibility and  undermines  his  account  of
        This assertion is, in any event, inconsistent with the  Appellant's
        evidence as recorded at question 69 of his asylum  interview  where
        he stated that the Taliban did in fact search the house  when  they
        lived in Grishk, and with his  answer  to  question  84  where  the
        Appellant said that the Taliban did go into the house in Musa Qalah
        and searched it.


    53. There is a further internal inconsistency within the Appellants own
        evidence relating to the visits  by  the  Taliban.  In  his  asylum
        interview the Appellant stated that the Taliban only sought him  in
        Grishk towards the last days of their stay there and he described a
        single incident when the Taliban came to HAG's house.  In  response
        to a clarification request from me  the  Appellant  said  that  the
        Taliban came to look for him a few times when he lived  in  Grishk.
        In both his statement of January 2010 and his asylum interview  the
        Appellant only spoke about the Taliban coming to look  for  him  in
        Musa Qalah on one  occasion.  However  in  his  oral  evidence  the
        Appellant stated that the  Taliban  came  a  few  times,  and  then
        clarified that they came 2  or  3  times  looking  for  him.  These
        inconsistencies  undermine  the  credibility  of  the   Appellant's
        account of being searched for by the Taliban.

    54. It is clear from the Appellant's evidence (and that of his brother)
        that HAG has the means of  communicating  outside  Afghanistan.  As
        part of his money transfer business HAG would need  to  communicate
        with associates in Dubai. The Appellant's brother, in his evidence,
        indicated that he spoke to HAG 3 to 4 months prior  to  his  appeal
        hearing. The Appellant's evidence was that HAG continued to work at
        the same place (in the market  in  Lashkarga  City,  a  government-
        controlled area) and that  he  was  visited  on  occasions  by  the
        authorities searching for the Appellant. Given that HAG  cared  for
        the Appellant for nearly 3 years after the death of his father, and
        presumably paid for the Appellant's journey to the United  kingdom,
        it is simply  not  plausible  that  HAG  would  fail  to  give  the
        Appellant any means of contacting him, at the very least to  ensure
        that he arrived in the UK safely. This undermines  the  Appellant's
        general  credibility.  I  additionally  note  that  in  his  asylum
        interview, at question 95, the Appellant said that both the Taliban
        and the police used to visit HAG at his shop continuously. This  is
        inconsistent with the Appellant's oral evidence where he said  that
        the Taliban did not visit HAG at his shop because the shop was in a
        government-controlled area.


    55. I accept that there is overlap between the Appellant's account  and
        that of his brother, and that the core of their accounts  have  the
        same premise. I accept, based on the backgrounds  reports  relating
        to Helmand  Province,  that  the  Taliban  are  active  in  Helmand
        province, and that  between  2004  and  2006  the  insurgency  grew
        significantly. This does support the Appellant's  account.  I  once
        again take account of the Appellant's  minority  when  the  alleged
        events occurred and the impact  of  the  passage  of  time  on  his
        ability to recall events. I  am  nevertheless  satisfied,  for  the
        reasons given above, that the Appellant has not  given  a  truthful
        account of the events  that  brought  him  to  the  UK.  I  am  not
        satisfied,  even  on  the  lower  standard  of  proof,   that   the
        Appellant's father was ever approached by the Taliban and asked  to
        transmit a large amount of money to Dubai. Nor do I accept that  he
        was ever abducted or threatened.  It  follows  that  I  reject  the
        Appellant's account of the firefight, his account of  his  father's
        death and his claim that the authorities and the Taliban  continued
        to manifest an adverse interest in him.


    56. Although in no way determinative of his claimed age, I find that my
        adverse credibility findings in respect of his protection claim are
        a factor going against the Appellant's claimed age.  Having  regard
        to my findings at [44] to [55] of this decision, and taking account
        of my adverse  credibility  findings  'in  the  round',  I  am  not
        persuaded that the Appellant was born in 1997. I consequently  find
        that his date of birth is 5 November 1995.

    57. Having found the Appellant's account of being targeted by both  the
        Taliban and the Afghan authorities to be incredible, I find that he
        would not face any  risk  of  persecution  or  treatment  breaching
        article 3  if  returned  to  his  home  area  of  Afghanistan.  The
        Appellant would be returned as a 21 year old man who has never come
        to the adverse attention of the authorities. Although I cannot make
        any finding as to whether his father is alive or dead  (although  I
        have rejected his account of his father's death), it is open to the
        Appellant to return to his home area  where  his  family  home  was
        situated and where HAG last lived and worked. Even if he no  longer
        has any network of support of any kind, he  has  attained  valuable
        skills through his studies in the UK which he can deploy in seeking
        employment.

    58. The Appellant contends  that  he  would  nevertheless  be  at  risk
        because he would be perceived to be  'westernised'  if  removed  to
        Helmand  Province.  He  relies  on  the  UNHCR   2016   Eligibility
        Guidelines for Afghanistan.  This  indicates  that  anti-government
        elements have reportedly target individuals who  are  perceived  to
        have adopted values  and/or  appearances  associated  with  Western
        countries, due to their imputed support for the Government and  the
        international community. In her oral submissions Ms Brown indicated
        that the question of perceived westernisation was relevant  to  the
        reasonableness of internal relocation. She could not point  to  any
        judicial authority indicating that an individual would face a  real
        risk of persecution on account of their perceived Western values or
        appearance alone. I am not satisfied, on the  evidence  before  me,
        that, if returned,  the  Appellant  would  manifest  any  so-called
        Western values or would have a  Western  appearance  sufficient  to
        render him at  risk  of  ill-treatment.  On  his  own  account  the
        Appellant is a devout Muslim who attends mosque  at  least  once  a
        week. He does not drink any alcohol and eats only Halal food. There
        is nothing to indicate  that  he  has  foregone  his  religious  or
        cultural heritage. Although he left Afghanistan as a minor he lived
        there until  he  was  around  14  years  old,  which  included  the
        formative years of his life. He would therefore still  be  familiar
        with the culture and  language,  and  has  indicated  that  he  has
        maintained friendships with other Afghan nationals in the  UK  (the
        Appellant indicated in his  oral  evidence  that  there  were  many
        Afghans at his local mosque and that he spent a lot of time with  a
        particular Afghan friend, and shares a room with  another  Afghan).
        Contrary to Ms Brown's submission  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
        educational achievements attained by the Appellant in the UK  would
        render him at risk of  ill-treatment  on  the  basis  that  he  was
        perceived to have adopted a Western  persona  and  Western  values.
        Nothing  in  the  background  evidence  indicates  that   achieving
        educational  and  vocational   qualifications   would   render   an
        individual as being westernised in the eyes of the Taliban.


    59. Ms Brown did not actively pursue  her  arguments  relating  to  the
        Appellant's   entitlement   to   Humanitarian    Protection,    but
        nevertheless relied on her written submissions. My  starting  point
        is AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163  (IAC).  The
        material headnotes read,
             (ii) Despite a rise in  the  number  of  civilian  deaths  and
             casualties and  (particularly  in  the  2010-2011  period)  an
             expansion of the geographical scope of the armed  conflict  in
             Afghanistan, the level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  that
             country taken as a whole is not at such a  high  level  as  to
             mean  that,  within  the  meaning  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive, a civilian, solely by  being  present
             in the country, faces a real risk which threatens his life  or
             person.
             (iii) Nor is the level of indiscriminate violence, even in the
             provinces worst affected by the violence  (which  may  now  be
             taken to include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at  such  a
             level


    60.   I  have  considered  the  further  background  country   evidence
        contained in the Appellant's bundle, including the EASO report.  Ms
        Brown did not draw my attention to any specific background document
        suggesting that the general security situation had deteriorated  to
        such an extent that a civilian would face a real  risk  threatening
        their life or person merely by being returned  to  Afghanistan.  In
        her skeleton argument she focused  on  the  security  situation  in
        Kabul  and  gave  an  extract  from  the   'Internal   Displacement
        Monitoring Centre (Norwegian Refugee Council) 2017 Global Report on
        Internal Displacement and a Radio Free Europe report relating to  a
        bomb attack. I have considered this evidence and the EASO  document
        and the  UNHCR  Eligibility  Guidelines.  The  EASO  report,  which
        contains the most detailed analysis, indicates that from January to
        August 2015 126 Kabul civilians were killed and 717  were  injured,
        out of a  city  of  at  least  3�  million  people  (although  some
        estimates were as high as  7  million).  I  am  not  satisfied  the
        evidence relied on by the Appellant discloses a deterioration  from
        that considered in AK such as to entitle me  to  depart  from  that
        country guidance.

Article 8

    61. In assessing the Appellant's Article 8 human rights  claim  I  will
        first  consider  whether  he  meets  the  provisions  of  paragraph
        276ADE(vi) of the immigration rules. An issue arose at the  hearing
        as to which version of paragraph 276ADE was applicable.  I  invited
        the parties to provide written submissions on this point  within  2
        days after the hearing. I received submissions from Ms Brown but no
        submissions from Mr Clarke.  Ms  Brown  invited  me  to  apply  the
        unamended version of the immigration rules in existence at the date
        of the decision under appeal. The version of  paragraph  276ADE  in
        existence when the decision under appeal was made states:


             The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
             on the
             grounds of private life in the UK are  that  at  the  date  of
             application, the applicant:

             (i) does not fall for refusal under  any  of  the  grounds  in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             ...

             (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in  the
             UK  for  less  than  20  years  (discounting  any  period   of
             imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,  cultural  or
             family) with the country to which  he  would  have  to  go  if
             required to leave the UK.

    62. This version was amended with effect on 28 July 2014.  The  amended
        version, so far as is material, states,


             (vi) ... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in
             the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles to
             the applicant's integration into the country to which he would
             have to go if required to leave the UK.

    63. The Statement of Changes, HC 532, accompanying the amended  version
        of paragraph 276ADE under the heading: "Implementation", states;

             The changes set out in paragraphs 4 to 12 and 49 to 64 of this
             statement take effect  on  28  July  2014  and  apply  to  all
             applications to which paragraphs 276ADE to 276DH and  Appendix
             FM apply (or can be  applied  by  virtue  of  the  Immigration
             Rules), and to any other ECHR Article 8 claims (save for those
             from foreign criminals), and which are  decided  on  or  after
             that date.

    64. I am satisfied, having regard to the  terms  of  the  Statement  of
        Changes, that the earlier version still applies to this  appeal  as
        the underlying decision was decided prior to 28 July 2014  and  the
        Appellant is not a foreign criminal.

    65. In Ogundimu (Article 8 - New Rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  60  (IAC)
        the Upper Tribunal said this at [123]-[125]:

             123. The natural and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
             imports, we think, a concept  involving  something  more  than
             merely remote and abstract links to the  country  of  proposed
             deportation or removal. It involves there  being  a  continued
             connection to life in that  country;  something  that  ties  a
             claimant to his or her country of origin. If this were not the
             case then it would appear that a person's nationality  of  the
             country of proposed deportation could  of  itself  lead  to  a
             failure to meet the  requirements  of  the  rule.  This  would
             render the application of the rule, given the  context  within
             which it operates, entirely meaningless.

             124. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting
             one. Consideration of whether a person has 'no ties'  to  such
             country must involve a rounded assessment of all the  relevant
             circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural
             and family' circumstances. Nevertheless, we are satisfied that
             the Appellant has no ties with Nigeria. He is  a  stranger  to
             the country, the people, and the way of life. His  father  may
             have ties but they are not ties of the Appellant or  any  ties
             that could result in support to the Appellant in the event  of
             his return there. Unsurprisingly,  given  the  length  of  the
             Appellant's residence here, all  of  his  ties  are  with  the
             United Kingdom.  Consequently  the  Appellant  has  so  little
             connection with Nigeria so as to mean  that  the  consequences
             for him in establishing private life there at the age  of  28,
             after 22 years residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  would  be
             'unjustifiably harsh'.

             125. Whilst each case turns on its  own  facts,  circumstances
             relevant to the assessment of whether a person has ties to the
             country to which they would have to go if they  were  required
             to leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not  limited
             to: the length of time a person has spent in  the  country  to
             which he would have to go if he were  required  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country, the
             exposure that person has had to the  cultural  norms  of  that
             country, whether  that  person  speaks  the  language  of  the
             country, the extent of the family and friends that person  has
             in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and
             the quality of the relationships that person  has  with  those
             friends and family members.

    66. The guidance in Ogundimu was approved by the Court of Appeal in  YM
        (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWCA
        Civ 1292.

    67. My assessment as  to  whether  the  Appellant  has  any  ties  with
        Afghanistan must take into account my factual findings  in  respect
        of his asylum claim. Having found that the Appellant fabricated the
        core of his account of events that caused him to leave  Afghanistan
        I cannot be satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that he  is
        not in contact with HAG (or even that his father is dead). I do not
        find it credible that HAG, having looked after  the  Appellant  for
        nearly 3 years, would not  have  given  him  his  contact  details,
        especially given that HAG continued to operate his  money  transfer
        business from the same  location.  Even  if  I  am  wrong  in  this
        assessment, and the Appellant does not have any contact details for
        HAG, there is nothing to prevent  him  from  looking  for  HAG  (or
        indeed his brother) on return to Afghanistan. I reiterate that  the
        Appellant is not at risk of harm in his home area and that there is
        nothing to stop him returning to  that  part  of  Afghanistan  with
        which he is familiar and where he is  likely,  on  the  balance  of
        probabilities, to reacquaint himself  with  people  he  knew  as  a
        youngster.


    68. Even if the Appellant has no contact  with  HAG,  I  am  satisfied,
        applying the principles set out in Ogundimu, that the Appellant has
        not lost his ties with Afghanistan. He was 14  years  old  when  he
        left the country. He would have spent the formative  years  of  his
        life there. He would be familiar with the culture, the way of  life
        and the spoken language. The  evidence  presented  at  the  hearing
        indicates that the Appellant is an observant Muslim who  frequently
        and regularly goes to a Mosque attended by many other Afghans.  The
        Appellant indicated that he has many Afghan friends and lives  with
        an Afghan. In these circumstances I find that he continues to  have
        a connection to life in Afghanistan amounting to  ties  that  could
        result in support to him in the event of his return there.


    69. I will now consider whether the Appellant's removal would result in
        a breach of Article 8 ECHR  considered  as  a  free-standing  right
        outside the immigration rules. I note in the context of immigration
        control that there is no legal or factual  presumption  as  to  the
        existence or absence of family life for the purposes of Article  8,
        and that the love and affection between  an  adult  child  and  his
        parent will not of itself justify a finding of a family life. There
        has to be 'something more' (Singh v Secretary of State for the Home
        Department [2015] EWCA Civ. 630, which was  considered  in  Butt  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 184, and
        Rai v Entry Clearance officer, New  Delhi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320).
        'Family life' and 'private life' are  composite  rights,  and  even
        though the Appellant is not related by blood to the [B  family],  I
        assess his  relationship  with  them  by  reference  to  the  above
        authorities and Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 (see  ZN  (Afghanistan)
        [2014] EWCA Civ 735).

    70. There is no doubt that  the  Appellant  has  established  a  strong
        private and family life in the United  Kingdom,  particularly  with
        his former foster carers, the [B family], since his arrival as a 14
        year old in January 2010. This was recognised in  the  letter  from
        Kent County Council's Independent  Reviewing  Officer,  Ms  Gillian
        Martin,  who  described  the  Appellant  having  formed  "a   close
        attachment to [PB] and [TB] and their immediate family". Ms  Martin
        noted that the Appellant had become very much involved  within  the
        local  community  by  playing  cricket  for  two  local  teams.  He
        represented  other  unaccompanied  minors   when   discussing   his
        experiences in care at a recruiting day for a  Barnardo's  project.
        The Appellant  had  an  excellent  reputation  at  school  and  the
        teaching staff were always positive  about  his  academic  progress
        confirming that he was motivated, hard-working and enthusiastic  as
        well as being polite  and  respectful  to  both  staff  and  fellow
        students. The Appellant was described as  being  one  of  the  most
        respectful, honest, sociable and considerate young men with whom Ms
        Martin had worked. The statements  from  some  of  the  Appellant's
        former classmates and the letter from his former school  describing
        him as a model student and an excellent role model for other  young
        and disadvantaged students speaks of the positive contribution that
        he has made. I have duly taken this into account. Further  evidence
        of the Appellant's achievements include a silver award presented by
        Kent County Council in September 2013  "In  honour  of  outstanding
        performance and dedication", and a certificate indicating that  the
        Appellant graduated with distinction from Bennett Memorial Diocesan
        School dated June 2013. The Appellant also  has  a  certificate  as
        part of his Duke of Edinburgh Bronze Award in  respect  of  helping
        the elderly for 3 months.


    71. The letter from Pearl O'Keeffe, dated 28 July 2014, the Appellant's
        course tutor at Lambeth College, indicated that he was  a  positive
        role model to his peers on the BTEC level II  construction  course,
        that he always offered to help others in the class and was a  well-
        respected member of the group. He was elected by the group to be  a
        course  representative  in  meetings  with  senior  management  and
        achieved a distinction for the course which enabled him to progress
        to the level III BTEC construction course.


    72. The letter from the Rev  Rachel  Knapp,  dated  26  February  2013,
        describes  the  Appellant's   commitment   and   determination   in
        integrating into his school and society in  Britain  and  described
        him as being a great asset to  the  school  and  somebody  who  has
        ambitions to make a  positive  economic  contribution  to  society.
        Daniel Kennedy  indicated  that  the  Appellant  developed  into  a
        positive role model for his peers, that  he  benefited  the  school
        immensely through his commitment  to  mutual  aspirations  and  the
        abiding contribution he made to the lives of  his  fellow  students
        and those who taught him.


    73. I have carefully considered the written and oral evidence given  by
        members of the [B family]. I have no hesitation in  accepting  that
        the Appellant does enjoy a good relationship with his former foster
        carers. In their initial joint statement dated 24 April  2013  [TB]
        and [PB] described the Appellant as a "very independent young man",
        and in her statement dated  23  June  2017  [TB]  agreed  that  the
        Appellant was  "an  independent,  bright  and  capable  young  man"
        although she worried that people did not see  his  vulnerable  side
        and she  did  not  believe  that  he  would  be  able  to  cope  in
        Afghanistan. The fact remains however that the Appellant is  not  a
        blood relative of the [B family], he has  not  lived  with  the  [B
        family] since 2014 and he is now over 21 years of age.


    74.  The  oral  evidence  given  at  the  hearing  suggested  that  the
        relationships between the Appellant and  the  [B  family]  was  not
        quite as strong as described in the statements. In particular  [PB]
        indicated that the Appellant visited the family once every 2 months
        or so, a point not challenged by Ms Brown,  which  is  at  variance
        with the Appellant's evidence. It was  also  telling  that  the  [B
        family] did not appear to have  quite  as  much  knowledge  of  the
        Appellant's background  and  circumstances  as  one  would  perhaps
        expect from an extremely close relationship. For example, [PB]  had
        never heard of HAG with whom the Appellant lived for  a  period  of
        almost 3 years prior to his arrival in the UK. I find it surprising
        that the [B family] would not know more about the close links  that
        the  Appellant  had  developed,  on  his  account,  in  Afghanistan
        following the death of his father. Despite claiming to  regard  the
        Appellant as a brother [AB] did not know what course the  Appellant
        studied at college or what he wanted to study at university. Whilst
        I have no hesitation in accepting that the Appellant  does  have  a
        good relationship with the [B family] I am not satisfied,  for  the
        reasons given, that this relationship is quite as strong  or  close
        as advanced on the Appellant's behalf.


    75. Although the [B family], quite understandably, indicated that  they
        would be unwilling to visit the Appellant in Afghanistan, there was
        no cogent evidence to indicate that  contact  would  be  completely
        severed. No evidence was  provided  as  to  the  inability  of  the
        Appellant to maintain contact with the [B family], albeit by remote
        means. Whilst  I  appreciate  that  such  communication  could  not
        replicate the nature of the relationship that the Appellant  enjoys
        with the [B family], he has been living  independently  since  2014
        and, on the basis of the evidence given at the hearing,  only  sees
        members of the [B family] once every month or so. Given the quality
        of his existing relationship with the [B family], and given that he
        is now an adult, the inability to have close personal contact  does
        not, of itself, render the decision disproportionate.


    76. The Appellant is in good health. There  was  no  evidence  that  he
        suffers from any mental health condition. There is no psychological
        or  psychiatric  report  suggesting   that   he   is   particularly
        vulnerable. The various statements from  the  [B  family]  and  the
        other letters of support describe the Appellant as  an  independent
        young man who is conscientious and hard-working. He has a number of
        certificates in ICT and, although there was no documentary evidence
        in support, I accept that he has  passed  a  Level  III  course  in
        construction at a 6th form college and that he has been accepted at
        university to study construction/engineering.  The  Appellant  also
        has a very good grasp of English and has qualifications in  Pearson
        Edexcel Functional skills in mathematics. He has worked albeit  for
        a very  limited  time  in  a  pizza  delivery  company  and  has  a
        qualification in basic First Aid. I find that the Appellant will be
        able to use  the  skills,  knowledge  and  qualifications  acquired
        during his residence in the UK to gain employment in Afghanistan. I
        note the evidence that his ability to  read  and  write  Pashtu  is
        poor. I accept that this may cause  him  some  initial  difficulty,
        but, given his education achievements and  clear  intelligence  and
        motivation, he is likely to make rapid  progress  in  learning  the
        written language. I am additionally satisfied  that  the  Appellant
        would be entitled to apply for funds available under  the  Assisted
        Return Scheme. Moreover, although [PB] has taken  a  pay  cut,  and
        their children are saving for the future, I find,  given  that  all
        but one of the [B family] children are  in  employment,  that  they
        would, cumulatively, be able to provide at least some funds to  the
        Appellant to enable him to establish himself if removed.


    77. Taking account of the specific factors identified in  section  117B
        of the  2002  Act,  I  must  have  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
        maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
        interest, and that I must attach little weight to the private  life
        established by the Appellant when his immigration status has always
        been precarious. I specifically note the length of  time  that  the
        Appellant has lived in the UK (almost 7� years) and that for  4  of
        those years he was a minor. Following Rhuppiah v Secretary of State
        for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803  I  regard  as  neutral
        factors the fact that the Appellant does speak a very good standard
        of English and that, if allowed to do so, he is likely to  be  able
        to obtain employment. Having holistic regard  to  all  the  factors
        detailed above, and weighing the positive contribution made by  the
        Appellant to life in the UK, his relationship with the [B  family],
        and the extent to which he has  integrated  into  English  society,
        against  the  public  interest  in  immigration  control  and   the
        precariousness of  his  immigration  status,  I  do  not  find  the
        Appellant's   removal   would   constitute    a    disproportionate
        interference with article 8.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds
The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds
The appeal is dismissed on Humanitarian Protection grounds


[pic]                               17 July 2017

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


-----------------------
[1] In B v the Mayor and Burgesses of the London Borough of Merton [2003]
EWHC 1689 (Admin), Stanley-Burnton J (as he then was) indicated, "A history
that is accepted as true and is consistent with an age below 18 will enable
the decision maker in such a case to decide that the applicant is a child.
Conversely, however, an untrue history, while relevant, is not necessarily
indicative of a lie as to the age of the applicant. Lies may be told for
reasons unconnected with the applicant's case as to his age, for example to
avoid his return to his country of origin."

