
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     KD
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Turner, Counsel
For the SSHD:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



      1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.   I  have  anonymised  the
         appellant because this is an  appeal  raising  asylum  grounds  and
         sensitive, medical information.

      2. In a decision dated 6 July 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Graham
         refused to adjourn the hearing.  The judge went on to hear evidence
         and submissions and dismissed the appeal.

      3. I must decide whether the Tribunal acted unfairly  in  refusing  to
         adjourn the hearing in all the circumstances, not whether it  acted
         reasonably - see Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  418
         (IAC).

      4. The background leading  to  the  adjournment  application  is  most
         conveniently set out in a chronology.

         27/6/13  Appellant ('A) claims asylum for reasons relating  to  his
                  Tamil ethnicity and imputed political opinion.

         17/2/15  A takes part in a detailed asylum interview.  A  discloses
                  that he was detained in 2009 and 2012, during  which  time
                  he was ill treated and tortured.

         19/2/15  A short report is prepared by  Dr  Persaud,  a  Consultant
                  Psychiatrist.  This is based upon an interview with A  and
                  a  copy  of  the   interview   transcript.    Dr   Persaud
                  acknowledges the limits of the report as it was  based  on
                  what he was told and must be interpreted  in  that  light.
                  He however states that he was impressed by  the  vividness
                  of the description of past traumas  and  believed  he  was
                  suffering from major depression.  Dr Persaud records  that
                  he asked the A to take the report to his  GP  so  that  he
                  could be prescribed an increased dose and  newer  type  of
                  anti-depressant,  and  be  more   urgently   referred   to
                  secondary care psychiatric services.

         26/2/15  SSHD decision  refusing  A  asylum  attaching  a  detailed
                  reasons for refusal letter.

         3/3/15   Refusal of asylum and relevant immigration decision served
                  upon A.

         16/3/15  Appeal notice lodged.

         17/3/15  Notice of case management hearing  (CMH)  on  18/5/15  and
                  substantive hearing on 1/6/15 issued.

         16/5/15  A's previous  solicitors'  make  an  application  for  the
                  hearing listed on 1/6/15 to be adjourned for four weeks to
                  enable inter alia an addendum  psychiatric  report  and  a
                  scarring report to be prepared.

         18/5/15   CMH  before  FTTJ  Cox.   Application  to   adjourn   the
                  substantive hearing is refused.  The record of proceedings
                  includes the  following:  "I  am  therefore  reluctant  to
                  adjourn, especially when he has expert evidence anyway."

         22/5/15  A's previous solicitors make  a  further  application  for
                  adjournment in which they raise concerns as to whether the
                  A is currently fit to give evidence and be cross-examined.

         27/5/15  The adjournment  application  is  refused.   There  is  no
                  indication as to who made this decision but it appears  to
                  be refused because it had previously been refused  at  the
                  CMH.

         29/5/15  A changes solicitors to direct access Counsel.

         31/5/15   In  a  detailed  skeleton  argument  Counsel  renews  the
                  application for an adjournment in order to obtain  a  full
                  psychiatric report.  Reference is made to the  absence  of
                  an  indication  in  Dr  Persaud's  brief  report  to   the
                  appellant's  fitness  to  give  evidence.   It   is   also
                  submitted that the A should be  treated  as  a  vulnerable
                  witness because of his current mental health.

                  The skeleton argument attaches a witness  statement  dated
                  31/5/15, which states "I am very depressed and my  GP  has
                  changed my medication and  increased  my  medication.   My
                  representatives are concerned  with  my  ability  to  give
                  evidence and they have only been instructed on Friday they
                  want time to get an updated report from Dr Persaud and  my
                  GP records and I would ask that my hearing is adjourned so
                  that this can be done"

                  The skeleton also attaches a short letter from Dr  Persaud
                  to the new representative. In this  Dr  Persaud  indicates
                  that he is  concerned  at  the  increased  dose  that  the
                  appellant has been prescribed and that he shall be able to
                  provide a full report within 10 days of seeing A.

         1/6/15   Appeal hearing.  Adjournment refused and appeal dismissed.

         12/6/15  Grounds of appeal prepared by Counsel.

         24/7/15  Permission to appeal granted.

         11/8/15  Rule 24 notice in which it is submitted that the judge was
                  entitled to consider the medical evidence  inadequate  and
                  proceed with the appeal.

      5. The matter now comes before me to decide whether the  Tribunal  has
         acted  unfairly  in   refusing   the   adjournment   in   all   the
         circumstances.  Mr Turner relied upon the grounds of appeal and  Ms
         Johnstone  relied  upon  the  Rule  24   notice.    After   hearing
         submissions from both parties I reserved my decision  which  I  now
         provide with reasons.

      6. In my judgment the Tribunal did not  act  fairly  in  refusing  the
         adjournment for the reasons I set out below.

      7. There was undoubtedly a delay of some two months  in  the  previous
         solicitors seeking a full psychiatric report once they received the
         notice of hearing.  However from 15 May 2015  up  to  the  date  of
         hearing it  is  clear  that  both  the  previous  and  more  recent
         representatives were very concerned about  the  appellant's  mental
         health.  As such applications were made to  obtain  a  full  report
         before the CMR, at the CMR, after the CMR and  again  at  the  full
         hearing.

      8. This is a protection claim in which the appellant  alleges  torture
         in  the  past.   Both  representatives  were  concerned  about  the
         appellant's ability to give evidence and his vulnerability.   Judge
         Graham incorrectly observed that this concern was not raised before
         the hearing [9].  The previous representatives raised this  in  the
         adjournment application on 22 May.

      9. Judge Graham also failed to appreciate that at the time of  writing
         Dr Persaud's short report in February, the  SSHD  had  not  made  a
         decision on the appellant's asylum claim.  As such no  hearing  was
         listed or believed to be imminent  given  the  SSHD's  delays.   In
         those circumstances, the judge was wrong to expect  Dr  Persaud  to
         give an opinion on fitness to give evidence  on  19  February  [9].
         That  the  judge  manifestly  failed  to  appreciate  the  relevant
         chronology is clear from  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  report
         itself [34-37].  The judge criticises the report  because  it  does
         not take into account the "respondent's bundle"  when  that  bundle
         and the SSHD's  assessment  of  credibility  would  not  have  been
         available at the time of writing the report.

     10.  Judge  Graham's  unreasoned  finding  that  the  appellant  is   a
         vulnerable adult [32] (absent updated  medical  evidence)  is  very
         difficult to reconcile with  the  finding  that  the  appellant  is
         "fully able to give evidence" [9].

     11. In my judgment a full psychiatric report was  necessary  to  justly
         determine the appellant's appeal.

     12. First, the Tribunal required this information to properly inform it
         about the current nature and extent of the  appellant's  (accepted)
         vulnerability and how the hearing should be conducted in  light  of
         this.

     13. Second, the initial  report  prepared  by  Dr  Persaud  was  brief,
         limited and uninformed by the SSHD's assessment of the  appellant's
         credibility.  This is understandable  because  the  SSHD's  refusal
         letter post-dated the report.  The report before the  Tribunal  was
         inherently limited and there needed to be a full report  that  took
         into account the SSHD's assessment of credibility.  As set  out  in
         JL (medical reports - credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  145  (IAC)
         those writing  medical  reports  for  use  in  asylum  appeals  are
         required to  ensure  where  possible  that,  before  forming  their
         opinions, they study any assessments that have already been made of
         the appellant's credibility by the immigration authorities.

     14. Third, whatever the past delay in obtaining  a  full  report  might
         have  been,  it  is  clear  that  both  the  previous  and  current
         representatives  attempted  to  remedy  this  by  applying  for  an
         adjournment of the hearing on three occasions.   When  refusing  an
         adjournment at the CMH Judge Cox noted that the  appellant  already
         had a psychiatric report.  Judge Cox did not appreciate  that  this
         report did not outline  the  appellant's  current  presentation  or
         address the SSHD's assessment  of  credibility  and  was  therefore
         inherently limited.  Judge Graham appreciated the limited nature of
         the initial report and as such attached limited evidential value to
         the report yet declined to give the appellant the  opportunity  for
         the report writer to provide a full  report.   In  so  doing  Judge
         Graham failed to appreciate that whilst the overall  assessment  of
         credibility is for the Tribunal, a full  psychiatric  report  would
         assist in assessing current vulnerability and the compatibility  of
         the appellant's account with his mental condition: see  JL  (supra)
         and SA (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1302.

     15. The adjournment applications made  references  to  the  appellant's
         current mental health and it is clear that  the  short  psychiatric
         report needed to be updated.  There was some medical evidence  that
         the appellant's mental health had deteriorated, hence Dr  Persaud's
         letter dated 31 May 2015 expressing concern as to  the  appellant's
         medication.

     16. In all the circumstances I am satisfied that the appeal  could  not
         be justly determined without an adjournment and the just  and  fair
         approach in accordance with the overriding  objective  required  an
         adjournment.  I am also satisfied that in refusing the  adjournment
         request Judge Graham  failed  to  take  into  account  the  correct
         chronology and failed to appreciate that the appellant's fitness to
         give evidence had been raised before, and was an issue that  needed
         to be determined in light of updated medical evidence.

Decision

     17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     18. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

      1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the First-tier Tribunal [  -
         ] on the first date available after 1 February 2016.

      2)  The  appellant  shall  file  and  serve  a  comprehensive   bundle
         containing all evidence he wishes to rely  upon  together  with  an
         updated skeleton argument cross-referencing to  pages  within  that
         bundle before 22 January 2016.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
15 October 2015

