
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/04520/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On October 6, 2015                   |On October 12, 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                          MISS JEAN THOKOZILE MOYO
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Mutebuka (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe.  The background to  this  case
    is she twice failed to  be  granted  permission  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom in 2002 and 2004 but claimed to have entered the United Kingdom
    on a false passport in January 2005. She did  not  claim  asylum  until
    February 4, 2013 and when she did her application was rejected  by  the
    respondent on February 27, 2015.

 2. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the matter came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Juss  on  June  11,  2015  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on June 17, 2015 the Tribunal dismissed her appeal
    on all grounds.

 3. The appellant applied  for  permission  to  appeal  on  June  23,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchinson on July 14,  2015  on
    the basis that it was arguable the Tribunal had erred by:

      a. Failing to make any findings in relation  to  the  the  appellant's
         evidence that she became politically active in 2011.

      b. Failing to take into account the second witness' evidence.

      c. Failing to make  any  findings  with  regard  to  the  relationship
         between the appellant's child and her father simply because he  did
         not attend to give evidence.

 4. The respondent submitted a Rule 24 response dated  August  4,  2015  in
    which she submitted the findings were open to the Tribunal.

 5. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 6. Mr Mutebuka adopted the  grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
    respondent's Rule 24 response did not engage with the grounds.  At  the
    original hearing the second witness, Juliet Mombeshora, was not  cross-
    examined by the respondent and her evidence should therefore have stood
    unopposed.  The  evidence  was  crucial  to  the  proceedings   as   it
    corroborated the appellant's account.  Mr  Mutebuka  further  submitted
    that the Tribunal had  failed  to  properly  engage  with  the  YouTube
    videos. Pictures within the bundle suggested that one of the videos had
    been viewed by thousands rather than a  mere  handful  of  people.  The
    evidence submitted supported his submission that the Tribunal  had  not
    properly engaged with the appellant's public profile.  As  regards  the
    child there was no  engagement  with  the  father's  statement  or  the
    evidence from the second witness. The second witness  corroborated  the
    level and amount of contact the child's father and  the  appellant  had
    with each other and the father's statement confirmed the level  of  his
    involvement. This assessment was flawed.

 7. Mr Bramble opposed the application.  At paragraphs [19]  and  [20]  the
    Tribunal noted the timing of her involvement with Zanu PF group but  at
    paragraph [22] the Tribunal noted her activities began in 2011 but  was
    concerned with  her  overall  credibility  and  the  findings  made  in
    paragraphs [19] and  [20]  that  these  activities  were  contrived  to
    bolster her asylum claim were clearly open to it and the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to accept the presenting officer's submission on  that  point.
    Whilst there was no  direct  consideration  of  the  second  witnesses'
    statement, Mr Bramble submitted that the statement added little to  the
    asylum claim because it was based on what she  had  been  told  by  the
    appellant rather than what she had witnessed first hand.  The  Tribunal
    was fully aware of the appellant's purported profile and  had  examined
    the evidence and then applied the  country  guidance  case  of  CM  (EM
    country  guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059  and
    concluded, at paragraph [23] and [24], that she had a  limited  profile
    and would not be at risk if returned to a major city such as Harare  or
    Bulawayo. Turning to the second aspect of the appeal the Tribunal noted
    the child's father did not attend the hearing and  they  did  not  live
    together. He considered the witness statement that  had  been  provided
    and he also had regard  to  the  skeleton  argument  submitted  by  the
    appellant's representative at the original hearing.  The  Tribunal  was
    entitled to look at the facts and make findings regarding  the  child's
    best interests. The Tribunal  had  no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    child's father was entitled to remain here  beyond  September  2015  as
    there was a lack of  information  submitted  about  his  circumstances.
    There was no evidence that he was now exercising  treaty  rights  as  a
    family member because there was no evidence he was still with  his  EEA
    wife. The Tribunal had to  deal  with  the  child's  situation  on  the
    evidence available and the findings made were open to it. There was  no
    material error.

 8. Mr Mutebuka accepted that the evidence regarding the YouTube videos did
    not appear to have been put  before  the  Tribunal.  He  accepted  that
    neither the  Tribunal's  nor  the  respondent's  bundle  contained  the
    evidence he had outlined and consequently that evidence could not  form
    part of an  error  of  law  assessment.   However,  he  maintained  the
    Tribunal had made no findings about her earlier activities and this was
    a material error. He also accepted that the evidence about the  child's
    father could have been better but he maintained that the  Tribunal  had
    erred as it failed to take into account the appellant's sister's or the
    father's statements  about  the  child.  If  the  evidence  was  to  be
    rejected, then reasons should have been given.  He invited me to  remit
    the matter to the first-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 9. I reserved my decision on both issues.

    DISCUSSION

10. Mr Mutebuka's challenge relates to the Tribunal's approach to both  the
    asylum claim and the best  interests  of  the  child.  Common  to  both
    arguments was Mr Mutebuka's submission  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    consider the evidence of the appellant's sister.

11. She provided a short witness statement  confirming  that  she  was  the
    appellant's sister and that they had  lived  together  since  2005.  At
    paragraph [5] and [7]  of  her  statement  she  set  out  her  sister's
    involvement in Zimbabwean political affairs and how she supported  her.
    At paragraph [8] of her witness statement she referred to  a  telephone
    conversation between her brother and herself in which he said the local
    Zanu PF militias had visited him to warn him  about  his  sister's  the
    appellant.  The  witness  statement  went  on  to  confirm   that   the
    circumstances of the child's birth and her sister's  relationship  with
    Mr McNeil.

12. This evidence forms  the  cornerstone  of  today's  appeal  because  Mr
    Mutebuka has submitted the Tribunal had no regard to  it.   Mr  Bramble
    accepted that the Tribunal did not deal with the evidence in any detail
    but submitted that most of this evidence, particularly in  relation  to
    the asylum claim, was third hand information and added nothing  to  the
    argument already advanced  by  the  appellant  and  considered  by  the
    Tribunal.

13. At paragraph [6] the Tribunal listed the evidence placed before it.  At
    paragraph [10] of the decision the Tribunal noted that the  appellant's
    sister was called to give evidence.  The  Tribunal  then  recorded  the
    closing submissions of both  representatives  and  the  thrust  of  the
    respondent's  submissions  was  that  the  appellant  had   failed   to
    demonstrate she was a human rights activist who  was  a  thorn  in  the
    Zimbabwean  government's  side.  At  paragraph  [40]  the  respondent's
    representative referred the tribunal to the country guidance  case  and
    submitted that this appellant did not fall into a risk category.

14. On her behalf the appellant's representative had pointed  to  the  fact
    that the appellant had engaged in sur place activities  and  identified
    those matters  which  he  submitted  demonstrated  she  was  a  genuine
    activist.

15. The Tribunal considered all these issues between  paragraphs  [19]  and
    paragraph [24] of  its  decision  and  concluded  that  the  claim  was
    contrived and deliberately constructed to enhance her asylum claim. The
    Tribunal found the appellant had created a profile  seven  days  before
    her asylum application.

16. At paragraph [20] the Tribunal had regard to the fact the appellant had
    attended on vigils and even taking  her  claim  that  there  were  many
    photographs on the Internet of her the Tribunal noted that  the  amount
    of views these images had had  was  minimal.  The  Tribunal  took  into
    account the fact that the appellant had  not  undertaken  any  activity
    against the Zanu PF  in  Zimbabwe  and  had  waited  six  years  before
    attending a vigil. The Tribunal was not satisfied the authorities  were
    aware of her activities.

17. Whilst Mr Bramble conceded the Tribunal did not  give  the  appellant's
    sister's statement any real consideration I have  to  consider  whether
    that omission amounts to a material  error  in  light  of  the  overall
    conclusions made.

18. In assessing risk to the appellant the  Tribunal  quite  properly  took
    into account the appellant's previous immigration history. She  had  on
    three occasions attempted to visit in the United Kingdom (refused  port
    entry once  and  two  refused  visa  applications)  and  that  she  had
    ultimately entered the United  Kingdom  in  January  2005  on  a  false
    passport. When she arrived in the United Kingdom she had no interest in
    Zimbabwean politics and she  had  never  experienced  any  problems  in
    Zimbabwe. The Tribunal noted that she had attended vigils in  2011  and
    subsequently became involved in making videos that were posted  on  the
    Internet.

19. Whilst the Tribunal did not consider  in  any  detail  the  appellant's
    sister's statement I do take on board Mr Bramble's submissions  that  a
    lot of her statement is based on what she was told and she is a witness
    who has a personal interest in the appellant being allowed  to  remain.
    The witness was also fully  aware  the  appellant  was  here  illegally
    because she  provided  her  with  accommodation  from  the  moment  she
    arrived. Even if her claims of activities in 2011 were made out to  the
    extent that she claimed, the fact remained she  did  not  claim  asylum
    until February 2013 at a  time  when  she  knew  people  were  claiming
    asylum.

20. The Tribunal was entitled to form a view of the appellant's involvement
    and this  was  not  a  case  where  the  Tribunal  failed  to  consider
    photographic evidence that had been submitted on her behalf.  The  lack
    of interest in those photographs led the Tribunal to conclude that  the
    appellant was a person who had no real interest  for  the  authorities.
    Whether her interest began in 2011 or shortly before her  asylum  claim
    mattered little in those circumstances because in considering the risks
    to the appellant the Tribunal had regard to the  appropriate  case  law
    and noted that even prominent supporters were capable of being returned
    to Zimbabwe particularly if they were returned to Harare  or  Bulawayo.
    Further evidence of more widely viewed video was raised at the  hearing
    but there was nothing before me to suggest this evidence was adduced to
    the Tribunal or ever served on the respondent. There  is  no  reference
    anywhere in the Tribunal's decision although  there  was  reference  to
    other pictures and videos.

21. Mr Mutebuka submitted that the risk to this appellant was upon  arrival
    in the country. The relevant guidance in CM is at paragraph [215]-

         "(1) As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

         ...

         (5) A returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

         (6) A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer  the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.

         (7) The issue of what is  a  person's  home  for  the  purposes  of
         internal relocation is to be decided as a matter of fact and is not
         necessarily to be determined by reference to  the  place  a  person
         from Zimbabwe regards as his or her rural homeland.  As  a  general
         matter, it is unlikely that a person with a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in a major urban centre such  as  Harare  will  have  a
         viable internal relocation alternative  to  a  rural  area  in  the
         Eastern provinces. Relocation to Matabeleland (including  Bulawayo)
         may be negated by discrimination, where the returnee is Shona.

         ...

         (11) In certain cases, persons found to  be  seriously  lacking  in
         credibility may properly be found as a result  to  have  failed  to
         show a reasonable likelihood (a) that they would not, in  fact,  be
         regarded, on return, as aligned with ZANU-PF and/or (b)  that  they
         would be returning to a socio-economic  milieu  in  which  problems
         with ZANU-PF will arise. This important point was identified in  RN
         ... and remains valid."

22. Although the Tribunal did not make specific findings on the appellant's
    sister's statement I am satisfied that the Tribunal was aware of it but
    having considered all the evidence concluded that this appellant was of
    no interest to the authorities and based  that  finding  upon  evidence
    submitted by the appellant on her own behalf. For these reasons I  find
    that there is no material error  in  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
    appellant's asylum claim. It's core finding that she was of no interest
    to the  Zimbabwean  government  meant  that  her  claim  was  correctly
    rejected by the Tribunal.

23. The Tribunal considered the child's claim between  paragraphs  [25]  to
    [28] of its decision. The Tribunal did not reject the  claim  that  the
    child's father was Mr McNeil but noted  that  his  EEA  residence  card
    expired in  September  2015  and  there  was  nothing  in  his  witness
    statement to suggest what his current circumstances were  in  light  of
    the fact he had fathered a child outside of marriage.

24. Although his statement was provided the day before the hearing he  made
    no reference  to  what  his  own  circumstances  were  and  he  neither
    identified his home address or with whom he was  living.  He  may  well
    have been present at the child's birth and be seeing the child but  the
    Tribunal was  entitled  not  to  consider  any  EEA  rights  issues  in
    circumstances where there was little evidence to support such a  claim.
    The skeleton argument submitted by the appellant's  representative  did
    not even address this issue. As Mr Bramble accepted at today's  hearing
    the child's interests  may  have  to  be  considered  further  if  more
    concrete evidence is produced concerning  the  child's  father's  legal
    status in the United Kingdom.

25. The only issue therefore is whether the  Tribunal  properly  considered
    the article 8 claim. The Tribunal was entitled  to  take  into  account
    that the child's father had not attended the hearing  and  attach  such
    weight as it felt appropriate to his statement. He had  stated  in  his
    witness statement at paragraph [7], "I cannot attend court  to  support
    this appeal due to unforeseen  circumstances"  and  the  statement  was
    dated June 10, 2015. The court file confirms that notification  of  the
    hearing date was sent out on March 18, 2015 and  this  gave  plenty  of
    time for him to provide a statement and attend the  hearing.  The  fact
    his statement was dated less that twenty-four hours before the  hearing
    meant the Tribunal was entitled to place more weight  on  the  father's
    absence.

26. The Tribunal applied section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  and  ultimately
    concluded the child's best interest was with her mother.

27. On the evidence presented I am satisfied there was no error in law.

28. It may well be that if further evidence is adduced  about  the  child's
    and her father's position the  appellant's  position  may  have  to  be
    considered further but that is a concern for another day.

29. For the reasons set out above I find there is no material error on  any
    of the grounds brought by the  appellant  and  I  uphold  the  original
    decision of the first Tier Tribunal.

    DECISION

30. There was no material  error.   I  uphold  the  original  decision  and
    dismiss this appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
