
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04188/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                             AMIRFARHAD DADRASI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Smeaton (for Hasan Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                            ERROR OF LAW HEARING

    1. This is the appeal of Amirfarhad Dadrasi, a citizen of Iran  born  23
       October 1989, against the decision to make removal directions against
       him under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 following
       the refusal of  his  asylum  claim.  He  now  appeals  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal, with permission, against the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    2. His asylum claim was based on the following account. He was  arrested
       for failure to comply with his military service obligations  in  2010
       or 2011 and served forty days out of the seventy  day  sentence  that
       ensued. In May 2012  he  received  an  email  that  contained  images
       including one of the Prophet Mohammed and various Mullahs;  he  saved
       these and forwarded the email to his friend Ali. A few days later  he
       was called by his sister  who  said  that  plain-clothed  agents  had
       visited their home, with Ali, and his younger brother Farzad had been
       taken away for questioning. The Appellant fled  the  country  fearing
       the reaction of the  state  authorities,  travelling  to  the  United
       Kingdom via Greece where he was arrested  and  detained  for  illegal
       entry; he claimed asylum there. He was introduced to Christianity  by
       friends and was baptised at the Athens Baptist Church on 23  December
       2012. He went into hiding in Greece  once  his  immigration  document
       expired and subsequently travelled to the United Kingdom.

    3. The First-tier Tribunal directed itself that the central issue before
       it was the genuineness of the Appellant's conversion to Christianity.
       It found that this was not credible, because
        a) There was  an  unexplained  discrepancy  between  his  interview
           record and his witness statement addressing the  fact  that  his
           baptism certificate from Greece gave the  date  as  14  December
           2012 whereas a baptism card stated 23 December 2012: this was  a
           surprising matter (particularly given that he had had over three
           months to clarify the matter with the  church  directly)  albeit
           not one that could itself destroy his credibility;
        b) The photos said to represent his baptism by his church's  pastor
           were taken against a background looking more like a kitchen  and
           a large industrial vat than a church and a baptism pool;
        c) It was unlikely that he would have  been  baptised  so  speedily
           having been in prison originally  and  then  converting  only  a
           month after having been given a bible;
        d) He had not told his family of  his  conversion,  notwithstanding
           his stated wish to evangelise;
        e) Despite claiming  to  be  an  evangelical,  he  has  not  sought
           converts, which he attributed partly to the language barrier and
           partly considering himself a "beginner", which the judge thought
           inconsistent with his claimed study of  the  Farsi  bible  since
           December 2012;
        f) He had not adequately explained why it was he had  not  extended
           his temporary leave to remain in Greece;
        g) Pastor John Brown's evidence did no  more  than  show  that  the
           Appellant had physically attended church,  and  he  was  not  in
           attendance to give oral evidence (his absence  not  having  been
           thought to justify an adjournment absent more  detailed  medical
           evidence  of  his  claimed  indisposition  following  a   hernia
           operation three days before the hearing having been provided).

    4. In the light of these findings, "His credibility therefore falls  and
       the other uncorroborated parts of his account concerning being wanted
       for sending offensive images by computer and  his  illegal  exit  are
       also not accepted".

    5. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  arguing  that  Pastor  Brown's  oral
       evidence would have been crucial to the success  of  the  appeal  and
       that the written evidence that he had supplied had in fact referenced
       the Appellant having evangelised and introduced people to the church;
       furthermore the Respondent's  acceptance  of  the  fact  that  George
       Dimakos was the pastor of the Greek church had  been  overlooked,  as
       had evidence from social  media  accounts  showing  pictures  of  the
       Pastor and his wife Luisa  which  corroborated  the  claim  that  the
       former was indeed present with the Appellant at  the  moment  of  his
       claimed baptism. It had been wrong to hold any failure to  regularise
       his status in Greece against him given the well known failings of the
       asylum system prevailing there, and no subsequent findings  had  been
       made on his primary reason for leaving Iran, ie the reaction  of  the
       state authorities to the emails with which he claimed  to  have  been
       associated.

    6. Notwithstanding a refusal of permission to appeal by Judge Ransley on
       27 July 2015, a renewed application was granted by Judge Kopieczek on
       8 September 2015, because there was ambiguity as to the  reasons  for
       refusing the adjournment given it was unclear whether the  First-tier
       Tribunal accepted that there was a genuine reason for  the  witness's
       non-attendance, and because arguably no adequate  findings  had  been
       made on the dangers he might face based on  his  claim  that  he  was
       wanted for sending offensive email images: the permission  grant  was
       not limited to these grounds.

    7. Although formally resisting the appeal, Mr Kandola did  not  actively
       seek to persuade me that the decision was a lawful one, and in  those
       circumstances Ms Smeaton was able to rely on her grounds of appeal.

       Findings and Reasons

    8. The decision of the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment; fairness)
       [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) emphasises the  importance  of  the  test  of
       fairness and the question of whether a party will be  deprived  of  a
       fair hearing if an adjournment is refused.

    9. The availability of a material witness on a  matter  central  to  the
       credibility of an asylum claim is of vital  importance  to  the  just
       disposal of an appeal. As noted in Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of
       2014, "Factors weighing in favour of adjourning an appeal, even at  a
       late stage in proceedings, include  ...  [s]udden  illness  or  other
       compelling reason  preventing  a  party  or  a  witness  attending  a
       hearing."

   10. Here, the appeal largely turns on whether the Appellant is a credible
       witness of having become an  evangelical  Christian.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal did not make a clear finding as to the availability of  this
       witness, but rather concentrated on the sufficiency  of  the  medical
       evidence that he had put forward. However, given the stated  wish  to
       support the Appellant's appeal by  a  Pastor,  it  was  necessary  to
       determine whether he was truly indisposed at present, and whether  he
       would in future be available as a witness, before a  lawful  decision
       on an adjournment was taken. That was not done here.

   11. As the findings made on the appeal were determined absent the support
       of a potentially corroborative witness in the light of whose evidence
       they might have been differently assessed,  it  is  not  possible  to
       uphold the decision based on the extant reasoning.  The  findings  on
       the original reasons for departing Iran stand and fall with those  on
       the Appellant's claim to have converted, and  so  will  also  require
       redetermination. In those circumstances, little more need to be  said
       about them. However, it is difficult  to  avoid  expressing  surprise
       that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  that   the   Appellant's
       credibility was impugned by  his  failure  to  extend  his  temporary
       residence in Greece.  The Strasbourg Court in M.S.S.  v  Belgium  and
       Greece 30696/09 [2011] ECHR 108 recognised there to be  very  serious
       failings in asylum reception conditions there, stating at [301] that
           "The Court notes, firstly, the shortcomings  in  access  to  the
           asylum procedure and in  the  examination  of  applications  for
           asylum ... insufficient information for asylum seekers about the
           procedures to be followed, difficult access to the Attica police
           headquarters, no reliable system of  communication  between  the
           authorities and the asylum seekers, shortage of interpreters and
           lack of training of the staff  responsible  for  conducting  the
           individual interviews, lack of legal aid  effectively  depriving
           the asylum seekers of legal  counsel,  and  excessively  lengthy
           delays in receiving a decision."

   12. Given that level of indictment of  the  conditions  in  Greece  by  a
       supranational court, it is difficult to see  that  an  asylum  seeker
       could be legitimately criticised  for  failing  to  regularise  their
       status.

   13. As this conclusion means that  the  appeal  will  have  to  be  fully
       redetermined without any factual findings being preserved,  it  seems
       to me that it is appropriate for remittal for hearing  afresh  before
       the First-tier Tribunal.

       Decision:

       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  flawed  by
       material error of law.

       The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.

[pic]
Signed:     Date: 17 November 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
