
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04200/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House,              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Stoke-on-Trent                       |                                     |
|On 25th November 2016                |On 22nd December 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                             MR AREF KHAN MANGEL
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss G Norman (instructed by Fountain, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Tully)
    promulgated on 19th January 2016 by which she dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal of his asylum claim.

 2. The application for permission to appeal contained four grounds.   Miss
    Norman had been instructed only the previous evening but  had  mastered
    the issues and realistically relied on only one; that the  Judge  erred
    in refusing the Appellant's adjournment application to obtain a medical
    report and by applying the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules  2005  when  the  relevant  Procedure  Rules  were  the  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules 2014. The two  sets  of  Procedure  Rules  differ  with
    regard to adjournment applications.

 3. The 2005 Procedure Rules deal with adjournment applications at rule  21
    which provides as follows -

21. (1) Where a party applies for an adjournment of a hearing of an appeal,
    he  must  -(a)  if  practicable,  notify  all  other  parties  of   the
    application;

         (b) show good reason why an adjournment is necessary; and

         (c) produce evidence of any fact or matter relied upon  in  support
       of the application.

       (2) The Tribunal must not adjourn the hearing of an  appeal  on  the
       application of a party, unless  satisfied  that  the  appeal  cannot
       otherwise be justly determined.

       (3) The Tribunal must not, in particular, adjourn the hearing on the
       application of a party in order to allow  the  party  more  time  to
       produce evidence, unless satisfied that-

         (a) the evidence relates to a matter in dispute in the appeal;

         (b) it would be unjust to determine the appeal  without  permitting
         the party a further opportunity to produce the evidence; and

         (c) where the party has failed to comply with  directions  for  the
         production  of  the  evidence,  he  has  provided  a   satisfactory
         explanation for that failure.

       (4) Where the hearing of an appeal is adjourned, the  Tribunal  will
      fix a new hearing date which -

         (a) shall be not more than 28 days after the original hearing date,
         unless the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  because  of  exceptional
         circumstances the appeal cannot justly be heard within  that  time;
         and

         (b) shall in any event be not later than is  strictly  required  by
         the circumstances necessitating the adjournment.

 4. The 2014 Tribunal Procedure Rules came into force on 20th October 2014.
    They differ from the 2005 Procedure  Rules  in  that  they  contain  no
    specific rule dealing with adjournment applications; rather adjournment
    applications appear to be encompassed within rule  2;  the  "overriding
    objective and parties' obligation to cooperate with the Tribunal."

 5. Rule 2 of the 2015 Procedure Rules provides:-

         (1)  The overriding objective of  these  Rules  is  to  enable  the
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.


         (2)  Dealing with the case fairly and justly includes-


                a) dealing with the case in ways which are proportionate  to
                   the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues,
                   the anticipated costs and the resources  of  the  parties
                   and of the Tribunal;


                b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility in
                   the proceedings;


                c) ensuring, so far as practicable,  that  the  parties  are
                   able to participate fully in the proceedings;


                d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal  effectively;
                   and


                e)  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with   proper
                   consideration of the issues.


         (3)  The Tribunal must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the  overriding
    objective when it-


             (a)  exercises any power under these Rules; or


             (b)  interprets any rule or practice direction.


         (4)  Parties must-


             (a)  help the Tribunal to further  the  overriding  objective;
         and


             (b)  cooperate with the Tribunal generally.


 6. It is unfortunate that the Judge referred to the wrong procedure Rules.
    However, whether that error is material depends upon the way  in  which
    she assessed and decided the adjournment application.

 7. The Judge set out the adjournment application at paragraph 6.  She  set
    out that the appeal had previously been listed for a  full  hearing  on
    23rd October 2015. On that date the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  been
    surprised by new evidence from the Respondent in the form of a  Eurodac
    search that indicated that he been fingerprinted  in  Greece  in  2008,
    which directly contradicted his evidence that  he  was  in  Afghanistan
    until 2009. As  a  result  the  hearing  was  adjourned  to  allow  the
    Appellant the opportunity to address this issue and the Respondent  was
    directed to serve a supplementary reasons for refusal letter.  At  that
    time, and for the first time, the Appellant's representative  submitted
    that the Appellant's explanation for the discrepancy was  that  he  was
    suffering from mental health problems and anxiety that had affected his
    memory. Also on 23rd October 2015 the Appellant was  directed  to  file
    and serve medical evidence  of  his  mental  health  problems  by  18th
    December 2015.

 8. No medical report was served in accordance with that direction.

 9. The Appellant's representative produced to Judge Tully  a  letter  from
    the Appellant's GP dated 11th January 2016 which  stated  that  he  was
    suffering from stress/anxiety query  depression.  He  also  provided  a
    letter from an NHS  consultant  clinical  neuropsychologist  indicating
    that the Appellant had been referred to her by his GP and placed  on  a
    waiting list for assessment and an appointment would be offered "in due
    course" to  decide  if  a  "neuropsychological  assessment  may  be  of
    benefit."

10. Judge Tully recorded the Appellant's representative's  submission  that
    the  Appellant  should  be  given  the  opportunity  to   pursue   that
    appointment, that his  mental  health  issues  make  him  a  vulnerable
    Appellant and that  evidence  from  a  medical  professional  would  be
    central in establishing the  credibility  of  his  claim  that  he  was
    confused about the dates of events set out in his claim.

11. At paragraph 9 Judge Tully recorded  that  she  asked  the  Appellant's
    representative  if  he  could  give  her  any  indication  of  when  an
    appointment would be made and when it might be reasonable to  assume  a
    medical report would be produced. He could not. Judge Tully  asked  him
    whether the Appellant had sought funding for a private  medical  report
    regarding his claimed condition and was  told  that  he  had  not.  The
    representative could offer no explanation why no such  application  had
    been made.

12. Judge Tully recorded that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  opposed
    the adjournment application on the basis that he was in a  position  to
    proceed and the Appellant had had ample time to obtain medical evidence
    but failed to do so.

13. At paragraph 12 Judge Tully noted that the adjournment application  was
    made very late; on the day of the hearing.  The  previous  hearing  had
    taken place on 23rd October 2015 and it was by now  11th  January  2016
    and the Appellant had been on notice since October that  he  needed  to
    supply a medical report and that it should be served by  18th  December
    2015. The Appellant had missed that deadline and no adjournment request
    was made then setting out any difficulties that there were in obtaining
    the required evidence. She noted that it was open to the  Appellant  to
    apply for funding  to  obtain  a  report,  which  might  reasonably  be
    expected to be produced relatively quickly but he chose not  to  do  so
    and had not explained why. Although it was  claimed  by  the  Appellant
    that he had been chasing his GP, no evidence was  produced  to  support
    that. The GP's letter did not indicate the Appellant was suffering from
    memory loss and the Judge found that  if  the  GP  had  concerns  about
    memory loss she might reasonably be expected to say so. The Judge noted
    that mental health issues and poor  concentration  did  not  equate  to
    memory problems and there was no evidence that the Appellant had memory
    problems. While the Judge accepted that  he  had  been  referred  to  a
    consultant,  there  was  no  indication  whatsoever  as  to  when  that
    appointment would take place and the outcome would be speculative.  She
    said that given that the Appellant did not even have an appointment  it
    would likely be many weeks/arguably months before the NHS report  would
    be available.

14. At paragraph 13 of the Decision and Reasons Judge Tully noted that  the
    Appellant  claimed  to  need  the  medical  report  to  establish  that
    psychological problems caused him to have difficulty remembering dates.
    The Judge said that she had read the documentary evidence carefully and
    noted that the Appellant had answered questions about dates  of  events
    in Afghanistan at his screening interview  and  specifically  confirmed
    that he was well enough to be interviewed. He did mention that  he  had
    "psychological nervous problems" but also it was specifically  recorded
    that he had attended a local hospital and  there  was  no  evidence  of
    illness. He did not claim at  that  time  to  have  problems  recording
    dates.

15. At paragraph 14 Judge Tully noted that the  Appellant  had  volunteered
    evidence of the dates events took place in  three  separate  statements
    prepared with the benefit of legal advice. While the  Appellant  always
    said he had nervous problems, he did not  say  that  any  psychological
    problems he had prevented him  from  giving  this  information  and  no
    submissions were made on any of those earlier occasions  regarding  his
    ability to recall dates and times when he was interviewed or  preparing
    witness statements.

16.  The  Judge  noted  that  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  his
    representatives were concerned about his mental health and  its  impact
    on his ability to give evidence prior to the  October  hearing  and  no
    medical report was even suggested prior to date.

17. At paragraph  16  the  Judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  was  legally
    represented throughout and would have had the opportunity to  read  the
    statements and his interview record and to go  through  them  with  his
    legal representatives. There was no evidence before her to show that he
    had said at any time that he was having difficulty with his  memory  or
    was unsure about dates. The Judge noted it was only when he  was  faced
    with evidence that was inconsistent at the hearing in October  that  he
    claimed mental disorder affected his memory. She found that the  timing
    of the request to adjourn for a medical report  was  inconsistent  with
    there being a genuine difficulty.

18. The Judge noted that the Appellant  was  present  in  court  and  could
    explain any problems he had, which she would take into account and  she
    noted he had already produced his medical records from his GP to  which
    he could refer.

19. The Judge then indicated at paragraph 18 that looking at  the  evidence
    and all the circumstances in the round, she  considered  that  all  the
    evidence which was required in order to be  able  to  make  a  decision
    would, on conclusion of the Appellant's oral evidence, be available  to
    her. She was not satisfied that refusing the adjournment prevented  the
    just disposal of the appeal and refused the adjournment request.

20. Having done so the Judge then recorded  that  the  Appellant  indicated
    that he was able to proceed and his representative  confirmed  that  he
    was in a position to proceed. The Judge noted also that  the  Appellant
    had seen his Dr the week before the hearing and that she had written in
    support of the appeal but did not say he was unfit to give evidence.

21. It is quite clear therefore  that  if  the  Judge  had  considered  the
    adjournment application in accordance with  paragraph  2  of  the  2014
    Procedure Rules she  would  have  reached  the  same  conclusion.   The
    careful consideration that she gave to the  application  accorded  with
    the requirements of the  appropriate  Procedure  Rules.  There  was  no
    proper explanation for the failure to take the  matter  further  or  to
    comply with the previous direction, and no  reason  to  think  that  if
    further time had been afforded to the applicant any useful  information
    would be forthcoming.

22. We also note that a subsequent report in possession of Miss Norman, but
    not produced to the Home Office nor the subject of  an  application  to
    adduce  further  evidence,  did  not  provide  a  diagnosis  of  memory
    problems, merely moderate depression.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal Decision and Reasons is not tainted  by  a  material
error of law and is upheld. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
dismissed.

There has been no application for an anonymity order and we do not make one


Signed                              Date 25th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






