

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: AA/04415/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 30th August 2016                         |On: 18th October 2016         |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr D. Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Secretary of State:  Ms J. Isherwood,  Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born in 1994.












    Anonymity


 2. This appeal concerns a claim for international protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The  Appellant  is  accepted  to  be  a  national  of  Pakistan.    The
    unchallenged  findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Bennett) are that he is of Hazara ethnicity. He is a Shi'a Muslim.   He
    and  his  immediate  family  members  face  a  well-founded   fear   of
    persecution in their home town of Quetta, Balochistan  for  reasons  of
    their nationality (ethnicity)  and  religious  belief.  The  agents  of
    persecution are a militant Sunni group called  Lashkar-e-Jhangvi  (LeJ)
    whose stated aim to is to "rid Pakistan of this impure  people".  There
    is a failure of state protection in Quetta.  The Appellant's father has
    been accepted as a refugee in Australia. His mother, sister  and  three
    younger brothers have all fled to Afghanistan. His twin brother went to
    Iran and is now living in China. The family property business in Quetta
    was sold to facilitate these departures.


 4. The question remained: could the Appellant reasonably  be  expected  to
    avail himself of the internal  flight  alternative  somewhere  else  in
    Pakistan? In a lengthy and detailed  dissection  of  the  evidence  the
    First-tier Tribunal concluded that he could. It was this finding  which
    has led to the present appeal. In a written decision dated 20th October
    2015, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly set  those  findings  aside.
    Judge Farrelly accepted the Appellant's submission that the findings in
    the First-tier Tribunal determination were hard to follow. On  the  one
    hand the Tribunal had accepted that  the  Appellant  would  be  readily
    identifiable because of his distinctive  'Mongolian'  Hazara  features,
    that these features would identify him as Shi'a, that there are attacks
    on Shi'a Muslims throughout the country, and  that  there  would  be  a
    nationwide failure of state protection. On the other he had found  that
    there are 300,000-400,000 Hazara living elsewhere in Pakistan  with  no
    reported difficulty and as a young man with no  health  concerns  there
    were no obstacles to the Appellant getting a job and  living  somewhere
    outside of Balochistan.   Judge Farrelly found that these findings were
    contradictory and unclear and set them aside for that reason.


 5. It was on this limited basis that the appeal has come before me  to  be
    re-made. The only issue is whether it would be unsafe or  unduly  harsh
    to expect the Appellant to relocate within Pakistan.

 6. Both parties have made a considerable amount of effort in sourcing  and
    presenting relevant evidence in this case, and I am grateful for  their
    assistance in this regard as well as the provision of  helpful  written
    submissions.   I begin by setting out the relevant legal principles.  I
    will then review the country background evidence and will then make  my
    findings on  internal  flight,  taking  into  account  the  Appellant's
    individual circumstances.



    Legal Framework

 7. Article 8 of the Qualification Directive reads:


      1.     As part of the assessment of the application for international
         protection, Member States may determine that an applicant is not in
         need of international protection if in a part  of  the  country  of
         origin there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or no real
         risk of suffering serious harm and the applicant can reasonably  be
         expected to stay in that part of the country.


      2.   In examining whether a part of  the  country  of  origin  is  in
         accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall  at  the  time  of
         taking the decision on the application have regard to  the  general
         circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to  the
         personal circumstances of the applicant.


      3.    Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding technical  obstacles  to
         return to the country of origin.


 8. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007]  UKHL
    49 the House of Lords make clear that the question of whether  internal
    flight is "reasonable" is not to be equated with the test under Article
    3 ECHR. Lord Bingham refers [at 5] to his  own  guidance  in  Januzi  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] UKHL 5:




         "In paragraph 21 of my opinion in Januzi I summarised  the  correct
         approach to the problem of internal relocation in terms with  which
         all my noble and learned friends agreed:


           'The   decision-maker,   taking   account   of   all    relevant
           circumstances pertaining to the  claimant  and  his  country  of
           origin, must decide whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
           claimant to relocate or whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
           expect him to  do  so....There  is,  as  Simon  Brown  LJ  aptly
           observed in Svazas v Secretary of State for the Home Department,
           [2002] 1 WLR 1891, para 55, a spectrum of cases.  The  decision-
           maker must do his  best  to  decide,  on  such  material  as  is
           available, where on the spectrum the  particular  case  falls...
           All must depend on a fair assessment of the relevant facts'.


         Although specifically directed to a secondary issue  in  the  case,
         these observations are plainly of general application.  It  is  not
         easy to see how the rule could be more simply or clearly expressed.
         It is, or should be, evidence that the enquiry must be directed  to
         the situation of  the  particular  applicant,  whose  age,  gender,
         experience,  health,  skills  and  family  ties  may  all  be  very
         relevant. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving priority to,
         consideration of the applicant's  way  of  life  in  the  place  of
         persecution. There is no warrant for excluding, or giving  priority
         to consideration of conditions generally  prevailing  in  the  home
         country. I do not underestimate the difficulty of making  decisions
         in some cases. But the difficulty lies in applying the test, not in
         expressing it. The humanitarian object of the Refugee Convention is
         to secure a reasonable measure of protection for those with a well-
         founded fear of persecution in their home country or some  part  of
         it; it is not to procure a general levelling-up of living standards
         around the world, desirable though of course that is."




 9. At paragraph 20 Baroness Hale cites with approval the UNHCR  view  that
    the test is whether the individual will be able to live  a  "relatively
    normal life without undue hardship", itself a formulation  approved  by
    their Lordships in Januzi:


         "As the UNHCR put it in their very  helpful  intervention  in  this
         case:


           '...the correct approach when considering the reasonableness  of
           IRA [internal relocation  alternative]  is  to  assess  all  the
           circumstances of the individual's  case  holistically  and  with
           specific reference to the  individual's  personal  circumstances
           (including past persecution or fear thereof,  psychological  and
           health condition, family  and  social  situation,  and  survival
           capacities). This assessment is to be made in the context of the
           conditions in the place of  relocation  (including  basic  human
           rights,   security   conditions,   socio-economic    conditions,
           accommodation, access to health care facilities),  in  order  to
           determine the impact on  that  individual  of  settling  in  the
           proposed place of relocation and whether  the  individual  could
           live a relatively normal life without undue hardship'.


         I do not  understand  there  to  be  any  difference  between  this
         approach and that commended by Lord Bingham in paragraph 5  of  his
         opinion. Very little, apart from the conditions in the  country  to
         which the claimant has fled, is ruled out."




    The Evidence


10. The country background evidence was extensive. I have before me a large
    bundle  including  reports  from   numerous   respected   international
    organisations, and the Hansard transcript of a parliamentary debate  on
    the plight of the Pakistan Hazara which took place on the 4th  February
    2013, during which honourable members  referred  to  the  situation  in
    Balochistan using the language of "genocide" and "ethnic cleansing".  I
    do not ignore that evidence. I do not however set it out here, for  two
    simple reasons. First, virtually  all  of  it  is  concerned  with  the
    situation in Quetta, which is not the  focus  of  my  concern  in  this
    appeal. Second, most of it is relatively  out  of  date,  covering  the
    period 2012-2015.  I focus instead on the three principle reports  that
    the parties drew my attention to: those of Dr Ballard, Sultana Noon and
    the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT).




    Roger Ballard


11. Roger Ballard is an anthropologist who is well known to this  Tribunal.
    He has taken a specialised interest in South Asia throughout  his  long
    and distinguished career and has prepared a great many reports for  use
    in asylum and immigration appeals.  His report in the Appellant's  case
    is dated 8th March 2014.
12. Insofar as Dr Ballard's commentary is relevant to the issue of internal
    flight, he provides the following opinions. The true number of Shi'a in
    Pakistan is unknown. There are no areas  in  which  they  are  not  the
    minority, with the exception of small pockets such as  Hazara  Town  in
    Quetta.  The Appellant is immediately identifiable as a Hazara  because
    of his physiognomy.  Hazaras tend to live together in communities -  in
    part in order to defend themselves from hostile elements. The groupings
    outside of the main Hazara areas are by comparison "miniscule". Hazaras
    who find themselves outside of Quetta or Mehrabad are  more  vulnerable
    to attack because they do not have the benefit  of  a  large  community
    around them. Where they are able to live together  in  a  larger  group
    they derive a sense of security from their strength in numbers.   These
    pressures have led to  a  substantial  increase  in  Hazaras  migrating
    overseas, notably to Australia. As the community in  Pakistan  shrinks,
    it becomes ever more vulnerable.



    Sultana Noon


13. The Appellant relies on a report by Ms Sultana Noon, currently  of  the
    Amnesty International Pakistan desk. Ms Noon has been a  'human  rights
    consultant' for over ten years and has worked extensively in  Pakistan.
    She has specialised in counter terrorist research and as a result has a
    good understanding of the various extremist  groups  operating  in  the
    country.  For the purpose of  this  report  she  visited  Pakistan  and
    between May and August 2016 interviewed 24  individuals,  including  17
    members  of  the  Hazara  community.    She  made  contact  with  these
    individuals with the assistance  of  human  rights  groups  working  in
    Pakistan and Afghanistan.  The  remaining  seven  respondents  included
    Islamabad  journalists,  a  human  rights  activist   in   Karachi,   a
    representative of the Human Rights Commission, a Shi'a scholar and  the
    Pakistan researchers for  Human  Rights  Watch  and  the  International
    Crisis Group.  Ms Noon also reviewed media  reports  and  the  existing
    literature on the position of Hazara and Shi'a generally  in  Pakistan.
    The identities  of  the  respondents  are  protected  due  to  security
    concerns that they expressed.  Her report is dated 9th August 2016.

14. Ms Noon states that Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LeJ) are  a  militant  extremist
    Sunni Deobandi group formed in 1996  as  a  breakaway  faction  of  the
    sectarian group Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan. They  view  Shi'a  Muslims  as
    heretics and consider their killing to be  religiously  justified.   It
    was banned in Pakistan in 2001 and has been designated as  a  terrorist
    group  by  the  United  States   of   America.     LeJ   have   claimed
    responsibility for numerous attacks against Shi'a Muslims in  Pakistan,
    as well as state targets.   By  the  most  conservative  estimate  (the
    Center for Research and Security Studies) the group murdered 66  people
    in 2015; the highest figure (provided by  the  Pakistan  Institute  for
    Peace Studies) is given as 86 deaths.  Since the Taliban's attack on  a
    school in Peshawar in  December  2014  there  has  been  a  countrywide
    crackdown  on  extremist  activity  and  this   has   disrupted   LeJ's
    operations. A journalist interviewed by Ms Noon reported  that  one  or
    two members of the group are arrested each week, although could provide
    no details.  Their leader Malik Ishaq was killed by police in July 2015
    and two prominent members, Naeem Bukhari and Sabir Khan, were  arrested
    in February 2016.   Multiple sources  reported  to  Ms  Noon  that  the
    organisation is re-grouping in response to this crackdown.  One  police
    officer is quoted in the media as saying police believe its members  to
    be operating in the Punjab under the name Lashkar-e-Yammama, where they
    are recruiting and training new members to carry out sectarian attacks.
     These attacks include the murder of  the  Punjab  home  minister  Col.
    Khanzada in Attock in  August  2015.  The  International  Crisis  Group
    endorse the theory that the group were responsible  for,  or  at  least
    complicit in, the Easter  2016  attack  in  Lahore,  where  70  people,
    including children, were killed.  In Sindh they claimed  responsibility
    for a suicide attack on a Shi'a procession that killed 24 people, again
    mostly children.  Five of the sectarian attacks in  Khyber  Pukhtunkhwa
    in 2015 were aimed at the Shi'a community, and these  are  believed  to
    have been attacks by LeJ.

15. Ms Noon lists a number  of  other  terrorist  organisations,  operating
    throughout Pakistan, who have targeted Shi'a communities.  There are an
    estimated 40 million Shi'a in Pakistan. They have come  under  physical
    attack by groups affiliated with both al-Qaeda and the  Taliban.   They
    are  also  subject  to  a  "rising  tide"  of  hate  speech,  which  is
    proliferated online as well as in the mainstream media. Ms  Noon  cites
    the 2016 report by the Jinnah Institute entitled  "State  of  Religious
    Freedom in Pakistan":

         "As in almost all cases of rising extremism and intolerance against
         Muslim and non-Muslim minorities in Pakistan, hate speech and  hate
         literature form the core methods of motivation and incitement  used
         by extremists to push their  agenda.  Shia  have  long  faced  hate
         speech and hate literature,  which  is  now  prevalent  across  the
         country, but the level of harassment and violence they  face  today
         is unprecedented.  Regular  rallies  and  speeches  by  leaders  of
         Lashkar-e-Jhangvi and Ahle-Sunnat Wal Jamaat, the reincarnation  of
         the banned Sipah-e-Sahaba, continue with impunity..."


16. Ms Noon states that there are no official figures  for  the  number  of
    Hazara living outside of Balochistan. There is  a  large  community  in
    Karachi, estimated to number between 5000 and 20,000.    They  live  in
    three neighbourhoods: Manghopir, Hussain Goth and Mughal  Goth.   There
    are smaller communities in  Lahore,  Multan,  Islamabad  and  Peshawar.
    Pulling together all of the information she  has  been  given  Ms  Noon
    believes that the number of Hazara living outside of  Balochistan  must
    well below the 300,000-400,000 estimated by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The community in Islamabad and Rawalpindi  for  instance  numbers  only
    about 200 families.


17. The Hazara men in Manghopir work mainly as unskilled  labourers  for  a
    minimum wage of approximately �92 per month.  Manghopir  was  described
    by all informants, including a counter-terrorism official,  as having a
    poor security situation and Ms Noon was  warned  against  visiting  the
    neighbourhood as a result. There is  said  to  be  a  Taliban  presence
    there.  The community  in  other  neighbourhoods  of  Mughal  Goth  and
    Hussain Goth are  relatively  better  off,  being  employed  mostly  as
    vendors, bakers and rickshaw drivers.   Accommodation  is  nevertheless
    cramped and overcrowded. Ms Noon was able to visit that  neighbourhood,
    which is bordered by a Pathan community on  one  side,  and  a  Muhajir
    community on the other. Respondents who had relocated to  Karachi  from
    Quetta reported securing accommodation as being a significant obstacle.
    One man described having to pay  for  the  privilege  of  living  on  a
    verandah with his family for a whole month,  until he could secure  one
    room for them to live in.   In respect of basic  socio-economic  rights
    such as healthcare, Ms Noon finds that the situation for Hazara is much
    the same as that faced  by  much  of  the  Pakistani  population.   The
    situation is better for people who already have relatives in the  place
    that they are seeking to live in. Kinship networks  play  an  important
    role in Pakistani society, and patronage an  important  role  in  being
    able to secure employment.

18. Many of Ms Noon's respondents expressed an ever-present fear  of  being
    targeted by militants.  A  woman  living  in  the  relative  safety  of
    Islamabad told her that whenever she sees a motorcycle close to her car
    she thinks "this is for me".  Her colleagues have advised her to wear a
    veil in public so that she cannot be recognised and that if she attends
    a Hazara cultural event she takes precautions in the days that  follow,
    only leaving her house where  necessary  and  taking  different  travel
    routes if possible.  Another respondent spoke  of  what  he  terms  the
    "collective insecurity" of the community.

19. Similar concerns were voiced in respect of the police and  authorities.
    A number of people reported having experienced discrimination and  open
    hostility in trying to perform basic  functions  like  registering  for
    identity cards or attending college.  Officials  frequently  questioned
    the nationality of Hazara citizens,  suspecting  them  to  be  Afghani.
    Such discriminatory practices are reported in the media,  and  in  some
    instances to the courts: in 2014 the Hazara community in Sindh went  to
    the High Court to petition for an end  to  the  unjustified  denial  of
    passports to Hazara applicants.  A Hazara man  who  is  now  living  in
    Australia told Ms Noon (in a Skype conversation) that Hazaras living in
    cities such as Karachi are subject to  harassment  by  the  police.  If
    there is a terrorist attack the  police  will  round  up  refugees,  or
    Pakistani men of Hazara or Pathan appearance. One man that he knew  was
    on his way home from the shops one day when he was picked up. He  spent
    three months in central jail and was facing removal to Afghanistan when
    he managed to bribe his way out.



    The Respondent's Country Background Material

20.  Whilst  the  Respondent  agrees  that  the  exact  number  of   Hazara
    distributed throughout Pakistan is unknown, it  is  her  position  that
    they number at least 300,000. This figure is derived from  the  Country
    of Origin Information Report of 2013.  I am referred to a blog  run  by
    the Hazara community in Karachi ('hazarasinkarachi') which claims  that
    the community numbers  over  13,000.  The  Respondent  relies  on  this
    evidence to rebut Dr Ballard's conclusion that the communities  outside
    of Balochistan are "miniscule".  The Respondent's bundle also  contains
    a copy of an email exchange between the Home Office  and  the  Pakistan
    Institute for Peace Studies. In response to the Home Office  query  the
    latter states that there are an estimated 25,000 Hazara families living
    in Karachi; "those who can afford the  expensive  living  of  Islamabad
    also relocated in the capital but their numbers are small".


21. Although the refusal letter makes mention of Islamabad  and  Lahore  as
    potential destinations, the written  submissions  dated  12th  November
    2015 posit Peshawar and Karachi as other alternatives.  In  respect  of
    Peshawar the Respondent relies on an item on Al  Jazeera  news  channel
    headed 'Hazara community find safe haven in Pakistan' which states that
    the "historic city of Peshawar in the northwest has welcomed them  with
    open arms, and trade seems to be thriving for many members of the small
    community".  The link provided to this  news  item  did  not  work.  It
    appears to have  aired  in  November  2011.   The  Respondent's  bundle
    contains  an  article  which  originally  appeared  in  Dawn,  but  was
    reproduced  on  the  9th  March  2014  on  an  internet   site   called
    'reliefweb'. It is entitled 'Tough Life for the Displaced Hazara in the
    Twin Cities'. The author has interviewed six Hazara who  had  all  fled
    persecution in  Balochistan.   All  speak  of  the  difficult  economic
    circumstances that they find themselves in, and the great dangers  that
    they left behind. The author  states  that  100,000  Hazara  have  left
    Quetta but does not give a source for that figure or specify where they
    might have gone.  The bundle also contains a number  of  articles  from
    various sources reporting on a series of demonstrations staged  by  the
    community in Islamabad against the killings in Balochistan.

22. In her oral and written submissions dated 24th August 2016 Ms Isherwood
    relied heavily  on  the  DFAT  thematic  report  'Shias  in  Pakistan',
    published in January 2016.

23. DFAT estimates that Shi'a Muslims represent approximately  20%  of  the
    population and are spread throughout Pakistan where they are  generally
    well integrated.  Hazaras are a predominantly Shi'a  ethnic  group  who
    number up to 900,000. Of these, 700,000 live in Quetta, up to 15,000 in
    Karachi,  with  other  communities  in  Peshawar,  Lahore,  Multan  and
    Islamabad.  DFAT assesses that Shi'as do not  suffer  greater  economic
    disadvantage that other Pakistanis. Credible human rights  groups  have
    reported that Shi'a face no discrimination  in  gaining  employment  in
    either the public  or  private  sector.   The  same  can  be  said  for
    education, and healthcare.  Hazaras have  their  own  political  party,
    which in 2013 won one seat in Balochistan.  There are a number of Shi'a
    charities and community organisations. An  estimated  50-70%  of  Shi'a
    students are members of the Imamia Student Organisation.

24. In respect of the overall security situation,  DFAT  reports  "credible
    sources" as saying that there has been a  75%  reduction  in  terrorist
    attacks across  the  country  from  2014  to  2015.  This  decrease  is
    attributed  to  the  military  operation  codenamed  Zarb-e-Azb   which
    commenced in June 2014 following the attack on Karachi airport, and  to
    the 20-point National Action Plan on counter-terrorism. Although Shi'as
    have  historically  been  disproportionately  affected   by   sectarian
    violence - 58% of fatalities in the first half of  2015  were  Shi'a  -
    DFAT assess the risk overall as low. The community  is  more  prominent
    during religious festivals such as Ashura  but  the  risk  of  harm  is
    offset by increased state protection. That said, the report continues:

         "4.4 Shias continue to face a threat from  anti-Shia  and  militant
         groups, particularly  Lashkar-e-Jhangvi  (LeJ)  and  Sipah-e-Sahaba
         Pakistan (SSP) or Ahl-e-Sunnat Wal Jammat  (ASWJ).  Most  of  these
         networks  have  broad  agendas  which  include   strong   anti-Shia
         sentiments. Various Pakistani Taliban groups  operating  under  the
         banner  of  Tehreek-e-Taliban  Pakistan  (TTP)  have  also  claimed
         responsibility for attacks on Shias.


         4.5. The LeJ is the  main  perpetrator  of  anti-Shia  violence  in
         Pakistan. The LeJ is a  collection  of  loosely  coordinated  cells
         linked to other militant networks  including  the  TTP.  Originally
         based in the Punjab as an offshoot of the  SSP,  the  LeJ  aims  to
         establish an Islamic Sunni state in Pakistan.....While  CRSS  notes
         that LeJ did not claim responsibility for any attacks between  June
         2014 and September 2015, credible sources have told DFAT  that  LeJ
         remains intact and has sleeper cells in major urban centres  across
         Pakistan.
         ...
         4.8.  Pakistani  authorities  have  increasingly  scrutinised   the
         activities of the LeJ, SSP, TTP and SMP since their designation  as
         terrorist organisations. Although this has resulted in  the  arrest
         of prominent militant leaders and  activists, capacity  constraints
         have limited the effectiveness of subsequent prosecutions..."


25. DFAT assesses that presently there is a "moderate risk" of  generalised
    violence in Karachi, Khyber-Pukhtunkwa and  Balochistan,  Islamabad  is
    "relatively  safe"  for  Shi'a  migrants,  there  is  a  low  level  of
    generalised  and  sectarian  violence  in  Gilgit-Baltistan   and   the
    situation in FATA is variable. Of the city of Peshawar  DFAT  says  the
    following:


         "4.28. DFAT understands that Shias  continue  to  relocate  to  the
         relative safety of Peshawar from other parts  of  Khyber-Pukhtunkwa
         and the FATA. There are also options for internal relocation within
         Peshawar. Credible sources have reported the movement of some  Shia
         families from parts of the Old City to the  New  City  to  distance
         themselves from a LeJ sleeper cell in the area, for example".

26. In respect of internal flight generally, DFAT notes that there  are  no
    legal impediments to relocation and that many people migrate  to  large
    urban centres because of the relative anonymity that they offer:


         "5.5. DFAT has observed that Shias relocate with relative ease  and
         frequency  because  of  family  and  communal  networks  throughout
         Pakistan. In Lahore, for example, there are large Shia  communities
         in Islampura and in old areas of the  Walled  City.  In  Islamabad,
         there are Shia communities, including Turi Shias, in Koh-i-Noor and
         Golra Sharif near the Islamabad Motorway Link  Road  and  in  small
         towns close to Islamabad such as Taxila, Bahra Kahu, Bani Gala  and
         Bari Imam. DFAT understands that accommodation  is  these  (working
         class) areas ranges from AUD 135-270 per month (for 1-2  rooms)  to
         AUD 685 per month (for a house).


         5.6. To some extent, these expenses are offset by higher wages paid
         in large  urban  centres,  particularly  for  those  with  relevant
         skills, including foreign language  and  computer  skills.  Migrant
         communities also provide a support network which can help alleviate
         higher living costs in these areas..."





    The Appellant

27. It is accepted that the Appellant is a Shi'a  Muslim  and  that  he  is
    Hazara. He came to the United Kingdom in 2010 when he was sixteen years
    old with valid leave to enter as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant.
    His studies, in the English language, were paid for  privately  by  his
    father who was then earning a  substantial  income  from  his  property
    business in Quetta. The family were wealthy and the Appellant  lived  a
    comfortable life. Before he Pakistan he was an  active  member  of  the
    Hazara Student Federation, a wing of the Hazara  Democratic  Party.  It
    was after the Appellant's arrival that the family came to  the  adverse
    attention of LeJ.  The situation in Quetta  grew  steadily  worse  with
    friends also facing attacks including bombings and shooting.  His whole
    family have now fled and it is the unchallenged finding of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the Appellant has no close  family  member  left  in
    Pakistan.  In his statement of 31st May 2016 the Appellant states  that
    his brother had been forced to return to Pakistan  from  Iran  but  had
    been shot at by unidentified gunmen on a motorbike. He  made  immediate
    arrangements to leave in order to study in China.


28. The Appellant is educated to what he  describes  as  an  "intermediate"
    level. He has no job experience  and  does  not  profess  to  have  any
    transferable skills. He was using a computer at the hearing to  take  a
    note and Ms Isherwood pointed to the suggestion in the DFAT report that
    an ability to speak English and computer literacy would be an advantage
    in the job market.  He has no  known  health  complaints.   His  family
    business is now in ruins and his father  is  living  as  a  refugee  in
    Australia. The Appellant avers that  his  father  would  be  unable  to
    assist him financially, because any money that he is  able  to  get  he
    uses to support the Appellant's mother and sisters who  are  living  in
    Afghanistan.  He has never lived in any place in  Pakistan  other  than
    Quetta.



    My Findings


    Evaluation of the Evidence

29. Dr Ballard's report was prepared for the First-tier Tribunal  and  thus
    deals primarily with the situation in Quetta. Dr Ballard has relied  on
    his own extensive knowledge and  experience  of  Pakistan  as  well  as
    reports from the International Crisis Group, the BBC  and  other  media
    outlets in order to provide his report.  This report is helpful in that
    it contextualises the Appellant's account in the history of the  Hazara
    people over the last couple of centuries.   It is less helpful in  that
    Dr Ballard is unable - quite candidly  -  to  provide  any  clarity  in
    respect of population size. The Respondent took great exception to  his
    description of the Hazara communities outside of Quetta as "miniscule".
     What Dr Ballard actually says is "as  compared  to  the  community  in
    Quetta, local Hazara settlements elsewhere  in  Pakistan  can  only  be
    described as miniscule". In the context of  evidence  that  Quetta  has
    approximately 600,000-700,000 Hazaras settled  there,  I  am  satisfied
    that this was a fair comment.


30. Ms Isherwood expressed a number of concerns about the Noon  report.  Ms
    Noon tells us that she interviewed  23  people  whose  identities  were
    protected. Although their anonymity was not per se a point of criticism
    for Ms Isherwood  she did question how those  respondents  came  to  be
    selected. She submitted that if you find your respondents through human
    rights organisations they are likely to be people who are already known
    to these groups. We were not for instance told that Ms Noon's  contacts
    went into Mughal Goth and randomly picked people in the street for  her
    to interview.  There is therefore the suspicion that all of the  people
    interviewed by Ms Noon had, as it were, a pre-prepared  axe  to  grind.
    Ms Isherwood was further concerned that the interviews  themselves  are
    not recorded and appended to the report. It is therefore  not  possible
    to see the full extent of their evidence,  and  this  leaves  open  the
    possibility that Ms Noon may have been selective in what went into  the
    report and what did not.

31. I find these criticisms to have some justification.   The  Home  Office
    has managed to identify evidence of Hazara being  "welcomed  with  open
    arms" in Peshawar (albeit dating from 2011) which suggests that  it  is
    not the case that all Hazara face  the  systematic  discrimination  and
    collective insecurity detailed by Ms Noon,  yet  her  report  does  not
    reflect those positive experiences.  Whilst there is nothing to support
    the insinuation of partial editing on her part, it is clear that if you
    interview a human rights activist you are  going  to  get  his  or  her
    perspective.   I have borne that in mind when  assessing  the  evidence
    overall.  I also bear in mind that much of Ms Noon's  report  is  based
    upon literature available  in  the  public  domain,  and  that  nothing
    reported in the  interviews  appeared  inconsistent  with  the  general
    country background material.

32. That brings me to the DFAT report.  Like Ms Noon, the author elected to
    conceal, for security reasons, the identity of the informants. Where Ms
    Noon outlined the  specific  role  and  religious  affiliation  of  her
    respondents - to give some idea of where they were coming  from  -  the
    DFAT report in places simply refers to "credible  sources".   It  would
    appear from the introduction that these sources include members of  the
    Pakistani government and security services, as  well  as  international
    observers such as the UN, and the same human rights groups contacted by
    Ms Noon.  Although there is no express reference to any  Hazara  groups
    or individuals I am satisfied that overall a  broad  range  of  sources
    were consulted in the compilation of this  report  which  is  concerned
    with the Shi'a population as  a  whole,  rather  than  ethnic  sub-sets
    within it.  This is reflected in the conclusions which I  found  to  be
    balanced, and  largely  in  accordance  with  those  of  Ms  Noon.  For
    instance, the welcome improvements in security following  the  Peshawar
    school attack are to be assessed in the context of the widely  reported
    view of "credible sources" that the extremists have not gone away; they
    have simply withdrawn into 'sleeper cells'.



    Conclusions on internal flight


33. Whether internal flight is 'reasonable' will depend on many things.  As
    Baroness Hale notes in AH, not much is excluded from my  consideration.
    I must consider all relevant factors and  consider  whether,  for  this
    individual Appellant,  resettlement  elsewhere  in  Pakistan  would  be
    unduly harsh, unreasonable, or would be such that he would not be  able
    to lead a normal life.


34. The Appellant has unarguably got three things going for him. He has his
    health, his age, and his gender.  All of these things are ostensibly in
    his favour in the job market in Pakistan. So too,  according  to  DFAT,
    are his education, computer literacy and ability speak  both  Urdu  and
    English.   The Appellant is an intelligent  and,  as  the  Home  Office
    would have it, "resilient and resourceful" individual.  I see no reason
    to reject (given the overall positive credibility  findings)  that  his
    family are all now dispersed  and  living  as  refugees  themselves.  I
    therefore proceed on the basis that they  are  unable  to  support  him
    financially, and make my assessment on the premise that he will work to
    support himself.    There  are  no  legal  impediments  to  him  moving
    internally, nor to him obtaining a CNIC card if for whatever reason  he
    does not have one now.  Even if a lack of social and family connections
    precluded him from getting a  job  befitting  his  class  origins,  the
    country background information indicates that the Hazara  community  in
    Karachi are extensively employed in the building  trade,  and  although
    this is no doubt low skilled and accordingly low paid employment, there
    would appear to be nothing to stop the  Appellant  getting  such  work.
    Although Ms Noon and  Mr  Sellwood  appeared  to  discount  that  as  a
    possibility, I note that this sort of insecure and unrewarding work  is
    of course the norm for a great many Pakistanis.  Being made to work  as
    a labourer is not in itself unduly harsh.


35. Whether the Appellant is physically able, and qualified, to work is  of
    course only one consideration. I note the emphasis, in all three of the
    reports summarised above, to the importance  of  family  and  community
    links in general, and for the internally displaced in  particular.  The
    DFAT report opines that Shi'as can internally relocate  "with  relative
    ease and frequency because of family and communal  networks  throughout
    Pakistan". It says nothing about the position for those who do not have
    such  links.   With  that  in  mind  Ms  Isherwood   concentrated   her
    submissions  on  the  availability  of  "community  ties".  Whilst  the
    Appellant may have no family to  speak  of  left  in  Pakistan,  he  is
    Hazara, and can reasonably be expected to relocate  to  another  Hazara
    community.  It is therefore important that I consider the  position  of
    those Hazara communities outside of Balochistan.


36. The statistics in respect of the size of these groups are not  easy  to
    decipher. There is a striking absence of official, empirically  derived
    figures. There appears to be agreement that the  Hazara  population  is
    something close to 900,000 in total.   The 2013  COIR  states  that  at
    least 300,000 of these people live outside of Balochistan. None of  the
    other evidence before me supports that high figure.  DFAT estimate that
    of the total 900,000, there are 700,000 concentrated in the  population
    centres around Quetta.  The sources all agree  that  the  next  largest
    contingent is found in Karachi.  The population there is  estimated  by
    Ms Noon to be between 5000-20,000, by the 'HazarasinKarachi' blog to be
    13,000, and by DFAT to be up to 15,000.  If these figures are  correct,
    that would mean that approximately another 185,000  people  are  spread
    between the twin cities, Peshawar, Multan and Lahore.  Even  accounting
    for small pockets in other places,   this would  not  accord  with  the
    consistent claim that Karachi has  the  largest  community  outside  of
    Balochistan.   One figure  contradicted  the  evidential  consensus  in
    respect of Karachi: the Pakistan Institute for Peace  Studies  informed
    the Home Office that there were 25,000 families living in Karachi. Even
    if that figure can be taken to represent between 75,000-100,000 people,
    it still makes the COIR's  total  of  300,000  overall  very  unlikely.
    Having considered  all  of  the  evidence  before  me  I  conclude  the
    following in respect of the spread of the Hazara population. First,  it
    is clear that the largest community remains in Quetta,  notwithstanding
    the sustained assault made upon it by Sunni   extremists  in  the  past
    decade. The next largest community is to be found in the  three  Hazara
    suburbs of Karachi,  where  the  population  appears  to  be  somewhere
    between  10,000  and  20,000.  Other  than  this,  there  are   smaller
    communities in Rawalpindi,  Islamabad,  Multan,  Lahore  and  Peshawar.
    Little can be said about the size of these communities, save that  they
    are much smaller than  that  in  Quetta,  or  indeed  Karachi.  Perhaps
    "minuscule" was overly dramatic, but Dr Ballard's point was a good one.
    Compared to the other  centres,  these  cities  hold  relatively  small
    populations.   If for  instance  Ms  Noon's  research  is  correct  and
    Islamabad is home to some 200 families, that would  number  only  about
    1000 people.


37. The statistics in respect of religion were substantially  clearer.   It
    is consistently reported that the Shi'a population make up  between  15
    and 20% of the population overall and they are  spread  throughout  the
    country.

38. The relevance  of  these  statistics  to  my  enquiry  stems  from  the
    consistent claim that Hazaras in general have a significant  subjective
    fear of adverse attention.   There is logic in Dr Ballard's  assessment
    that the smaller the minority, the more vulnerable  they  feel  in  the
    context of a society where there is a  "rising  tide  of  hate  speech"
    against them.  Relevant to my assessment then will be the experience of
    these already established Hazara communities.

39. It is clear from the totality of the evidence that Hazaras in  Pakistan
    do not live carefree lives. The evidence  consistently  indicates  that
    wherever they live,  they are fearful of attack by militants. The  only
    evidence to the contrary was the 2011 al-Jazeera item  about  Peshawar.
    Unfortunately I have not  been  able  to  view  that  film,  and  I  am
    reluctant to draw any sort of conclusion from the headline alone.  That
    is particularly  so  given  that  other,  more  recent  evidence  about
    Peshawar in the DFAT report is to the effect that Hazara  families  are
    fleeing the Old City for fear of militant sleeper cells.

40. How well founded are these fears of attack? Ms Isherwood makes the good
     point that - Quetta aside - there is marked absence of  references  in
    the material to Hazara being specifically targeted.   Neither  Ms  Noon
    nor  Dr  Ballard  could  offer  any  examples  of  Hazaras  outside  of
    Balochistan being the victim of extremist attack. That is  not  to  say
    that such casualities do not exist; it may be that  they  are  subsumed
    into the statistics on Shi'a victims, but Ms Isherwood was  correct  in
    her observation.  The Respondent does nonetheless  accept  unreservedly
    the evidence that there is a heightened risk  for  Shi'as  in  general.
    DFAT reports that in the first half of 2015,  58%  of  the  victims  of
    sectarian violence were Shi'a, a figure that must be seen in  light  of
    their statistical representation in the population as a  whole.     The
    Respondent further accepts that Hazaras are  physically  distinct  from
    other Pakistanis and as such are  immediately  identifiable  as  Shi'a.
    Nor is it contested that there are in Pakistan  agents  of  persecution
    whose stated aim, which they pursue with deadly  determination,  is  to
    expunge from Pakistan those they regard as "impure". The  Hazaras  find
    themselves at the centre of this assault.  Although there  has  been  a
    welcome decrease in attacks in the past year or so, a  fact  attributed
    to the renewed resolve of the army and police, the sources  also  agree
    that the  extremists  are  simply  biding  their  time.  The  "credible
    sources" cited by DFAT, as well as those who spoke to Ms Noon,  confirm
    the widely held view of the security services in Pakistan that  LeJ  is
    re-grouping under a different name in the  Punjab,  and  that  'sleeper
    cells' have withdrawn to await orders in all major cities.


41. I assess the objective risk to the Appellant in light of this evidence.
    He is a young man without family who  would  likely  be  living  alone.
    Whilst this is a matter which would no doubt  lead  to  his  heightened
    sense of personal insecurity (a matter I discuss  below)  the  evidence
    does not suggest that such individuals are high on the target list  for
    LeJ or similar groups. The events over the  past  year  have  primarily
    been 'spectaculars', designed to cause maximum number of casualties and
    greatest publicity. The Easter attack in Lahore  (ostensibly  aimed  at
    Christians but in fact the vast majority of the dead were  Muslim)  and
    the bombing of an Ashura procession in Sindh in  which  numerous  Shi'a
    children died are examples of these. Outside of  Balochistan  the  only
    reported assault on an individual by LeJ was the assassination  of  the
    Home  Minister  of  the  Punjab  at  Attock,  reportedly  launched   in
    retaliation for his role in the offensive against them.   Whilst  there
    remains the possibility that the Appellant would  attract  the  adverse
    attention of militants local to his neighbourhood,  there  is  not  the
    statistical or background evidence to establish that there is  a  'real
    risk' of death or serious harm to him as an individual Hazara living in
    one of the larger cities in outside of Balochistan.


42. That is not to say that there is no risk at  all.   As  I  note  above,
    Hazaras in general have a 'collective insecurity' about their position.
      Even those living in the relative safety of affluent  Islamabad  feel
    compelled to change their routes with frequency and to take precautions
    following overt displays of  their  cultural  and  religious  identity.
    These fears clearly come  from  somewhere.  It  seems  to  me,  on  the
    evidence that I have been shown, that causes of  this  subjective  fear
    are manifold.

43. First, there is the  continuing  bloodshed  in  Balochistan.  This  was
    characterised  in  a  UK  parliamentary  debate  in  2013  as   "ethnic
    cleansing"  and  certainly  this  is  the  view  taken  by  the  Hazara
    communities themselves. The Respondent's bundle contains photographs of
    protestors outside of the parliament  building  and  Supreme  Court  in
    Islamabad holding  placards  about  the  "genocide"  being  perpetrated
    against them. The fact that this has been allowed to continue since the
    latter part of the last century no doubt informs the view taken by  the
    average Hazara about his value to the state of Pakistan.

44. Second, there is the  continuing  assault  on  Shi'a  communities  from
    militants dedicated to their destruction. Whilst a statistical analysis
    shows that the harm feared has not yet reached the proportions where it
    could be said that any Shi'a is  at  a  real  risk  of  harm,  this  is
    unlikely to be of much consolation to the people  who  live  with  that
    threat every day.

45. Third, is the ability of such groups to propagate their  hatred  in  an
    open way to a responsive audience. The Jinnah Institute  documents,  in
    its 2016 report, how leaders of banned groups have  continued  to  make
    speeches and address rallies with impunity.  That anti-Shi'a  sentiment
    can be expressed openly in Pakistan illustrates not only  that  a  good
    proportion of the Sunni population endorses it, but it also  creates  a
    chilling effect on the ability of its opponents to speak out.   It  has
    unfortunately been the greatest victory  of  the  militants  that  many
    tolerant Pakistanis are now afraid to defend the minorities  that  they
    attack.    For the individual members  of  such  groups,  this  "rising
    tide" of hostility towards them, must have very  profound  consequences
    for their sense of security.

46. Fourth, there is the dismay expressed to Ms Noon  about  the  way  that
    Hazaras are generally treated by the security services and officialdom.
    Notwithstanding that the fact that it is this community has  borne  the
    brunt of terrorist attacks in the past twenty years, it is young Hazara
    men who are immediately suspected if something does happen.  The  clear
    force of Ms  Noon's  research  was  that  Hazaras  in  general  have  a
    perception that they will suffer discrimination and unlawful denial  of
    their rights as citizens when they come into contact  with  the  state.
    For instance, any kind of official interaction with an  institution  or
    branch  of  state  in  Pakistan  requires  the  individual  to  hold  a
    'Computerised National Identity Card'.  Ms Noon records  evidence  that
    Hazaras often face discrimination and abuse in trying to  secure  these
    documents. Officials accuse them of being Afghani and refuse to  accept
    their entitlement.

47. All of these factors contribute to the sense  of  insecurity  and  fear
    experienced by Hazaras in Pakistan. I accept  with  a  high  degree  of
    certainty that the Appellant will share that experience  should  he  be
    returned.  I am however further satisfied that the subjective  fear  is
    likely for him to be particularly intense.

48. I have no evidence either way about whether a lone male stranger  would
    be welcomed into one of the Hazara communities that have been discussed
    in this case.  I am prepared to presume that Ms Isherwood is correct in
    her assumption that he would at least be tolerated, but I do so mindful
    that he is an individual with no known  connections  to  any  of  these
    places.    He left  Pakistan  at  the  age  of  16,  having  lived  the
    sheltered life of a son of a wealthy property owner.   Upon  return  he
    will not have the protection - literal or metaphorical -  of  the  high
    compound walls of the middle classes. He will be fending for himself in
    a situation entirely alien to him. He will  not  know  how  to  conduct
    himself, who to contact to get work or help, who to trust. He  will  be
    an individual attaching himself to  an  already  small  and  frightened
    community. Unlike the Hazaras who are already living in Mughal Goth  or
    Islamabad or wherever it might be, the  Appellant  has  no  friends  or
    acquaintances to whom he could turn if there was any trouble, or if  he
    was feeling particularly vulnerable.   He does not have the benefit  of
    the kinship networks discussed  by  Dr  Ballard,  whose  importance  is
    underlined by DFAT and Noon.

49. It does not appear to me that in  these  circumstances  he  could  lead
    anything like a  'normal  life'.    Hazaras  already  living  in  these
    communities have their homes,  jobs,  families  and  neighbours  around
    them: these protective factors will give them some sense of security to
    counterbalance the  oppressive  hostility  they  face  'outside'.   The
    Appellant does not have any of these protective factors.   Without  the
    connections to obtain a job commensurate  with  either  his  skills  or
    expectations he will likely find himself in low  skilled  and  insecure
    employment.  The poor  in  Pakistan  cope  with  the  irregular  income
    offered by jobs such as labouring by falling back on their families. He
    will not  have  that  option.  Irregular  employment  means  precarious
    accommodation, and that means his personal security will be undermined.
      That means that for the Appellant life is likely  to  be  very  bleak
    indeed.

50. Having considered all of the evidence I find that  internal  relocation
    would be, for this Appellant, unduly harsh.



    Decisions


51. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors of law and for
    the reasons set out by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Farrelly,  was  set
    aside to a limited extent with findings of fact preserved.


52. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee"


53. There is an order for anonymity.








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    8th
                                October 2016
