

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04857/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                        |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 20 October 2016                         |On 26 October 2016             |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                     MR MOHAMMAD SHAFIQ UZ ZAMAN ABBASI

                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Sarwar      (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni      (Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jerromes hereinafter "the Judge")  made
after a  hearing  of  30 June 2015  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision of 5 March 2015 refusing to grant him asylum or  any
other form of international protection and deciding to remove him  from  the
United Kingdom.

2.    After a hearing of 7 July 2016, I decided to set aside  the Judge's
decision because the making of that decision had involved the making  of  an
error of law.  However, I decided  to  preserve  the Judge's  findings  and
conclusions (which were adverse)  regarding  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
entitled to international protection.  That left outstanding matters  to  be
decided concerning his claimed relationship with a UK based partner and her
two UK based minor children.

My reasons for setting aside the Judge's decision

3.    The appellant had arrived for his appeal  hearing  before  the  First-
tier Tribunal without having mentioned to  his  legal  representatives  his
claimed relationship. He only informed his Counsel (not Mr Sarwar) about it
shortly prior to the time his hearing was  due  to  commence.   His  Counsel
quite properly applied for an adjournment because it was  thought  important
that the claimed partner (who was not present) should attend  to  give  oral
evidence.  The Judge declined to adjourn but did hear  oral  evidence  from
the  appellant  himself  regarding  the   relationship.    However,   having
disbelieved the appellant in  large  measure  regarding  the  claimed  facts
underpinning  the  application  for   international   protection   he   also
disbelieved him regarding the  relationship,  concluding  that  he  had  not
demonstrated that there was such a relationship.  I set the  decision  aside
because I took the view that the Judge had not adopted the proper  approach
to the adjournment request bearing in mind  what  had  been  stated  by  the
Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe (adjournment:  fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).
I decided  that  the  matters  surrounding  the  relationship  ought  to  be
reconsidered.  I did not interfere with the part of the decision  concerning
international protection and, indeed, the Judge's reasoning as to that  had
never been challenged.  More detail as to why I set the decision  aside  may
be found in my determination as to  that  issue  which  was  promulgated  on
19 July 2016.

The issues relevant to my remaking of the decision

4.    The appellant, in urging me to remake  the  decision  in  his  favour,
relied upon his  claimed  relationship  with  one  [SS]  (a  female  British
citizen)  and  her  two  infant   daughters.   They   had   been   born   on
25 February 2005 and 14 March 2008 respectively. They are  both  British
citizens.  He asserted that, whilst he was not the natural father of  either
child he was effectively their father so that  he  had  a  genuine  parental
relationship with each one. It was not contended, though, that he  would  be
able to meet any of what might be referred  to  as  the  Article 8  related
Immigration Rules contained within Appendix FM to those Rules.  Mr Sarwar
told me that such was not being argued because with respect to the  "partner
route" it was not the case that the two of them had been living together  in
a relationship akin to marriage for at least two years prior to the date  of
the application and, as to the "parental route", it  was  accepted  that  no
valid application on that basis had ever  been  made.   However,  Mr Sarwar
argued that the appeal should succeed on Article 8 grounds, with respect to
the  relationship  with  [SS]  and  the  two   children   outside   of   the
Immigration Rules and that there were "compelling reasons"  as  to  why  it
should do so.

The evidence

5.    At the hearing of 20 October 2016, when I  was  concerned  with  the
remaking of the decision, I had before me the various  documents  which  had
been relied upon by the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  also
had a bundle  of  documents  which  had  been  supplied  on  behalf  of  the
appellant immediately prior to the hearing before me of  7 July 2016  (the
hearing which led me to set the decision aside) and which included,  amongst
other things, two witness statements of the appellant (though one  was  only
concerned with the international protection issues), a witness statement  of
[SS], evidence that the two  had  had  an  Islamic  marriage  ceremony,  two
letters  written  by  the  two  children,  some  evidence  from  the  school
attended by the two children and a letter from [SS]'s GP.   I  confirm  that
in considering how to remake this decision I have looked  carefully  at  all
of the documentary evidence which has been placed before me.

6.    In addition to the documentary evidence I also had the opportunity  of
hearing oral evidence from both the appellant and [SS].  Each gave  evidence
with the  assistance  of  an  interpreter.   They  both  appeared  to  fully
understand the interpreter throughout the  course  of  the  proceedings.   I
confirm I have taken into account what they told me.

7.    The appellant's position regarding his relationship with  his  partner
and the children,  when  account  is  taken  of  his  witness  statement  of
30 June 2015 and his oral evidence to me, may be summarised as follows.

8.    He says that he first met his partner at a time when a friend  of  his
was assisting with  a  repair  to  her  central  heating  boiler.   In  oral
evidence he placed their first meeting as being towards  the  end  of  2013.
He says that, their having met, a  relationship  ensued  and  that  the  two
underwent an Islamic marriage ceremony on 24 April 2014.   He  says  that,
since that time they have  cohabited  in  a  household  which  includes  her
daughters.  He says that he assists  his  partner  because  she  has  health
difficulties which include back  pain,  arthritis,  a  hearing  problem  and
depression.  He says he has a good relationship with the  two  children  and
that they "love me a lot".  He adds that they consider him to be  their  own
father rather than a stepfather.  Their natural father has passed away.   He
claims to be involved with their schooling and says that he regularly  takes
them to and brings them home from school.

9.    In cross-examination the appellant said that he had told  his  partner
about his "asylum case"  prior  to  the  Islamic  marriage  ceremony  taking
place.  He said that she was concerned about his immigration status at  that
time and remains so now.  He had  not  mentioned  the  relationship  to  the
Home Office at an earlier stage because  a  friend  had  advised  him  that
unless the relationship had existed for two years it would not  benefit  him
from  an  immigration  perspective.   He  had  not  spoken  to   his   legal
representatives about this because he had been waiting for  the  outcome  of
his asylum case.  He had been married previously and his first wife and  his
daughter were now living in Italy.  He had last had  contact  with  them  in
2012 and had not made any subsequent attempts to find  out  where  they  are
because he is in trouble himself and is now "settled with this family".   He
had told his partner about his first wife and he does not hide  things  from
her.  He looks after her.  So far as he knows she has never  worked  in  the
UK.  She has a sister in the UK with whom she does not have contact and  she
has a maternal aunt with whom she has occasional contact.

10.   In her statement of 30 June 2016, [SS] says (see paragraph 2)  that
she met the appellant in April 2014 when he came  to  her  house  with  his
friend to fix her boiler.  She then says  "at  a  later  stage  we  mutually
agreed to move together in 2014".  She  describes  the  appellant  as  being
very supportive.  She says that  she  has  previously  been  in  an  abusive
relationship, has been the victim  of  domestic  violence  and  has  had  an
unhappy history in a number of respects.  She has health problems.  Her  two
daughters love the appellant.  She says of him he "supports  us  very  well"
and that "he has made my life very beautiful".

11.   In oral evidence she explained that she is unable to  read  or  write.
She  had  married  the  appellant  (the  Islamic   marriage   ceremony)   on
24 April 2014 but they had met at an earlier time  though  she  could  not
recall the date.  She thought it was probably  in  October  or  November  of
2013.  She thought she had known him for 2-3 months  prior  to  the  Islamic
marriage ceremony.  He had not  told  her  anything  about  his  immigration
situation, nor had she asked anything about it, prior to  the  marriage.  He
had told her that he had come to the UK as a student, that he had been  here
for "so many years", and that he "had a case going on  which  he  lost"  but
then they married.  She said that she understood  what  asylum  was  (though
she later said she didn't).  He looks after her and the children very  well.
 She receives State benefits including a benefit she chose  to  describe  as
"sick note" but which may have been a reference to  employment  and  support
allowance.  She was aware that he had had a previous marriage  and  that  he
has a daughter.  She thought that he had separated from his first wife  some
three to four years ago. She did not know where his wife and  daughter  were
but observed that "usually women go back to live with  their  parents".   He
had told her he had lost his case after the  hearing  in  June 2015.   When
asked whether he had told her about the hearing before it  took  place,  she
said that she did not know and that he might have done but she has a lot  of
tension in her head and forgets things.  In response to  some  clarification
questions put by me, she said that he had told her  that  he  did  not  have
permission to live in the UK permanently after they  had  married.   In  re-
examination she was asked what she had thought his  immigration  status  was
prior to the marriage and she said that that had not been  discussed.   When
it was put to her that the appellant had said he  had  told  her  about  his
immigration situation prior to the  marriage  she  said  that  her  previous
history has "affected my mind"  and  indicated  that  she  tends  to  forget
things.

The closing submissions of the representatives

12.   Mrs Aboni, in summary, reminded me that I would have to be  satisfied
that there were "compelling circumstances" if I were to allow the appeal  on
Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.   It  had  not  been  shown  that  the
appellant  is  in  a  genuine  relationship  with  [SS].   There  had   been
inconsistency in the evidence about when they had first met and  about  when
she knew of his precarious immigration status.   She  presented  as  a  very
vulnerable person and the  appellant  had  taken  advantage  of  that.   His
partner knows little of his background and his previous  marriage.   It  has
not been shown that  the  appellant's  relationship  with  the  children  is
genuine.  In any event, it would be reasonable to expect the  entire  family
to relocate to Pakistan.  I was urged to dismiss the appeal.

13.   Mr Sarwar accepted, as noted above,  that  the  requirements  of  the
Immigration Rules could not be satisfied.  The appellant had been  late  in
disclosing his relationship but it is plausible he  might  have  been  given
the advice by his friend that he claims he was  given.   There  has  been  a
large measure of consistency in the evidence of the two  concerning  various
aspects of the relationship.  When the two married the appellant  was  still
awaiting final adjudication regarding asylum so he was not in  a  "backs  to
the wall situation" where he might have felt a pressing need to  enter  into
a false relationship.  There was evidence from the school and  from  the  GP
which supported the proposition that the appellant's relationship  with  his
partner and her daughters was  a  genuine  one.   As  to  the  relevance  of
section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the
2002 Act"), it would not be reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the
United Kingdom.  I was urged,  in  remaking  the  decision,  to  allow  the
appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

My reasoning

14.   With respect to the matters I am called upon to  decide,  in  remaking
this decision, the  burden  of  proof  rests  upon  the  appellant  and  the
standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities.

15.   It seems to me that, logically, the first matter for  me  to  consider
and reach a view upon  is  the  genuineness  or  otherwise  of  the  claimed
romantic relationship between the appellant and [SS].  It also seems  to  me
that for me to be satisfied in this regard, I  have  to  conclude  that  the
relationship is genuine from the perspective of both  parties  to  it.   So,
if, for example, I were to  find  that  one  of  the  parties  is  genuinely
committed to the relationship but, for whatever reason, the  other  is  not,
then I would conclude, overall, that the relationship cannot be regarded  as
a genuine one for the purposes of this  appeal  and  my  evaluation  of  the
situation under Article 8.

16.    The  appellant,  as  is  not  disputed,  was  born  in  Pakistan   on
1 September 1970 and came to the UK, as a student, in October 2009 having
obtained entry clearance from  abroad.   His  leave  expired  in,  I  think,
April 2011 and he was  encountered  by  the  authorities  and  served  with
documentation as an overstayer, in July 2012 and, in that  same  month,  he
made his claim for asylum.  However, it was refused and  the Judge  decided
that he had not  told  the  truth  about  that  claim.  The Judge  attached
particular weight  to  the  appellant  not  having  claimed  asylum  at  the
earliest opportunity and not having attempted to regularise his  immigration
status until he was apprehended by the authorities after  his  lawful  leave
had expired.  The Judge also thought that the appellant had been  dishonest
about why he had not claimed earlier.   The  detailed  account  underpinning
his asylum claim, which rested upon the contention that he was at  risk  for
political  reasons,  was  rejected.   As  I  have  indicated,  the   adverse
credibility finding as to all of that was not the subject of any  challenge.
 Mr Sarwar realistically  acknowledged  that  at  the  hearing  before  me.
Although Mrs Aboni did not specifically raise this in her  submissions,  it
does seem to me that I can do nothing other than accept that  the  appellant
had chosen to pursue a false asylum claim and that he had been  prepared  to
deceive during the course of a lengthy substantive  asylum  interview  which
took place in December 2013  and  had,  similarly,  sought  to  dishonestly
pursue that same false claim at the appeal hearing. That does not  mean,  of
itself, that he is lying to me about his relationship.  It  is,  though,  an
illustration that he is capable of dishonesty if he  feels  that  such  will
benefit him.  That is something  I  do  bear  in  mind  when  assessing  the
credibility of his claims with respect to the relationship.

17.   The appellant, despite having entered  into  an  Islamic  marriage  in
April 2014, clearly did not make any mention of that  relationship  to  his
legal advisors until the morning of the hearing of 30 June 2015.   On  the
face of it, it is very surprising that if he was in  a  loving  relationship
to which he was genuinely committed, he would not raise the issue  with  his
representatives.  It would seem to be  an  obvious  thing  to  do.   He  has
offered an explanation for that which is that he had  been  advised  by  his
friend that the relationship would  not  benefit  him  from  an  immigration
perspective  unless  it  had  been  subsisting  for  two  years.    I   note
Mr Sarwar's point that it is not implausible that that sort of advice might
be given by someone who is  not  himself  well  versed  in  immigration  law
bearing in mind, I suppose, that there are a number  of  references  to  two
year periods, in the context  of  relationships,  to  be  found  within  the
Immigration Rules.  But that does not explain why the appellant would trust
such advice to the extent that he would not  even  check  it  with  his  own
solicitors.  That to my mind does point to a lack of commitment on his  part
to the  relationship.   I  think  if  he  was  genuinely  committed  to  the
relationship he would have been so concerned about the  risk  of  separation
that he would have asked his solicitor about it. There  would  have  been  a
significant imperative for him to do so.

18.   I have concluded, on the material before me, that  the  appellant  did
not offer [SS] any proper  explanation  as  to  his  precarious  immigration
status prior to the two  of  them  entering  into  the  marriage.   In  this
context,  although  the  appellant  has  filed  a   witness   statement   of
20 June 2015 in which he seeks to deal with the relationship, he makes  no
mention of his telling her about  this  at  all.   I  find  that  surprising
because one would think that, in the context of a genuine  relationship,  he
would regard the  imparting  of  such  information  as  being  a  matter  of
importance within the context of that relationship.   It  is  right  to  say
that, in his oral evidence, he said that he had told her about it  prior  to
the marriage.  However, her evidence, though she did refer  to  some  memory
difficulties, and whilst at certain points confused (not  a  criticism)  was
really to the effect that he had not done so  until  afterwards.   That  was
what she said to me when I asked her when she had first found  out  that  he
did not have permission, as I put it, "to  live  here  forever".   She  said
that they had married and "after that I knew about  that".   She  said  what
amounted to something similar in re-examination.  Although there  is  reason
to think she  can  be  somewhat  vague  about  matters  relating  to  dates,
something I will touch upon in a little more  detail  below,  I  prefer  her
version of events to his on this particular matter.  In reaching  that  view
I bear in mind his previous track record of  having  told  untruths  to  the
Home Office when seeking asylum and having also done so  at  a  hearing.  I
regard his failure (and I do find there was such a failure on his  part)  to
tell her about his precarious status prior to the marriage  to  be  damaging
to his contention that  he  is  committed  to  the  relationship.   That  is
because I think if he was committed to the relationship he would  have  told
her about his  precarious  status  prior  to  her  entering  into  a  formal
commitment to him.

19.   Mrs Aboni did urge me to conclude that  there  had  been  significant
inconsistency  in  the  evidence  regarding  when   the   relationship   had
commenced.  However, I do not think the inconsistency  in  this  regard  has
been particularly significant.  Memories do fade and,  in  truth,  there  is
little difference in saying that  the  relationship  commenced  towards  the
latter end of 2013 or that it commenced in early 2014.  So  that  is  not  a
matter I have attached any weight to.  I would also accept that [SS]  has  a
degree of difficulty with respect to  recollection.   She  claimed  to  have
such problems a number of times and there is some evidence that she  suffers
from depression which might have some form of impact in  that  regard.   She
also appears to lack, on her  own  evidence,  literacy  and  numeracy  which
might also  contribute  to  her  not  being  able  to  remember  dates  very
accurately.  That does no cause me to doubt her oral evidence that she  only
knew of his precarious status after marriage because she said that twice  at
the hearing and because there is cause to doubt the appellant's  version  of
events as to that too.  However, as I say, in looking at  the  circumstances
as a whole, I  am  not  particularly  concerned  by  the  relatively  slight
inconsistencies  there  were  as  to  the  time  of  commencement   of   the
relationship.

20.   Mr Sarwar points me to some evidence from the school and from the  GP
which  he  says  supports  the  proposition  that   there   is   a   genuine
relationship.  I accept that the letter from  the  school,  which  is  dated
20 June 2016, refers to  him  collecting  the  children  from  school  and
bringing them to  school.   I  accept  it  refers  to  him  having  attended
parents' evenings in the past.  I accept  the  GP  letter,  which  is  dated
20 October 2015, describes the appellant as  being  [SS]'s  "husband"  and
observes  that  she  "seems   to   be   dependent,   both   physically   and
psychologically" on  him.   However,  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the
respective authors of those letters are likely to have  sufficient  intimate
knowledge regarding the situation for any views they  may  have  as  to  the
nature of the relationship to be accorded significant weight.

21.   I do accept,  as  Mr Sarwar  submits,  that  there  are  elements  of
consistency in the evidence of the couple.  She was aware, for  example,  of
his previous marriage and the fact that he has a  daughter.   The  two  were
consistent that they had first met as a consequence of her boiler having  to
be  fixed.   However,  what  I  have  concerns  about,  from  a  credibility
perspective, is not the fact that the  two  live  together  but  rather  the
appellant's own genuine commitment to the relationship.  So, I  am  prepared
to accept that there is a relationship of some sort which  would  explain  a
degree of consistency in their evidence.  However, overall, I  do  not  find
that to be a matter which greatly assists the appellant.

22.   I did consider whether it might be thought,  although  the  point  was
not put in precisely this way, that the appellant's failure to  mention  the
relationship to his legal advisors at an earlier stage might be a  point  in
his favour. I say that because, on one view, one might think that if he  had
entered into the relationship for immigration purposes he  would  have  been
keen to seek to take advantage of it straightaway.  I also note Mr Sarwar's
point that he had not entered into the relationship at  a  time  when  there
was, otherwise, no hope given that matters concerning asylum  had  not  been
finally resolved. On the  other  hand,  though,  it  may  be  as  Mrs Aboni
suggests that the  appellant  was  seeking  to  simply  hedge  his  bets  by
entering a relationship which he thought might ultimately aid him if  things
did not work out with respect to asylum.

23.   In putting everything together, whilst I  appreciate  that  there  are
some arguments either way, I have not found  myself  able  to  accept  that,
from the appellant's own perspective, his relationship is a genuine one.   I
would tend to incline to the view that, from her  perspective,  it  probably
is but  as  I  have  already  indicated,  I  take  the  view  that  for  the
relationship to be accepted for immigration purposes as  a  genuine  one  it
has to be so from the point of view of each party.

24.   There is, of course, the matter of the appellant's  relationship  with
the two children.   That  is  a  matter  of  potentially  very  considerable
significance  bearing  in  mind  the  content  of  section 117B(6)  of  the
2002 Act. I would accept that the appellant, since he  shares  a  household
with the children, does have some involvement in their lives.  I would  also
accept, in light of the letter from the school,  that  he  does  often  take
them to school and bring them back from school.  However, I  have  found  he
has not been able to demonstrate that he is,  from  his  perspective,  in  a
genuine relationship with their mother.  I have found, in  effect,  that  he
is  in  that  relationship  because  he  sees  it   as   being   potentially
advantageous to him in his bid (which has been unsuccessful so  far  because
he has not been believed about his asylum claim) to remain in the UK.   That
is a matter of real significance in my evaluation of his  relationship  with
the children.  In the circumstances I cannot be satisfied that there is,  in
existence, a genuine parental relationship.

25.   It seems to me that my above findings are  fatal  to  the  appellant's
case.   It   is   accepted   that   he   does   not   succeed   within   the
Immigration Rules.  I conclude that he cannot  succeed  outside  the  Rules
given my finding that, whatever the view of [SS], his relationship with  her
and with the two children is not, from his perspective,  a  genuine  partner
relationship nor a genuine parental one.

26.   In these  circumstances,  therefore,  in  remaking  this  decision,  I
resolve matters against the appellant.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal has already  been  set  aside.   In
remaking the decision, however, I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.  None was made  by  the  First-tier Tribunal
and none has been sought before me.


Signed:                           Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway          26 October 2016


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I make no fee award.


Signed:                           Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway          26 October 2016

