
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04540/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A D
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. R. Bartram, Migrant Law Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert OBE promulgated on 9  September  2015
    in which he allowed AD's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the Secretary of State  as
    the Respondent and to AD as the Appellant, reflecting  their  positions
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "In summary, the grounds on which the respondent  seeks  permission
         to appeal complain as to: (1) the judge not  having  given  reasons
         for refusing to admit additional evidence  [primarily  relating  to
         the "Congolese Support Group"] at the hearing  on  18  August  2015
         (reference is made to the presenting officer's minute which bears a
         date of 28 August 2015 but might actually be from 18  August);  (2)
         mis-application of the country guidance  given  in  BM  and  Others
         (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] 00293  (IAC),
         circulated on 2 June 2015; (3) the judge apparently counting in the
         appellant's favour her physical appearance  before  him  -  in  the
         absence of medical  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  physical
         health problems; and (4) a failure to apply the correct  principles
         before indicating that the appellant would probably also succeed by
         reference to article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

         The grounds are arguable.  Amongst other things,  it  seems  to  me
         arguable that the judge adopted a flawed  approach  when  assessing
         the appellant's case for international protection.  For example, in
         the absence of medical evidence regarding the appellant's  physical
         health problems, the judge seems to have counted in  the  (68  year
         old) appellant's favour her physical appearance before  him  -  see
         his  paragraph  6.   And  it  was  also  the  judge's   view   that
         "Inconsistency is the hallmark of a  refugee  who  has  experienced
         traumatic   events"   (paragraph   7   of   the   decision    under
         consideration)."

 4. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives, following
    which I reserved my decision which I set out below with reasons.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Bramble relied on the grounds of appeal.

 6. Mr. Bartram submitted in relation to the first ground that there was no
    record of this request in the decision and that his note of the hearing
    recorded none of these submissions.   Notwithstanding  the  possibility
    that this evidence had been rejected, the  Respondent's  representative
    could have made submissions that it was for the Appellant to prove  her
    case.  Mr. Bartram stated that he had some documents on his file  which
    he had been given by the Respondent's representative at the hearing.

 7. In relation to the second ground he submitted that BM  and  Others  was
    not limited to members of APARECO.  The risk  category  included  those
    who were opponents of the regime and BM and Others did not  limit  this
    to APARECO.  To do so would be to overrule the case of MM (UDPS members
    - risk on return) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 00023.

 8. In relation to grounds three and four, Mr. Bartram submitted that there
    was  an  interplay  between  the  medical  evidence  and  findings   of
    credibility.  I was referred to paragraph  [6]  of  the  decision.   In
    assessing credibility the judge had taken account of  the  letter  from
    Barbara Gehrels, but this was not the sole reason that he had made  his
    credibility findings.  I  was  referred  to  the  cross-examination  in
    paragraph [11] and the analysis of the medical  evidence  in  paragraph
    [12].  The consistency of the evidence went in favour of the Appellant.
     I was referred to paragraph  [17]  where  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's evidence  was  consistent  both  internally  and  with  the
    country evidence.  At paragraph [19] the judge referred to there  being
    some issues with the case before him.  The judge  was  right  to  place
    some weight on the symptoms identified by the counsellor and on what he
    saw and heard at the hearing.

 9. In relation to the fourth ground and Article 8, it  was  not  incumbent
    upon the judge to allow the appeal on every ground, and he had  already
    allowed it on asylum grounds.

10. Mr. Bramble in his submissions stated that the first and second grounds
    of appeal were related.  The judge had to make a proper  assessment  of
    the group to which the  Appellant  claimed  to  belong,  the  Congolese
    Support  Group  ("CSG").   The  presenting  officer  provided   various
    documents which related to the witnesses who attended the hearing,  and
    some documents which related to CSG.  In paragraph [11],  page  5,  the
    judge states that the credibility of the  CSG  was  challenged  by  the
    Respondent's representative in submissions.  This was relevant  to  the
    second ground.   I was referred to paragraphs [87] and [88] of  BM  and
    Others which are the basis for the headnote.  At paragraph [87] of  the
    Upper Tribunal set out steps to be followed to ascertain the status  of
    APARECO.  It was submitted that the judge needed to go through the same
    exercise for the CSG but that he had not taken that task in hand.  This
    needed to be done to ascertain  what  weight  could  be  given  to  the
    letters of support.  The reference in paragraph [20] to  the  video  on
    the opposition website was not a sufficient basis for the analysis.

11. In relation to the third ground, limited weight should be given to  the
    letter from Barbara Gehrels.  She did not have the level  of  expertise
    necessary to make a diagnosis.  The judge  was  entitled  to  take  the
    circumstances and demeanour of the Appellant into account but there was
    no medical evidence before the judge regarding the physical aspects  of
    her claimed medical problems.  The  statement  at  paragraph  [7]  that
    "inconsistency is a hallmark of a refugee who has experienced traumatic
    events" was a preconceived notion in showed that the judge had "put the
    cart before the horse".

12. In relation to the fourth ground although the judge did not  allow  the
    appeal under Article 8, in paragraph [23] he all but allowed  it  under
    Article 8 outside the rules.  There was not a sufficient assessment  in
    paragraph [23] to reach that conclusion.

13. Mr. Bartram responded that the statement referred to in  paragraph  [7]
    was not a conclusion, and the judge was only setting out the test which
    he would apply.  In relation  to  the  evidence  of  physical  problems
    referred to in paragraph [18], the judge found that there may  well  be
    little by way of medical evidence of such an experience  but  that  the
    psychological consequences were what remained.

14. In relation to the legitimacy of  the  CSG,  the  grounds  referred  to
    APARECO.  It was clear that APARECO mattered to  the  DRC  authorities.
    In paragraph  [20]  of  the  decision  the  judge  found  there  was  a
    possibility that the video would have  been  seen.   The  question  was
    whether the CSG opposed the government, which they  did,  and  on  that
    basis there was a serious possibility that the government would take it
    out against the Appellant.   The structure of the CSG as  set  out  was
    sufficient.

Error of law

Grounds 1 and 2

15. In relation to the first ground, there is no reference in the  decision
    to any attempt by the Respondent's  representative  to  submit  further
    documents in relation to the witnesses or to  the  CSG.   There  is  no
    record of any application in the Record of  Proceedings.   Mr.  Bartram
    stated that he had no record of any submissions being made, although he
    was in possession of some documents which had been given to him by  the
    Respondent's  representative  at  the  hearing.   There  were  no  such
    documents on the Tribunal file, but given the claim of  the  presenting
    officer that they had not been admitted, I would  not  expect  to  have
    found them.

16. It is troubling that the evidence of what occurred at the hearing is so
    different, with  the  Respondent's  representative  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stating that she attempted to  submit  further  documents  but
    there being no record  of  this  in  the  decision  or  the  Record  of
    Proceedings.  There is a reference in the decision to submissions being
    made by the Respondent's representative challenging the credibility  of
    the CSG [11], but there is no reference to the basis on  which  it  was
    challenged, nor any reference to supporting evidence.

17. The judge states in paragraph [11] that the CSG letter "simply  details
    the current family structure with the appellant living with her son and
    two grandchildren, setting out that the group organised a public  march
    from the DRC Embassy in the UK up to  10  Downing  Street  on  30  June
    2015."  He then continues to set out further details of what is in  the
    letter.  At first the decision implies that it is a letter which simply
    sets out the Appellant's family structure, but as the judge goes on  to
    detail its contents, it is clear that the letter goes beyond  a  simple
    description of the Appellant's family circumstances.  Although referred
    to, there are no details of the Respondent's representative's challenge
    to the CSG's credibility in the decision or the Record of  Proceedings,
    and there is no further analysis of the CSG in the decision.

18. As submitted by Mr. Bramble, the issue of the credibility of the CSG is
    relevant to the second ground of appeal.  This relates to  the  judge's
    failure to give reasons for his findings  as  to  why  the  authorities
    would have viewed the CSG website, and why  therefore  the  Appellant's
    sur place activities would be known to the DRC authorities.  It relates
    directly to the  judge's  failure  to  make  findings  to  support  the
    proposition that the DRC authorities had any adverse  interest  in  the
    CSG.

19. The Respondent refers to the case of BM and Others in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  Paragraph [87] starts "We address  the  discrete  question  of
    risk to those who are considered to be opponents of the  Kabila  regime
    by reason of their sur place activities in the  United  Kingdom."   The
    decision then turns to an analysis of APARECO, which was  the  relevant
    opposition group in the case of BM  and  Others.   This  leads  to  the
    finding as set out in paragraph (iii) of the headnote that:

         "Persons who have a significant and visible profile within  APARECO
         (UK) are at real risk of persecution for  a  Convention  reason  or
         serious harm or treatment proscribed by Article 3 ECHR by virtue of
         falling within one of the risk categories identified by  the  Upper
         Tribunal in MM (UDPS Members - Risk on Return) DRC CG [2007]  UKAIT
         00023.  Those belonging to this category include persons  who  are,
         or are perceived to be, leaders, office bearers and  spokespersons.
         As a general rule, mere rank and file members are unlikely to  fall
         within this category.  However, each case will be  fact  sensitive,
         with particular attention directed  to  the  likely  knowledge  and
         perceptions of DRC state agents."

20. BM and Others finds that those with a visible  profile  within  APARECO
    are at real risk of persecution because they fall  within  one  of  the
    risk categories identified in MM as opponents  of  the  Kabila  regime.
    However, there is no analysis here of the CSG and no findings  that  it
    is perceived in a similar way to APARECO.  I find  that,  in  order  to
    ascertain whether the Appellant fell within one of the risk  categories
    identified in MM, it was  incumbent  on  the  judge  to  carry  out  an
    assessment of the CSG along similar lines to the assessment of  APARECO
    in BM and Others.  It is clear from the decision  that  the  Respondent
    had concerns about the credibility  of  the  CSG,  but  these  are  not
    addressed, and the status of the CSG is not  given  any  consideration.
    This goes  to  establishing  whether  the  Appellant  had  a  political
    profile, actual or perceived, which was likely to have brought  her  to
    the adverse attention of the DRC authorities.

21. In paragraph [11], when  setting  out  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    Appellant, the judge quotes from the CSG letter:

         "The letter finally confirmed  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had
         joined the strategic team of  the  Congo  Support  Group  in  White
         Chapel and, because of her high profile views and presence  on  the
         website recording a video, would be at serious risk in the DR Congo
         if she were returned."

22. In paragraph [20] the judge finds that there is a real  risk  that  the
    Appellant's video which was on the CSG website would have been seen  by
    the authorities.   However,  he  gives  no  reasons  for  why  the  DRC
    authorities would be interested in, or aware of, the CSG  website.   He
    makes general  statements  about  the  "resourcefulness  of  forces  of
    repression in  Africa  and  elsewhere",  without  making  any  specific
    findings relating to the CSG.  He makes no reference to the CSG letter.

23. BM and Others held in relation to APARECO that, as a general rule, mere
    rank and file members are unlikely to fall within this  risk  category.
    It held that "those belonging to this category include persons who are,
    or are perceived to be, leaders, office bearers and spokespersons."  It
    also acknowledges that each case will be fact sensitive with particular
    attention directed to the likely knowledge and perceptions of  the  DRC
    state agents.

24. There is no finding in the decision that the Appellant is anything more
    than a rank and file member of the CSG.  Although when setting out  the
    evidence the judge quotes from the CSG letter  which  states  that  the
    Appellant is a member of the strategic team of the CSG in  Whitechapel,
    there is no  analysis  of  what  this  means.   Neither  is  there  any
    attention directed to the "likely knowledge and perceptions of the  DRC
    state agents".  As set out above [21] there is no assessment of the CSG
    so as to lead to any findings  that  the  DRC  state  agents  would  be
    interested in it.

25. I find that the judged erred in failing to give  reasons  for  why  the
    authorities would have viewed the CSG website.  There  are  no  reasons
    given for why the  DRC  authorities  have  any  interest  in  the  CSG.
    Further, there is no finding that the Appellant is anything more than a
    supporter of the CSG.

26. I find that the judge has not established that the CSG is on a par with
    APARECO such that involvement with the  CSG  would  be  regarded  in  a
    similar way to involvement with APARECO.  Clearly central to this issue
    is the Respondent's challenge to the credibility of the  CSG,  and  any
    evidence which the Respondent may have to support her submissions.   It
    is unsatisfactory that this extra evidence was in the possession of the
    Appellant's representative, and  that  there  was  such  a  discrepancy
    between the recollection of the presenting officer and  the  record  of
    proceedings.

27. This failure to give  reasons  is  material  as,  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant falls within the risk category identified in  BM  and  Others
    with reference to MM, is determinative of whether  or  not  her  asylum
    claim succeeds.

Ground 3

28. In relation to the other grounds, the  judge  was  aware  that  Barbara
    Gehrels was not a recognised qualified professional capable of making a
    diagnosis of PTSD.  As accepted by Mr. Bramble, the judge was  entitled
    to take the circumstances and demeanour of the Appellant into  account,
    and also to take into account the  evidence  of  Barbara  Gehrels.   In
    paragraphs [8] and [12] the judge accepts that there are limitations on
    the degree of weight that can be given to the report.

29. In paragraph [18] the judge states that as it happened in  2009  "there
    may well be little by way of certain medical physical evidence".  He is
    aware that the timelapse will have affected the  possibility  of  there
    being  corroborative  medical  evidence  relating   to   her   physical
    condition.  I find, as accepted by Mr. Bramble, that he was entitled to
    take the Appellant's physical appearance and demeanour before him  into
    account.

30.  It  was  submitted  that  in  paragraph  [7]  when  the  judge  states
    "inconsistency is a hallmark of a refugee who has experienced traumatic
    events", this was not a finding but rather the judge  setting  out  the
    test that would apply.  However I  find  that  this  has  affected  his
    approach towards the evidence which was before  him,  and  towards  any
    inconsistencies in the evidence.  Rather  than  assessing  all  of  the
    evidence and then coming to a conclusion as to the inconsistencies,  he
    has  approached   the   evidence   from   the   standpoint   that   any
    inconsistencies will lend towards a positive credibility finding.



Ground 4

31. Although the judge did not expressly allow the Appellant's appeal under
    Article 8, he did make findings in  paragraph  [23]  that  her  removal
    would be "highly likely to be disproportionate to the need to  maintain
    immigration control".  However he made this  finding  without  carrying
    out a proper assessment of her Article 8 claim.  There is no assessment
    of paragraph 117B which is  necessary  when  making  a  finding  as  to
    proportionality.  Although the appeal was not allowed under Article  8,
    to make such a statement without having made any findings  is  not  the
    correct approach.

Decision

The decision involves the making of an error on a point of law and I set  it
aside.  No findings are preserved.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date 26 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

