
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04595/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 6 January 2015                             |On 15 January 2015           |
|Prepared on 12 January 2015                   |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    E. N.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  the  DRC  who  entered  the  United
         Kingdom  unlawfully.  His  asylum  claim  in  September  2013   was
         rejected, and a decision to remove him to the DRC  was  accordingly
         made on 19 June 2014. His appeal against that removal decision  was
         then dismissed by  decision  of  Judge  Kempton  promulgated  on  6
         October 2014.

      2.  The  Appellant  duly  applied  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal, which was granted  by  Judge  Ransley  on  13
         November 2014 on the basis it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  had
         accepted core elements of the claim and had thus failed to consider
         the appeal in the light of the principles set out in HJ (Iran).

      3. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice  on  24  November  2014.  She
         argued that the grounds were misconceived, because  the  Judge  had
         directed herself  appropriately  and  on  a  fair  reading  of  the
         decision had rejected the core account of being the subject  of  an
         arrest warrant, and of being wanted by the security services in the
         DRC.

      4. Neither party has formally applied  for  permission  to  rely  upon
         further evidence pursuant to Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
         Procedure Rules 2008.

      5. Thus the matter comes before me.

    The grounds

      6. The grounds asserted that the Judge accepted the  majority  of  the
         Appellant's  account.  Ms  Pickering  accepted  in  the  course  of
         argument that it was extremely difficult to discern from the  style
         in which the  decision  was  written  when  the  Judge  was  simply
         detailing the evidence before her in  any  particular  passage,  as
         opposed to making a specific finding of  fact.  In  particular  she
         accepted that (despite its heading) she could  not  categorise  the
         whole of the passage comprising paragraphs 18-51 as being a  series
         of findings of fact. Moreover she  accepted  that  there  was  very
         limited use of what might be termed the standard language in  which
         a finding of fact was ordinarily made. Although that language could
         be identified in paragraphs 37 and 38, it could  not  be  found  in
         paragraph 23. Read in context therefore she accepted that paragraph
         23 appeared to be no more that a discussion of the way in which the
         Appellant's case was put.

      7. There is no dispute before me over the fact that the Judge accepted
         the Appellant had worked for the  organisation  he  named,  in  the
         capacity he had identified.  Nor  over  the  fact  that  the  Judge
         specifically rejected his claim to be  the  subject  of  an  arrest
         warrant, or to have been the subject of any attempt by the security
         services to arrest him. As  Ms  Pickering  accepted,  these  latter
         points were significant adverse findings, which rejected a key part
         of his account as dishonest.

      8. Ultimately Ms Pickering put the Appellant's case in  the  following
         way. She accepted;

          i) that there was no free standing HJ (Iran) point,

         ii) that the grounds of the application for permission  to  appeal
             raised no challenge to the Determination on the basis  it  was
             incomprehensible or perverse (although she reserved the  right
             to argue elsewhere on another occasion that it was),

        iii) that the grounds did not challenge  the  adverse  findings  in
             relation to the Appellant's claim to  be  the  subject  of  an
             arrest warrant.

      9. In  the  circumstances  Ms  Pickering  summarised  the  Appellant's
         complaint as a failure on the part of the Judge to make an adequate
         assessment  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  the  light  of  the
         background evidence,  and  thus  a  failure  to  make  an  adequate
         assessment of risk. Had the Judge done so then it was  argued  that
         she would have been bound (despite  her  rejection  of  the  arrest
         warrant) to have reached the conclusion that the Appellant  was  at
         risk of harm upon return to the DRC.

     10. For the Respondent Ms Rackstraw argued that although  the  decision
         was not particularly well  drafted  it  did  allow  the  reader  to
         identify that the key parts of the Appellant's  evidence  had  been
         rejected as untrue, and the Judge's reasons  for  doing  so.  Those
         reasons were adequate. This necessarily meant that although it  was
         accepted that the Appellant had worked for the organisation  named,
         in the capacity identified, he had acquired no adverse profile with
         the authorities in the DRC prior to departure upon which  they  had
         sought to act. He had done nothing subsequently to create one,  and
         it followed that he faced no risk of harm upon return.

     11. In order to establish that he did face a risk of harm therefore the
         Appellant would have needed to establish that he  had  acquired  an
         adverse profile with the authorities in the DRC prior to  departure
         upon which they had not sought to act, despite having the means and
         opportunity to do so. Moreover despite that  historic  stance,  and
         without any obvious reason for it to change, he  had  to  establish
         that the adverse profile was such that there was a real  risk  that
         the authorities in the DRC  would  now  seek  to  act  upon  it  by
         detaining him.

    Conclusion

     12. It was central to the Appellant's case that his activities  in  the
         course of his employment within the DRC had  come  to  the  adverse
         attention of the authorities,  causing  them  to  issue  an  arrest
         warrant against him, and, to take active steps to  seek  to  arrest
         him at his home in Kinshasa. Whatever criticisms can fairly be made
         of the style  in  which  the  decision  has  been  written,  it  is
         ultimately not in dispute that the Judge rejected those claims, and
         that she gave adequate reasons for doing so. Those adverse findings
         of primary fact were central to the way in which the Appellant  put
         his case, and they are not the subject of challenge before me.

     13. It was central to the Appellant's case that the manner in which  he
         performed his employment in the DRC had lead to  his  acquiring  an
         adverse political profile. If  that  were  so,  his  identity,  and
         employer, would always have been well known to the DRC authorities.
         It followed that they would  have  had  ample  opportunity  to  act
         against him, had they wished to do so.

     14.  The  Appellant's  case  is  therefore  that,  notwithstanding  the
         dishonest element to the way in which he put his  claim,  a  proper
         analysis of the background evidence in relation to  the  DRC  would
         have  led  the  Judge  to  the  conclusion  that  the   Appellant's
         activities in the course of his employment had created  an  adverse
         political profile as a critic of the government,  albeit  one  upon
         which the authorities in the DRC had not yet acted  to  take  steps
         against him before his lawful departure, but that nevertheless they
         would be likely to do so in the event of return.

     15. Once the Appellant's case is reduced to those terms it is plain  in
         my judgement that the criticisms that are advanced of the  decision
         are no more than a disagreement with it, and identify  no  material
         error of law. Thus notwithstanding the terms in which permission to
         appeal was granted, there is no merit in the grounds.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 6
    October 2014  contains  no  error  of  law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside  and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.







    Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 12 January 2015





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.







    Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 12 January 2015
