
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04834/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                            ARSALAN MORVARIDNEJAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M D Templeton, of Quinn Martin & Langan,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 5 May  1991.   He  has  not
    sought an anonymity order.  He appeals against a decision by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D H Clapham, promulgated on 6 August 2015.

 2. The centrepiece of the appellant's claim is that he was  convicted  and
    sentenced by the Revolutionary Court for converting to Zoroastrianism.

 3. At paragraph 67 the judge said:

         "I accept the fact that the appellant received a summons which  may
         have frightened him particularly given the fact that it appears  to
         have come from the Revolutionary Court but there are  a  number  of
         aspects of this evidence which give me concern."

 4. Some concerns are set out at paragraphs 68 and 69, and are  perhaps  to
    be derived also from earlier parts of  the  determination.   The  judge
    continues at paragraph 70:

         "I accept that he has only copies of the alleged documents and that
         there may be valid reasons for this ... but taking all the evidence
         in the round, because  of  the  above  inconsistencies,  I  am  not
         placing significant weight on these documents."

 5. Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek granted permission,  on  the  view  that
    arguably there was a lack of clear findings on the claim of having been
    convicted and sentenced by the Revolutionary Court.

 6. The Presenting Officer did not seek to argue that the findings  on  the
    point were clear.

 7. I uphold the submission that the findings are  legally  inadequate,  on
    the central aspect of the claim.

 8. Mr Templeton suggested, somewhat  faintly,  that  there  were  positive
    findings about receipt of the summons which ought to be preserved;  but
    I am unable to interpret the determination in that way.

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   There  are
    no findings to be preserved.  Under section 12(ii)(b)(i)  of  the  2007
    Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of  judicial  fact
    finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    member(s) of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case  are
    not to include Judge D H Clapham.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           5 February 2016


