
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA049092015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 April 2016                             |On 10 June 2016               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                    [S A]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, instructed by March & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka.  She appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision of  13  March
    2015 refusing to grant asylum and giving  directions  for  her  removal
    from the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in  June  2009  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant.   She  was  granted
    further leave to remain in the same category on 23 February 2011, valid
    until 30 April 2014.  She returned to Sri Lanka  three  times,  between
    March and April 2011, between  June  and  August  2011  and  between  6
    September and 6 October 2013.  On 26 October  2013  she  contacted  the
    respondent in order to request an appointment with the Asylum Screening
    Unit and attended an appointment on  26  November  2013  at  which  she
    claimed asylum.

3.   The claim for asylum arose from the fact that  the  appellant  and  her
    cousin were  both  arrested  and  detained  separately  in  Colombo  in
    September 2013.  She claimed to have been interrogated on suspicion  of
    funding the resurgence of the LTTE and was ill-treated.  Her cousin was
    previously a member of the LTTE and had been arrested and subjected  to
    retraining before being rehabilitated within the  community.   She  had
    been arrested when she had left her family home to visit him and assist
    in his charitable work.  While in  the  United  Kingdom  she  had  been
    remitting funds to Sri Lanka to assist displaced and  needy  people  in
    Sri Lanka and her cousin had been the person who dealt with  the  funds
    for that purpose.  In the past  she  had  been  arrested  in  2009  and
    questioned in connection with air tickets issued to members of the LTTE
    who had been intercepted in possession of those tickets and seeking  to
    leave Sri Lanka.  When detained in 2013, she had been held  for  a  day
    and then released and thereafter obtained the student visa and came  to
    the United Kingdom.

4.   Her two earlier visits to Sri Lanka were uneventful.  In February  2011
    the college at which she was studying was suspended  and  she  had  not
    studied since that date.  At the first interview she said she  attended
    a second college but it was closed in 2012 and she had been working  in
    the United Kingdom subsequently.

5.   The appellant was released after the intervention of  a  solicitor  and
    with her uncle's help.  The release was on conditions of reporting  and
    her Sri Lankan national ID was retained by the police who demanded  the
    surrender of her passport in order to prevent her leaving  the  country
    as a condition of the return of the ID.  In fact she did not  surrender
    her passport and made no attempt to recover her ID.  She did not report
    as required but left Sri Lanka two  days  later  and  returned  to  the
    United Kingdom with the assistance through departure formalities of  an
    agent who made the necessary arrangements.

6.   She claimed that on return to the United Kingdom she  said  she  wished
    to claim asylum but was told that since she had valid  leave  to  enter
    she could enter and claim  asylum  in  due  course  and  no  claim  was
    recorded  at  the  airport  and  she  was  allowed  to  proceed.    She
    subsequently made  the  appointment  to  claim  asylum  at  the  Asylum
    Screening Unit to which I have referred above.  Through  her  solicitor
    her uncle had obtained copies of summonses and an arrest warrant  which
    were provided to the Tribunal.

7.   The judge did not accept that she had made an asylum  claim  on  return
    as, had she disclosed that she  wished  to  claim  asylum  it  was  not
    probable, as he put it, that she would have been permitted entry  on  a
    student visa without at least an investigation as to  whether  she  was
    engaged in studies.  He thought it was likely that  curtailment  action
    would have been taken in respect of the visa and she would perhaps have
    been admitted with temporary admission for the purposes of  making  her
    claim or even that the claim might have been recorded and initiated  at
    the port.  He  considered  that  this  adverse  finding  gave  rise  to
    considerable cause  for  caution.   He  noted  documentation,  and  the
    absence of any challenge to  the  documentation  on  the  part  of  the
    respondent, relating to the appellant's former employment in Sri  Lanka
    and that she had worked for the NGO World Vision and then for a  travel
    organisation, and also  accepted  what  she  said  about  her  cousin's
    history with the LTTE and his retraining and rehabilitation.   He  also
    accepted that she had been interrogated in 2009.

8.   As regards the summonses and the arrest warrant the judge did not  find
    these credible on the basis that there was no reason for  summonses  to
    be issued for her to attend court as the authorities  would  have  been
    aware by that time that she had left Sri Lanka and it was not  credible
    that there could have been attempts by  court  process  to  secure  her
    attendance at court.  She must have been known to be a fugitive outside
    Sri Lanka.  As regards the alleged arrest warrant  it  was  a  document
    addressed to a police officer requiring him  to  arrest  a  person  and
    there was no possibility of such a document being served on any  person
    other than the arrested person on  the  occasion  of  the  arrest.   He
    considered that a good  explanation  was  required  to  show  how  such
    documents could have come into the possession of the appellant  or  her
    representatives in Sri Lanka and he found that explanation  lacking  in
    credibility, largely because the solicitor said in his letter  that  he
    was told in December 2013 by the appellant's uncle of the  issue  of  a
    warrant of arrest but on the face  of  it  the  warrant  was  allegedly
    issued only in November 2014.  The other documents including  a  letter
    from a second attorney and an alleged Justice of  the  Peace  were  not
    regarded as adding anything of assistance.

9.   The judge also did not accept that the authorities would have  released
    the appellant without the surrender of her passport if  it  had  indeed
    been required.  A  newspaper  clipping  purporting  to  report  on  her
    arrest, release and flight dated 24  June  2015  was  thought  to  lack
    credibility since there was no good reason why it should  be  published
    nearly two years after the event and it was a relatively  insignificant
    story.  The judge also found lacking in credibility  the  claim  to  be
    involved in sur place activities since the document  from  the  British
    Tamils Forum welcoming her as a member from 4 August 2015  was  clearly
    the welcome of a new member with information as to  the  activities  of
    the organisation in contrast to her claim to have been a supporter  for
    years and to have been active.  Accordingly the  central  core  of  the
    claim was rejected and the appellant was found to lack credibility  and
    her appeal was as a consequence dismissed.

10.  The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was initially refused by a First-tier Judge but subsequently permission
    was granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge.

11.  In his submissions Mr Mannan made the point  at  the  outset  that  the
    appellant was not present today as she was experiencing  problems  with
    her pregnancy and  was  unable  therefore  to  attend  and  there  were
    therefore no clear instructions as to the directions made by the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge that she should  be  prepared  for  the  decision  being
    remade if an error of law was found.  He argued that in  any  event  it
    was an appropriate case for remittal if the Tribunal were in  agreement
    with his submissions.

12.  Otherwise Mr  Mannan  relied  on  and  developed  points  made  in  the
    grounds.  He argued with regard to the supposedly fatal  error  of  the
    date in the solicitor's letter that  it  was  clearly  a  typographical
    error since there were  references  thereafter  to  the  summons  being
    issued  in  July  and  August  2014.   A  further  problem   with   the
    determination was that with regard to paragraph 16 of the documentation
    there was no Home Office challenge  to  the  documents  and  they  were
    accepted as  reliable.   The  judge  had  then  failed  to  take  those
    documents into account and they were part of the central  core  of  the
    appellant's claim.  With regard to the  summonses  and  arrest  warrant
    referred to at paragraph 18, these had never  been  challenged  by  the
    Home Office and if they had been, the burden would  have  been  on  the
    Home Office.  The judge said it was not possible that the summons would
    have been issued but it had been and  it  was  followed  by  an  arrest
    warrant and this was perfectly plausible.   Also  with  regard  to  the
    newspaper clipping there was no Home Office challenge to  that  either.
    The judge had not accepted the document from the British Tamils  Forum.
    This was problematic as the judge had failed to take into  account  the
    appellant's active involvement since entry into the United Kingdom  and
    that was her evidence which had not been factored in.   It  was  unfair
    not to accept that she had made a claim for asylum on her return.   She
    had sought to book an appointment and that was the system and that  had
    not been factored in at all and it was wrong also to say  that  it  was
    connected with the expiry of her visa as in fact that was  not  due  to
    take place for another six or seven months.  It was incorrect that  the
    visa would not be renewed as the Home Office had suspended the  college
    and knew she was seeking another place and her  leave  had  never  been
    curtailed.  The determination was therefore unsafe.

13.  In his submissions Mr Walker  argued  that  the  judge  came  to  clear
    conclusions which were open to him about the documents.  The  newspaper
    article had only  been  submitted  before  the  hearing  date  and  the
    Secretary of State could not have considered it.  The  main  point  was
    that the judge had made clear findings which were open to  him  on  the
    documents and the challenge was a matter of disagreement only.

14.  By way of reply Mr Mannan argued that it was  more  than  disagreement.
    Paragraph 20 of the refusal letter set  out  the  evidence  before  the
    Secretary of State and this was not referred to by the judge  or  given
    any weight.  If the Home Office had doubts about the newspaper  at  the
    hearing then they could have sought an adjournment.  The main point was
    that after her return to the United Kingdom the respondent was told  of
    the summons and the arrest warrant and they were produced  to  her  and
    they were not challenged as being dishonestly obtained.  The judge  had
    taken it onto himself to come to a decision about them.  There  was  an
    error in the date by the judge and by the solicitor at paragraph 20 and
    therefore the basis for the conclusions at paragraph 25 was wrong.  The
    core of the claim remained sustainable and there was required to  be  a
    proper consideration and clear findings with regard  to  the  documents
    including the newspapers.  The assertions  by  the  judge  for  example
    about remittances were clearly wrong and there was  a  need  for  clear
    findings on both core and peripheral matters.

15.  I reserved my determination.

16.  I will deal with the points that Mr  Mannan  raised  in  the  order  in
    which he raised them.  I address first the point about the  solicitor's
    letter and the alleged discrepancy about  dates.   In  his  letter  the
    attorney  Mr  Selvarasa  refers  to  having  been  instructed  by   the
    appellant's uncle to represent and secure her  release  after  she  was
    detained by the authorities on 14 September 2013.  He goes  on  to  say
    that in the month of December 2013 her uncle had contacted him and said
    that police officers had visited her home and informed that they wanted
    to arrest her and the court had issued an arrest warrant  against  her.
    The arrest warrant is however dated 11 November 2014.  I have found  no
    reference in that letter to the summons being issued in July and August
    2014.  In any event a summons is different from an arrest  warrant.   I
    consider the judge was perfectly entitled to attach significance to the
    discrepancy in that letter, in that it is clear that the  attorney  was
    saying that the arrest warrant had been issued at a  time  some  eleven
    months prior to the issue of the warrant.  The  reference  to  December
    2013 in the letter cannot be regarded as  simply  a  mistake,  and  the
    judge was entitled to treat it as he did.

17.  The matters in respect of which the judge found  the  appellant  to  be
    credible at paragraph 16 relate to her former employment in  Sri  Lanka
    and her claim that she had a  cousin  who  was  in  the  LTTE  and  had
    undergone retraining and rehabilitation and that she  was  interrogated
    by the Sri Lankan authorities in 2009.  I consider it was open  to  the
    judge to find that these matters, although they were in the appellant's
    favour, did not add weight to the central core  of  her  account.   The
    summonses and the warrant are not referred to in  the  decision  letter
    and I can only assume that they  were  not  before  the  decision-maker
    since they seem to have appeared first under cover of a  letter  of  13
    August 2015, a week before the hearing before the judge.  There  cannot
    therefore be said to have been a  failure  by  the  respondent  not  to
    address these points in the decision letter.  The judge does  not  note
    in  his decision the points made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing, but I consider that it was properly open to  him  to  consider
    the credibility of the summonses and the arrest warrant and to  express
    the doubts that  he  did  at  paragraph  18  of  the  determination  in
    particular.  It was open to him to consider that bearing in  mind  that
    the Sri Lankan intelligence sources are said to be sophisticated,  they
    would not have been unaware of the fact of her flight and therefore  to
    conclude as he did as to the futility of the issuing of  the  summonses
    and the fact that the arrest warrant would not be served on any  person
    other than the person who the judge was entitled to find they must have
    realised would have left Sri Lanka by then.  Of greater significance is
    the point at paragraph 22 about  the  passport.   It  was  in  my  view
    perfectly open to the judge to consider that it was inconceivable  that
    the appellant would have been released without her passport first being
    surrendered if it had in fact been required.  The authorities must have
    been aware that the appellant might do what in fact  she  actually  did
    and get hold  of  her  passport  and  leave  the  country  rather  than
    reporting.  It was therefore open to the  judge  to  find  this  was  a
    matter adverse to the appellant's credibility.

18.  Again the concerns about the  newspaper  clippings  were  open  to  the
    judge.  It was open to him to find no good reason  why  an  independent
    newspaper would publish such a matter nearly two years after the event,
    bearing in mind that it was  a  relatively  insignificant  story.   The
    letter from the British Tamils Forum dated 4  August  2015  is  as  the
    judge said, written as the welcoming of a new member  with  information
    as to the activities of the organisation which does not sit  well  with
    the appellant's claim to have been a supporter for years  and  to  have
    been active, and accordingly it was again open to  the  judge  to  take
    this into account in assessing credibility.  As regards  the  point  at
    paragraph 20 of the refusal letter  concerning  the  appellant's  claim
    that when questioned  she  was  asked  about  her  tattoo  and  beaten,
    together with the photographs she provided showing images of  her  arms
    and legs showing signs of multiple  scarring,  the  judge  referred  at
    paragraph 26 to the fact that the appellant might  have  scars  on  her
    lower limbs but it was false to say that these  had  ever  aroused  the
    suspicion of the authorities and it seems that she was asked about  the
    tattoo rather than the scars.

19.  Bringing these matters together, I considered that it was open  to  the
    judge to entertain  the  doubts  that  he  did  about  the  appellant's
    credibility.  There is no indication that the appellant  was  taken  by
    surprise or disadvantaged in any way by the judge taking  these  points
    as they were matters that were before him at the  hearing  rather  than
    points that had been raised to the Secretary of State which  she  could
    have  addressed  in  the  decision  letter.   The  adverse  credibility
    findings were fully open  to  the  judge,  and  as  a  consequence  his
    decision dismissing this appeal is endorsed.  The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 10 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

