
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04101/2014
                                                               AA/04102/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 25th August 2015                  |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 M A K & N M
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Blundell (instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1.   This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  by  the
         Secretary of State in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Designated Judge McClure) promulgated  on  5th
         November 2014 by which he allowed the Appellants' asylum appeals.

    2.   The Appellants in the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  were
         husband and wife who had claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  their
         Ahmadi faith.  They are Pakistan nationals.  Their  three  children
         claimed as their dependants.

    3.   They arrived in the UK in 2011 with visit visas and claimed asylum
         three weeks after arrival.  Their applications were refused by  the
         Secretary of State.  They appealed and their  appeals  came  before
         Judge  Levin  who  dismissed  their  appeals  in  a   determination
         promulgated in April 2012.

    4.   The Appellants made further submissions to the Secretary of  State
         who treated the submissions as a fresh claim but refused it on  5th
         June 2014.  Additionally the Secretary of State made  decisions  to
         remove the family on 10th June 2014.

    5.   The Appellants appealed against the removal  decisions  on  asylum
         grounds and the appeals came before  Designated  Judge  McClure  on
         22nd July 2014.

    6.   The claim before Designated Judge McClure was that they  would  be
         unable to practise their faith openly as  Ahmadis  because  Ahmadis
         are widely persecuted in Pakistan.

    7.   Designated Judge McClure referred to Judge  Levin's  determination
         having noted that Devaseelan [2003] Imm  AR  1  applied.   He  also
         referred himself to the latest Country Guidance case of  MN  &  Ors
         (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389
         (IAC) and set out the guidance contained therein.

    8.   So far as Judge  Levin's  determination  is  concerned  Designated
         Judge  McClure  indicated  that  his  determination  stood  as   an
         assessment of the claim at the  time  of  the  determination.   The
         first determination was the starting point, save and except that he
         could review the facts where there was additional evidence.

    9.    He  then  set  out  the  details  and  findings  of   the   first
         determination.  Judge Levin had identified that the core issue  was
         the credibility of the First Appellants' claim that he had preached
         his faith to another in Pakistan and  as  a  consequence  had  been
         targeted.  He found that the first  Appellant's  own  evidence  was
         that he had faced no significant problems in Pakistan as  a  result
         of his claimed conversion of another to  the  Ahmadi  faith.     He
         concluded that there was no reasonable likelihood  that  the  first
         Appellant's  claim  was  true;  namely  that   there   were   court
         proceedings or a Fatwa issued against him and  found  that  he  had
         fabricated his story as to what had occurred in Pakistan.

    10.  Judge Levin went on to find that as ordinary members of the Ahmadi
         faith, as he found the Appellants to be, they would not be at  risk
         in Pakistan based on the then Country Guidance of MJ & ZM  (Ahmadis
         - risk) Pakistan CG [2008] UKAIT 00033.

    11.  Designated Judge McClure, having set out Judge Levin's findings in
         detail then set out the evidence  before  him.  He  looked  at  the
         evidence of the Appellant's activities in the UK.

    12.  At paragraph  45  Designated  Judge  McClure  found  that  various
         documents produced, that originated in Pakistan,  were  created  in
         order to support the asylum claim and attached no weight to them.

    13.  At paragraph 46 he found no reason  to  go  behind  Judge  Levin's
         findings and that his reasons for rejecting the  claim  about  what
         had occurred in Pakistan were valid.

    14.  At paragraph 50 Designated Judge McClure identified that he needed
         to consider whether the Appellants would  be  at  further  risk  if
         returned now on the basis that the first Appellant claimed that  he
         would want to preach in Pakistan and be  active  in  promoting  his
         faith.

    15.  At paragraph 53 Designated Judge McClure reminded himself that  he
         needed to consider whether his activities in  the  UK,  as  in  the
         past, were designed to create a claim for  asylum  and  whether  he
         would in fact preach and seek to promote his faith in Pakistan.

    16.  The Designated Judge noted that the first Appellant was seeking to
         involve himself in the Ahmadiyya Association in the  UK  and  there
         was evidence from that organisation to that effect.  He noted  that
         the first Appellant was not merely just involving  himself  in  the
         observance of his religion but was positively  seeking  to  promote
         his beliefs to others.

    17.  At paragraph 56 the Designated Judge noted that:-

             "According to the letters from the Ahmadiyya  Association  the
             first Appellant attends  the  congregational  prayers,  annual
             conventions, gatherings of the Khuddam and  any  other  events
             involving the association.  He has attended  the  inauguration
             of  a   mosque.    He   has   participated   in   face-to-face
             conversations with non-Ahmadi friends discussing promoting his
             religion.  He has been involved in attending at public  events
             where his religion is being promoted and  explained  to  other
             people"

    18.  The Designated Judge found that he was not merely attending at the
         mosque and answering the call to prayer.

    19.  At paragraph 57 the Designated Judge noted that according  to  the
         Ahmadiyya  Association  one  of  the  children  had  committed  and
         dedicated herself to  service  of  the  Ahmadiyya  community  which
         indicated that the family as a whole was involved in the faith  and
         the promotion of the faith.

    20.  At paragraph 58 he found that notwithstanding the adverse  matters
         found by Judge Levin, there was evidence that since coming  to  the
         UK the family had been materially  and  actively  involved  in  the
         promotion of their faith.

    21.  The Designated Judge was clearly alive to the possibility of  this
         being a ruse to gain asylum as at paragraph 59 he said:-

             "Whilst one would look  at  that  with  a  certain  degree  of
             circumspection, the degree and extent  of  the  commitment  is
             such that I am now  satisfied  that  the  first  Appellant  is
             materially committed to the Ahmadi faith.   I  find  that  the
             Appellants are a family that are genuinely committed to  their
             faith and to the promotion of their  faith  and  proselytising
             others".

    22.  At paragraph 60 he found:-

             "Having been given the opportunity in the UK I find  that  the
             Appellants have taken the opportunity of the greater religious
             freedom to express  openly  their  faith.   I  find  that  the
             Appellants would wish to continue promoting their  faith.   It
             is not just a case of the  first  Appellant  being  materially
             involved in the promotion and advancement  of  the  faith  but
             other members of the family as well"

    23.  On that basis and in accordance with Country Guidance  he  allowed
         the appeal.

    24.  The Secretary of  State  sought  and  was  granted  permission  to
         appeal.  She argued that at paragraph 47 the Judge  had  found  the
         Appellants were not exceptional Ahmadis and had endorsed the  first
         Judge's findings  as  to  the  claims  about  what  took  place  in
         Pakistan.  He found the Pakistani documents false and  yet  against
         that  background  had  nevertheless  allowed  that   appeal.    The
         Secretary of State argues that the finding that they would wish  to
         openly promote their faith in Pakistan is inadequately reasoned and
         irrational.

    25.   I  have  set  out  above  the  Designated  Judge's  findings  and
         reasoning.  He was clearly alive to the credibility issues but made
         findings on the basis of the Appellants activities in the UK in the
         three years since they arrived.  He was  cautious,  as  he  pointed
         out, but nevertheless found the Appellants would  wish  to  promote
         their faith in Pakistan.  His reasoning is detailed and conclusions
         rational and open to him on the evidence before him.

    26.   The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
         dismissed.

    27.  The First-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity direction I order
         it to continue.




    Signed   Dated 1st September 2015


    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


Direction regarding anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed   Date 1st September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
