

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: AA/04960/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                         |                                  |
|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 January 2016                       |       On 2 February 2016         |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant

                                   And





                                   Ms S S


                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION RETAINED)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Reid of Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal has been brought by the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
  decision of Judge Seifert, a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  who
  following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 20 August 2015 allowed the  appeal
  of the above named now named as respondent  in  this  determination.  The
  Secretary of State had refused her application to be allowed to remain in
  the United Kingdom as a refugee. The respondent is a  female  citizen  of
  Sri Lanka. Her date of birth is 1 October 1978. The  respondent  came  to
  the UK with a valid visa as a Tier 4 General Student allowing  her  leave
  from 12 January 2011 until 13 April 2014. She claimed asylum on 27  March
  2014 and on 4 March 2015, the appellant refused to grant her  asylum  for
  reasons set out in her letter of 4 March 2015.


2.   The Secretary of State,  hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  appellant,
  contends in her grounds of appeal that the First Tier Judge Seifert erred
  in law by "making a material misdirection of law" and by "failing to give
  adequate reasons for findings on material matters." In  relation  to  the
  first ground of appeal the appellant asserts that the relevant  case  law
  (GJ and Others (post civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2-15]  UKUT  319
  IAC was not properly applied  as  "it  was  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to
  consider whether the respondent's account in facts fits the  category  of
  persons that is currently focus of the Sri Lankan Government concerns  as
  described in the Summary Findings [2] and [3]"

3.    In her second ground of appeal, the appellant states, " The Judge  has
  failed to make findings as to why, if this appellant  were  of  interest,
  why there was no attempt made to actually detain her again,  until  after
  she had left the area."

4.     Judge  Jane  Reid,  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  granted
  permission to appeal on 2 November 2015 stating, "It is arguable that the
  judge's conclusions on the Appellant's argument on risk  on  return  with
  reference to GJ lack reasoning."  Judge  Reid  goes  on  to  say  in  her
  decision, "The grounds disclose an arguable error of law".

5.   In his submissions at the hearing before  me,  Mr  Duffy,  representing
  the appellant said that he wished to rely on the grounds of appeal, which
  he described as "only one ground of  appeal  and  that  being  a  reasons
  challenge". He invited  me  to  look  closely  at  Paragraph  57  of  the
  determination and note that the appellant had not been paced on  a  "Stop
  List" by the authorities in Sri Lanka. He asked that I should follow what
  the Court of Appeal has said in its decision in MP & NR. He was not  able
  to produce a copy of the decision but gave  its  citation  as  2014  EWCA
  Civ.829 (Paragraph 50).

6.   Ms Reid invited me  to  find  that  the  First  Tier  Judge  had  given
  adequate reasons for her conclusion. She drew my attention to  Paragraphs
  53, 56 and 57 of the determination, emphasising that in  her  grounds  of
  appeal, the appellant had  not  raised  any  challenge  to  the  positive
  credibility findings made by the Judge. Ms Reid argued that the Judge  of
  the First Tier had  correctly  and  properly  concentrated  on  the  risk
  category set out in Paragraph 7 (a) of the GJ decision as  the  appellant
  had been perceived to be a threat to the integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
  single state. Ms  Reid  contended  that  the  grounds  submitted  by  the
  appellant were an attempt to re-argue the substantive merits of the  case
  which in the light of absence of challenge to  the  credibility  findings
  made by Judge Seifert was clearly and plainly wrong.

7.    I invited Mr Duffy to respond to the arguments advanced  by  Ms  Reid.
  He said he had nothing more to say.

8.    I have given careful consideration  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  upon
  which permission to appeal had been granted and the terms upon  which  it
  had been granted. I note that the decision granting permission to  appeal
  does not say that the grounds disclose an arguable material error of  law
  but simply states that the "grounds disclose an arguable error  of  law".
  An arguable error of law is not enough for granting permission to appeal.
  The error has to be shown to be an arguable material error of law  before
  a valid permission to appeal can be granted. However this point  was  not
  brought to the attention of the parties at the hearing  and  it  was  not
  taken up.

9.    Nevertheless I must only allow this appeal of the Secretary  of  State
  if I am satisfied that in allowing the appeal Judge Seifert  has  made  a
  material error of law. Having heard arguments from representatives of the
  parties and having examined the determination closely, I am not satisfied
  that the determination contains a material error of  law.  I  have  taken
  account of the Court of Appeal decision cited to me by Mr Duffy.

10.   In my judgment the conclusion that the Judge reached was open  to  him
  as he found the respondent credible as set out in  Paragraph  53  of  his
  determination and having fully  considered  the  decision  in  GJ  as  is
  evident in the paragraphs that  follow.  Her  reasons  for  allowing  the
  appeal are set out in paragraph 57 of the determination where  the  Judge
  states, " Having considered the evidence and submissions as a whole,  and
  having found the appellant to be a credible witness  in  respect  of  the
  events leading to her leaving Sri Lanka and the continued interest in her
  as described in her evidence  and  the  letter  from  her  father,  I  am
  satisfied that it has been shown to the required standard that she  would
  be perceived by the authorities to pose a risk to the  integrity  of  Sri
  Lanka as a single state were she to return there." This  makes  it  clear
  that in allowing the appeal the Judge has weighed all the evidence on the
  correct standard, given adequate reasons for allowing the appeal  and  in
  so doing applied the correct current legal test.

 11. This appeal of the Secretary of State is  accordingly  dismissed.  The
      decision of Judge Seifert     allowing the appeal stands and as  found
      in that decision the respondent is a refugee.




      K Drabu CBE
      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
      23 January 2016








