
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04432/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 September 2013                          |On 27 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD



                                   Between

                                  Mr Y M Z

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Fielden, Counsel, instructed by Leonard & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 30 March 1995.

2.   On 25 September 2012 the appellant  made  an  application  for  further
    leave to remain which was refused by the respondent on 25 April 2013.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision   which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju on 10 June 2013.

4.   At that time all parties would seer to have been udder  the  impression
    that the appeal was simply an upgrade appeal, the appellant seeking  to
    be considered  as  a  refugee.   In  those  circumstances  it  was  not
    necessary to consider the aspect of Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.   Subsequently it has transpired that that was  an  error  and  that  the
    appellant's discretionary leave had expired and that therefore  removal
    directions having been issued as a result of the claim  for  asylum  it
    was necessary to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   For those reasons permission to appeal was granted on 2 August 2013.

7.   The respondent in a reply dated 15  August  2013  accepted  that  there
    would be a fresh oral hearing to determine Article 8 of the ECHR.

8.   The matter came before me.   Miss  Fielden  represents  the  appellant.
    She was not in position to proceed with any hearing on Article 8  as  a
    number of key witnesses were not present and were unable to be  present
    on this occasion.  Both parties, however, invited me to say that  given
    that  no findings whatsoever had been made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on the issue of Article 8 that it  was  entirely  appropriate  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for those findings  to
    be made.

9.   In  those  circumstances  I  agreed  to  that  suggestion  giving  oral
    directions to the further consideration of the case.

10.  These directions are set out  herein.

Directions

    (1)  The findings of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand so far as  the
         dismissal of the appeals in  respect  of  asylum  and  humanitarian
         protection.


    (3)  There will be a hearing of the appellant's  claim  in  respect  of
         Article 8 of the ECHR.


    (3)  Having regard to paragraph 7 of the  Senior  President's  Practice
         Directions that  hearing  shall  be  conducted  in  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.


    (4)  A date for hearing of 13 November 2013.


    (5)  An interpreter in the Pashtu language is required.


    (6)  Witness statements from all those who it is intended  to  call  as
         witnesses should be obtained and disclosed.


    (7)  Details of all family members relating to  the  appellant  in  the
         United Kingdom should be disclosed with  full  details.   Similarly
         family members in Afghanistan.


    (8)  Full details of the appellant's private and/or family life  should
         be provided.  All evidence relating thereto  should  be  served  no
         later than 10 days prior to the hearing.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

