
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04143/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons          |
|                                          |Promulgated                 |
|On 7 March 2016                           |On 25th April 2016          |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between


                                    [R R]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ndubuisi of Drummond Miller LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen dated 5  August  2015.  The
    appeal relates  to  a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Myers
    promulgated on 13 July 2015.  The Judge at the First-tier Tribunal  had
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse leave to remain based on family life.  The asylum claim had been
    abandoned.

2.    The Judge  had  considered  the  written  and  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant, his British wife and other witnesses. At paragraphs  18  and
    23 of her decision she noted the concession by the Respondent that  the
    Appellant and his wife were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.
    The Judge fully and extensively considered Appendix FM and case law  in
    respect of it. The Judge then went on to  make  important  findings  at
    paragraph 27,

            "...If I just had to consider the Appellant and his  wife  there
    would be no insurmountable obstacles to them continuing family life  in
    Bangladesh......It is very different, however, when the child is  added
    to the equation. I have found above that it is unreasonable  to  expect
    him  to  leave  the  UK,  and  it  follows  therefore  that  there  are
    insurmountable obstacles to his mother leaving as she  must  remain  to
    care for her son at an important time in his development".

3.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal are very detailed  but  paragraph  K
    at page 3 encapsulates the Appellant's  position.  The  contention  was
    that paragraph 27 (which I have  referred  to  above)  of  the  Judge's
    decision ought to have been the  end  of  the  matter  and  the  appeal
    allowed. It was an error of law for the Judge to then go on  to  decide
    whether the Appellant could or should return to Bangladesh.

4.    Permission to appeal was  specifically  granted  in  respect  of  this
    ground, but not in respect of ground two which  related  to  a  claimed
    error of law in respect of the proportionality assessment  relating  to
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

5.    The Respondent by way of a Rule 24 Reply dated 19 August 2015  opposed
    the Appellant's appeal but said at paragraph 3  that  it  was  accepted
    that the Judge had erred in finding that the requirements of EX.1  were
    met at paragraph 27 but then  applied  a  further  irrelevant  test  at
    paragraph 28.

6.    It was said at paragraph 4 of the Rule 24 Reply  that  the  Judge  had
    not adequately reasoned her findings in respect of  the  reasonableness
    of the Appellant's step-son leaving the United Kingdom.

7.    In his written submissions and in his oral  submissions,  Mr  Ndubuisi
    submitted that:

   a) In light of the concession made by the Respondent at  paragraph  3  of
      the Rule 24 Reply that was sufficient to dispose of the appeal and for
      it to be allowed under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules;

   b) That the challenge to the Judge's decision  was  "not  competent"  and
      cannot be made in a Rule 24 response;

   c) Reliance was placed on the Upper Tribunal's decision in EG and NG  (UT
      Rule 18: withdrawal; Rule 24; scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143.

8.    Ms Johnstone in her submissions said that the error was  material  and
    it affected the whole of the determination. Was it reasonable  for  the
    child to relocate? Paragraph 28 refers to insurmountable obstacles. The
    error identified by the Appellant was inconsistency. These factors  are
    relevant to EX.1. Notice was given on how it was intended to appeal. It
    was said that there was inadequate reasoning and on proportionality. It
    was submitted that the error identified means that the  decision  as  a
    whole was unsafe. The decision would have to be remade with  the  facts
    of the case. As for the case law,  Ms  Johnstone  said  that  the  Home
    Office would not challenge a dismissed decision. It was  agreed  though
    that the reasons given by the Judge were inconsistent.

9.    I had reserved my decision.

10.   A three Judge Upper Tribunal in EG and NG  had  considered  issues  in
    respect of Rule 24 Notices. The decision makes clear  at  paragraph  46
    that,

            "... In short rule 24 does have a meaning that does  not  depend
    on Ms Dubinsky's premise and we reject the construction that she  urged
    on us. Rule 24 does not create a right of appeal to a party who has not
    asked for permission to appeal. Rule 24 is not in any way  to  do  with
    seeking permission to appeal and it is not an  alternative  to  seeking
    permission where permission is needed. It is to do with  giving  notice
    about how the respondent intends to respond  to  the  appeal  that  the
    appellant has permission to pursue. If a respondent wants to argue that
    the First-tier Tribunal should  have  reached  a  materially  different
    conclusion then the respondent needs permission to appeal."

11.   The Upper Tribunal went on to say at paragraph 57 that,

            "57.     A party is not entitled to rely on points raised  in  a
    rule 24 Notice. The notice merely records an intention.  A  party  that
    wants to exercise  a  right  to  appeal  a  decision  must  obtain  the
    permission required by section  11(3)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007."

12.   In my judgment, although attractively put, Ms  Johnstone's  submission
    that the reliance on matters  in  the  Respondent's  Rule  24  was  not
    seeking to raise a ground of appeal cannot stand. There were  only  two
    issues raised in respect of the Appellant's relationship with his wife.
    Firstly was the relationship genuine and subsisting? This was  conceded
    by the Presenting Officer at the hearing before  the  Judge.  Secondly,
    were there insurmountable obstacles? This was found to  be  so  by  the
    Judge. Indeed clearly found to be so at paragraph  27  of  the  Judge's
    decision. This too was later conceded in the Rule  24  Reply  from  the
    Respondent.

13.   Therefore the Appellant's appeal has to be  allowed  pursuant  to  the
    Appendix FM to the  Immigration  Rules  as  there  was  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship and there were insurmountable obstacles to  the
    family living in Bangladesh. As the Judge noted, the Rules specifically
    required her to consider the minor child.  As set out  in  the  Judge's
    decision and during the hearing before me, all other parts of the  Rule
    were met and indeed conceded by the Respondent.  It is clear  that  the
    Judge did materially err in law by going beyond  Paragraph  27  of  her
    decision. Once she had found that there were  insurmountable  obstacles
    that ought to have led to the appeal being allowed. It was an error  of
    law to then apply a further requirement of assessing whether there were
    insurmountable obstacles in the Appellant returning  to  Bangladesh  on
    his own. That additional test is not what Appendix FM requires.

14.   Even if I am wrong and the Respondent can raise issues in  respect  of
    the Appellant's step son in the Rule 24 Reply, it is to be  noted  that
    in fact the Judge did consider the position in respect of the step son.
    For example at paragraph 25 of her decision the Judge referred  to  the
    step son currently undertaking his GCSE's at school.  There  were  also
    letters from the step son's school. This is therefore a  British  child
    at school during an important time in his life. Expecting him to  leave
    the United Kingdom for Bangladesh is simply unrealistic. Therefore,  it
    is clear that there were insurmountable obstacles to the  teenage  step
    son leaving the United Kingdom and living  in  Bangladesh  during  this
    important and crucial stage in his schooling  and  life.  In  turn  his
    mother had to stay with him. Therefore so would  the  Appellant.  As  a
    consequence, in any event, the  Appellant's  appeal  would  still  have
    succeeded, even if the Respondent was permitted to  raise  the  matters
    raised in paragraph 4 of the Rule 24 Reply.

15.   I therefore allow the Appellant's appeal  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law. That decision dismissing the appeal is set aside.

I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal under the  Immigration
Rules.

An anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                       Date: 21 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
