

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number AA/04204/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Sheldon Determination Promulgated
On 20th November 2014  On 26th November 2014
Prepared 25th November 2014


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                     T S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss A Benfield (Counsel, instructed by A & P
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan national He claimed asylum in the UK on
    the 27th of October 2011 following his return from Sri Lanka. His claim
    was refused and his appeal dismissed in a determination dated the 30th
    of July 2014 following a hearing at Bennett House, Stoke on Trent.

 2. The Judge rejected the Appellant's credibility before considering the
    medical report submitted by the Appellant which considered a number of
    injuries that were visible and which he had said had been inflicted by
    the security forces when he was detained and before he came to the UK.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that the Judge
    had approached the medical evidence incorrectly and had dismissed the
    report on the basis of the findings made in respect of the Appellant's
    general credibility rather than regarding the opinions of the doctor as
    being independent views that carried weight.

 4. At the hearing it was conceded by Mr Mills that the approach of the
    Judge had been erroneous and that the determination could not be
    sustained, he accepted that the appeal would have to be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all issues.

 5. On that basis I find that I respect of the Judge's approach to the
    Appellant's credibility and the expert the evidence the determination
    contains errors of law such that it has to be set aside and remade.
    Directions are given separately.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing on all
issues.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 which is continued.

Fee Award

In remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 26th November 2014


