
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04272/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 September 2016                 |On 31 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                Palwasha [K]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  She appealed  to  a  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  27
    February 2015 to remove her as  an  illegal  entrant  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her asylum claim was also refused.

2.   The appellant claimed  to  be  at  risk  in  part  on  account  of  her
    husband's activities, who, she says, had worked for the government  for
    five or six years in intelligence, informing on the  Taliban.   He  had
    gone missing after a suicide bomb blast and rumours had spread that  he
    was involved in that.  The Taliban had reported that he  had  died  but
    there was no evidence of that.  About a month earlier than this, one of
    her sons had gone to the Madrassa as usual but failed to return and his
    dead body was subsequently identified by her husband.  Subsequently she
    and her husband had refused to allow their children to  return  to  the
    Madrassa and when the Taliban asked why they said it was because he had
    gone missing from there.  It was at that time that she had become aware
    from her husband of his intelligence work.

3.   After her husband's disappearance  she  remained  at  her  in-laws  for
    three or four months, but was ill-treated by them and pressure was  put
    on her to marry her brother-in-law.  With the  help  of  an  agent  her
    father arranged for her to come to the United Kingdom.   She  initially
    said at interview that she had not seen her  husband  but  subsequently
    said she had met him in an unknown country where she was  staying  with
    relatives and who had taken her to him and  from  there  they  and  the
    children went on to "the jungle", which was presumed to be near  or  in
    Calais.  She had sent her husband and his brother to fetch milk but  in
    the time they were away she and the children were  put  in  a  car  and
    taken from the camp and she said  she  had  had  no  contact  with  him
    subsequently.  She claimed to be at risk on return from the  government
    because they believed her husband had carried out the bombing, from the
    Taliban because many of her in-laws were  members  of  the  Taliban  or
    sympathisers and as she had run away and taken the children  it  was  a
    matter of honour and she would be killed  if  returned,  and  she  also
    feared that as her sons got older the Taliban would  take  them  to  be
    trained and force her daughter to marry early.   She  also  claimed  to
    fear her in-laws because they were trying to force  her  to  marry  her
    brother-in-law in accordance with their culture.

4.   The judge found the appellant to lack credibility.  She  accepted  that
    in a patriarchal society the appellant would not have had any  in-depth
    knowledge of her husband's work but said that she had not explained how
    the  village  people  discovered  that  her  husband  was  working   in
    intelligence or came to understand that he was spying, before she  did.
    The judge said that the appellant's evidence concerning  her  visit  to
    the government office and what she was told was discrepant.   She  said
    there was no evidence to  link  the  disappearance  and  death  of  the
    appellant's son to her husband's activities.  The judge went on to  say
    that in any event the appellant's evidence was that for three or months
    following the disappearance of her husband she lived with her  in-laws.
    If she were at risk from the government or the Taliban, both would have
    had ample time to take action against her but had not done so.  She had
    stated in her screening interview that the Taliban had issued an arrest
    warrant but there was no evidence of that and the judge did not  accept
    it.  There was no evidence that the appellant had received any  threats
    or visits from government sources or the Taliban when  she  was  living
    with her in-laws and the judge therefore  found  that  she  was  of  no
    interest to the authorities or to the Taliban.

5.   The judge went on to say that she did not find  it  credible  that  the
    appellant did not make enquiries of her husband about where he had been
    when they were reunited in an unknown place  before  travelling  on  to
    "the jungle" or that they did not make or  attempt  to  make  plans  to
    travel together on the final leg of the journey.  She  considered  that
    the explanations of the attempts made by the  appellant  to  trace  him
    were unsatisfactory.  She had said she had tried but was very busy with
    her children, but when asked what methods she had used she  had  failed
    to answer the question.  The judge noted that it  was  the  appellant's
    father who had made the arrangements with an agent and considered  that
    as a consequence he had contact with people who it  was  reasonable  to
    assume  could  make  enquiries  concerning  the  appellant's  husband's
    whereabouts.  It was known that he was in Calais at a  given  date  and
    had been taken there along with  the  appellant  and  children  shortly
    before the appellant embarked on the last  leg  of  her  journey.   The
    judge concluded that she was unable to  make  any  finding  as  to  the
    appellant's  husband's  whereabouts  but  she  did  not   believe   the
    appellant's account as to what had happened in the jungle.

6.   As regards the claimed fear from her in-laws, the judge noted that  the
    appellant  had  failed  to  mention  in  her  screening  interview   or
    substantive interview that they were Taliban supporters and because  of
    his former intelligence work her husband could not contact  them.   She
    described this as a significant omission from the  appellant's  earlier
    written evidence and went to credibility but she  had  decided  not  to
    attach weight of significance to it.  She found that there was no  good
    reason for the appellant not to inform her in-laws that her husband was
    still alive or for him to inform his parents.  On her own evidence  she
    was not a widow but the judge accepted, given that she  was  unable  or
    unwilling to supply any information about her husband's whereabouts and
    there was no independent evidence about him from any other source, that
    she would be regarded as the head of the household.   As  a  widow  her
    wellbeing depended largely on the goodwill of her missing  or  deceased
    husband's family, and she would  be  considered  the  property  of  her
    husband's family and might be forced into levirate  marriage  requiring
    her to marry a close male relative of her late husband.

7.   The judge noted the  decision  of  AK  [2012]  UKUT,  that  in  general
    returning to Kabul was not safe or unreasonable  and  stated  that  the
    appellant would not  be  in  the  position  of  a  lone  woman  without
    protection if returned to Kabul as she had close family there including
    her including her father and brothers on whom she could rely to support
    her and her children and protect her from her in-laws should  she  come
    to their attention.  The judge noted the  appellant's  claim  that  she
    could not return to her father's house but found no support for this in
    the background material.  The judge was satisfied  that  the  appellant
    had a male  support  network  available  to  her  in  Kabul  such  that
    relocation there was a reasonable option.   In  the  alternative  there
    were women's shelters in Kabul to which she  could  go.   Having  found
    that the appellant would not face a risk on  return  from  anyone,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal with regard to asylum and also  humanitarian
    protection.  She also dismissed the appeal in respect of Article 8.

8.   The appellant sought permission to appeal against this decision on  the
    basis that inadequate  reasons  had  been  given  for  various  of  the
    findings of fact, and also there  had  been  a  failure  to  take  into
    account material background evidence.  Permission was refused by both a
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  and  an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge,  but
    subsequently on a Cart judicial review Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb granted
    permission and as a consequence the matter comes before me.

9.   In his submissions Mr Neale relied on and developed the points made  in
    his consolidated grounds of appeal.  The judge had accepted that  there
    was a risk of forced levirate marriage as the appellant  was  perceived
    by her husband's family as being a widow.  As a  consequence,  risk  in
    the home area had been accepted, but  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    appellant could relocate to Kabul  as  her  father  and  brothers  were
    there.

10.  The judge had erred in finding that her father and brothers  could  act
    as her male protectors and that her husband's family  could  not  track
    her down in  Kabul.   The  judge  had  overlooked  background  evidence
    referred to at paragraph 9 of Mr Neale's skeleton.  It  could  be  seen
    that a widow was considered the  property  of  her  deceased  husband's
    family and the authorities often actively collaborated with families to
    return women.  If the  judge  did  not  accept  that  evidence  it  was
    incumbent upon her to say why.  Given the acceptance  of  risk  in  the
    home area she could not live as a lone woman  in  Afghanistan  and  the
    judge had fallen into  error  in  failing  to  dealing  with  all  this
    evidence.

11.  The appellant also challenged the credibility findings.  The judge  had
    not accepted that there was risk from the Taliban  or  the  government.
    It was unclear what she meant by "village people" at  paragraph  44  of
    her  decision.   The  appellant  had  not  claimed  that  the   general
    population of the village were aware of the intelligence activities  of
    her husband.  If the judge had meant to refer to the  Taliban  by  this
    phrase, it was unclear why she had found it to be incredible.

12.  Also with regard to the reference to discrepancies at paragraph  44  it
    was not clear what  evidence  was  referred  to  but  if  it  was  with
    reference to paragraph 4.j. of the refusal letter,  the  appellant  had
    explained that in her witness statement.  The judge  did  not  have  to
    believe her, but if she did not she had to say why she did not.

13.  With regard to paragraph 45 and the judge's reference to the  appellant
    not  being  targeted  when  she  was  living  with  her  in-laws,  this
    misunderstood the nature of her claim.  She would be  at  risk  if  her
    husband was alive and everybody believed him to be dead.   So  she  had
    problems either way in that if he were dead or assumed to be dead  then
    she faced the risk from his  family  and  if  deemed  to  be  alive  or
    actually alive then risk from the  Taliban  and  the  government.   The
    UNHCR guidelines were relevant with regard to risk to families of  pro-
    government operatives.  There was no other clear basis  for  the  judge
    arriving  at  her  adverse  findings  on  credibility.   The  point  at
    paragraph 46 about her husband and "the jungle" was  a  separate  issue
    but essentially with regard to  events  in  Afghanistan  the  issue  of
    credibility was dealt with at  paragraphs  44  and  45.   If  she  were
    targeted by  the  Taliban  or  the  government  that  was  relevant  to
    relocation.  The  grounds  were  in  the  alternative  but  either  was
    sufficient for the decision to be set aside.

14.  If the Tribunal were with Mr Neale and if the findings  about  risk  of
    marriage in the home area were  preserved  there  as  the  question  of
    relocation to Kabul and the Tribunal might find she could not  relocate
    to Kabul at which point the new evidence would  be  relevant.   If  not
    there should be remittal to a First-tier Judge for  a  rehearing.   The
    findings at paragraph 47 should be preserved  but  the  Tribunal  would
    need to  make  new  findings  about  her  history  and  risk  from  the
    government and the Taliban on relocation to Kabul.

15.  Mr Jarvis put in the decision of the  Supreme  Court  in  MA  (Somalia)
    [2010] UKSC 49.  He argued that the grounds missed the point.   It  was
    clear that the judge had significant and  serious  concerns  about  the
    appellant's evidence as to where her husband was.  At paragraph 46  she
    had found unsatisfactory the evidence about the efforts  to  trace  the
    husband.  It was likely that enquiries  had  already  been  made.   The
    respondent did not accept that the  husband  was  outside  Afghanistan.
    The judge had made it clear that she did not  believe  the  appellant's
    account of what had happened in "the jungle".   This  was  relevant  to
    relocation.  She had lied about her husband's whereabouts.  The  matter
    had to be considered in line with MA (Somalia), at  paragraphs  47  and
    48, where a person had not told the truth about a relevant matter  they
    had failed to make out their claim on that particular point.   She  had
    failed to show where her husband was.  The  judge  also  had  noted  at
    paragraph 47, albeit attaching no weight of significance  to  it,  that
    she had failed until late on to mention that her in-laws  were  Taliban
    supporters and could not contact them.  The judge had not accepted,  at
    paragraph 45, that an arrest warrant had been issued by the Taliban.

16.  As regards  the  challenge  to  the  credibility  findings,  only  some
    aspects had been challenged  by  Mr  Neale.   It  was  clear  that  the
    reference to the "village people" was a reference to the people in  the
    village, bearing in mind that it was a Taliban area, and they were  the
    people who believed that her husband was responsible for  the  bombing.
    This could be seen by referring back to paragraph 19  where  the  judge
    had noted from the appellant's witness statement that she had said that
    the Taliban and people in her area believed her husband was responsible
    for carrying out the suicide bomb attack.   The  appellant  would  have
    been aware of the general attitude about her husband in the village.

17.  With regard to the reference to a discrepancy,  at  paragraph  44,  the
    judge had identified at the hearing  the  reference  to  the  appellant
    visiting the government office, and when one read the determination  it
    was clear that the submission about this was at paragraph 29  from  the
    Presenting Officer that it  was  incredible  that  the  appellant  knew
    nothing about  her  husband's  work  and  yet  was  able  to  attend  a
    government office when searching for him.  The judge needed to  say  no
    more than that.

18.  With regard to paragraph 45 of the  judge's  decision,  the  point  was
    that if the Taliban and the government  thought  that  the  appellant's
    husband was of adverse interest the judge was entitled to look at  what
    the appellant did next and she had seen  it  as  significant  that  the
    appellant remained with her in-laws in a  Taliban-controlled  area  and
    there had been no adverse interest from  either  side.   It  should  be
    questioned why the Taliban or the government would not be interested in
    the family if there was already an adverse interest in the  appellant's
    husband.  The lack of truth about the arrest warrant was  material  and
    significant.

19.  With regard to the second ground,  the  judge,  at  paragraph  47,  had
    found no reason why the appellant or her husband could not or  did  not
    contact his family in Afghanistan to  say  that  he  was  still  alive.
    There was no good reason for her not to tell them or why he  could  not
    have done that.  Mr Jarvis argued that the judge was wrong to say  that
    the appellant would be regarded as the head  of  the  household.   This
    misunderstood MA (Somalia).  There was no need to say that she  had  to
    be willing to supply information about her husband's whereabouts or she
    could maintain a lie and  obtain  status  that  way.   The  credibility
    findings as a whole were sound.  There  was  no  good  reason  why  the
    husband's family and her family did not know that he  was  alive.   She
    would return not as a widow but as an unknown local or she could return
    to her in-laws, not as a widow.  The evidence on relocation was  a  red
    herring.  The findings undermined the causal link between her return as
    a lone woman with no family support.   She  had  said  as  recorded  at
    paragraph 22 that the police would not involve themselves, but even  if
    that were wrong,  the  issue  was  different.   There  was  no  adverse
    interest in her from the government or the  Taliban  and  no  need  for
    anyone to tell them that her husband was alive.

20.  By way of reply Mr Neale argued that in effect Mr  Jarvis  was  seeking
    without a cross-appeal to challenge the judge's findings of a risk of a
    levirate marriage.   If  there  were  an  arguable  error  of  law  the
    respondent should have cross-appealed.  The submissions  on  behalf  of
    the respondent read a lot  into  the  judge's  findings  including  the
    claimed inference that the family knew  that  the  husband  was  alive,
    which should be compared with the finding at the end of  paragraph  47.
    The findings of a risk of a forced levirate marriage were  unchallenged
    and that was why relocation fell to be  considered  and  that  was  the
    basis upon which the appeal was to be considered.

21.  If it were the case as Mr Jarvis suggested, with  regard  to  paragraph
    44, it was the case that the appellant had not claimed that the  people
    in the village knew about her husband.  This was speculation as to what
    the judge had meant with regard to the discrepancies as to what she had
    been told by the government.  If it were on the basis suggested  by  Mr
    Jarvis she had not said that in contrast to the point at paragraph 4.j.
    of the decision letter.  It was necessary for the reasons to be clear.

22.  With regard to paragraph 45, it was  not  speculative.   The  risk  was
    contingent on the husband being alive and that was her  case,  so  when
    they believed him to be dead it did not imply that if he was  known  to
    be alive she would not have problems.

23.  I reserved my determination.

24.  It seems logical to take first the issue  of  the  judge's  credibility
    findings as those concern risk, and then come on  to  the  question  of
    internal relocation.

25.  The appellant's evidence as recorded at paragraph  19  of  the  judge's
    decision was that the Taliban and  people  in  her  area  believed  her
    husband was responsible for carrying out the suicide bomb attack.  This
    is not quite the same thing, however, as the finding  at  paragraph  44
    that  the  village  people  discovered  her  husband  was  working   in
    intelligence or came to understand that he was spying, before she  did.
    As regards to the visit to  the  government  office,  her  evidence  as
    recorded at paragraph 10 of the judge's decision was that the appellant
    and her father-in-law and brother-in-law went to a government office to
    enquire and were told that her husband had carried out the  attack  but
    had died; alternatively they asked her about her husband's whereabouts.
     This, I agree with Mr Neale, appears to be the  discrepancy  to  which
    the judge was referring, I  also  agree  that  the  appellant  gave  an
    explanation of this at paragraph 3 of her statement where she said that
    the Taliban and the people in their area believed her husband  was  the
    person who had carried out the attack but the government said it  seems
    though he had carried out the attack but they were unable  to  identify
    the body and so were unsure and were  asking  if  she  knew  about  his
    whereabouts.  The judge did not say what she made of that explanation.

26.  Perhaps of greater significance is the judge's conclusion that  if  the
    appellant were at risk from the government or the  Taliban  both  would
    have had ample time to take action against her but did not  during  the
    three or four months after her husband's disappearance when  she  lived
    with her in-laws.  The point in  this  regard  is  that  since  it  was
    believed that her husband was dead,  she  did  not  face  risk  on  his
    account, and as a consequence it would only if he were believed  to  be
    alive that difficulties would arise for her.  I accept  the  submission
    that the judge appears to have misunderstood the  appellant's  case  in
    this regard and the adverse finding fails  to  take  into  account  the
    basis upon which the claim was put.  This led  the  judge  to  conclude
    that she was of no interest to the authorities and of  no  interest  to
    the Taliban.  Further the judge went on to express doubts, at paragraph
    46 of her decision, about the appellant's husband's whereabouts and the
    lack of credibility of her evidence in that regard.   She  had  already
    concluded that there was no risk  from  the  authorities  or  from  the
    Taliban on a basis which I consider to be flawed.   Nor  is  there  any
    effective engaging with the background evidence referred to by Mr Neale
    that was before the judge in respect of relocation.  Although  none  of
    that deals with the specific circumstances of the appellant,  there  is
    enough in that evidence  with  regard  to  the  situation  of  a  widow
    rejecting levirate marriage, and the risk from  the  authorities  to  a
    woman in that position, that the judge at least was required to address
    this evidence even if she concluded that it did not preclude her coming
    to a finding adverse to the appellant on internal relocation.

27.  In conclusion I  consider  that  the  judge  did  err  materially  with
    respect to the credibility findings and also with  regard  to  internal
    relocation.  It is right, I consider, to maintain  the  finding  to  be
    found in the closing sentence of paragraph 47 concerning  the  risk  of
    being forced into levirate marriage  by  her  husband's  family,  which
    raises questions of relocation in any event.  Findings  require  to  be
    made on the issue of risk from the authorities and  from  the  Taliban.
    To that extent therefore the matter is remitted for a rehearing subject
    to the protected finding from paragraph 47, before a  First-tier  Judge
    other than Judge Griffith sitting at Taylor House.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              31 October 2016

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              31 October 2016

