
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04828/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 February 2018                      |On 21 February 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     Hz
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, of Kesar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

 1. The appellant is an ethic Kurdish citizen of  Iran,  who  was  born  in
    January 1997.  He arrived in the UK in June 2012 and claimed asylum  on
    23 June 2012.


 2. I summarise the basis of the appellant's asylum claim. His  father  was
    involved politically in what he now  believes  to  be  the  KDPI  Party
    (Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan). The  appellant  did  not  know
    what his father's job was in Iran. When he was 8 years old, his parents
    took him to live in the Kurdish region of  Iran  (KRI),  where  he  was
    educated and  where  the  appellant's  father  worked  as  a  labourer.
    Approximately twice a week the appellant's father would be  visited  by
    two men in the evening who would stay for approximately  2  hours.  The
    appellant's father and the men spoke in Farsi and the  appellant  would
    hear mention of the Iranian president. His father would also leave  the
    family house twice a week after the family meal, but the appellant  did
    not know where his father went or what he did. The  appellant's  mother
    would visit Iranian friends about twice a month who, according  to  the
    appellant's mother, were members of the KDPI,  although  there  was  no
    talk of politics during the visits.

 3. Approximately two months before he arrived in the  UK  the  appellant's
    father went to Iran for a week, on what the  appellant  thought  was  a
    trip to arrange accommodation for the family to return to that country.
    On reappearing in Iraq, however,  the  appellant's  father  was  in  an
    agitated state. The appellant recalled seeing his father in  possession
    of a plastic bag that contained a lot of  documents.  During  the  next
    month the appellant's father always seemed angry when he spoke, and  he
    spoke to people a lot on the telephone. During this time the  appellant
    was informed that the family would be selling their home and  returning
    to Iran when school finished in the summer. The family left Iraq a week
    after school finished for the summer. When they were  travelling  in  a
    lorry the appellant's  father  apologised  to  the  appellant  for  not
    telling him everything and said they were not returning  to  Iran.  The
    appellant's father showed him a piece of paper which, according to what
    the appellant is recorded as saying at interview, was an Iranian arrest
    warrant. The document had  an  Iranian  logo  and  it  looked  like  an
    official document, although the appellant did not read it himself.  His
    father said they were not returning to their village in Iran because of
    his political problems. The appellant's father told him that if he (the
    father) was ever arrested, he would have no choice but to hand  himself
    over the authorities in order to protect the appellant.  The  appellant
    concluded that his father must have been working  for  an  organisation
    that was opposed to the Iranian regime. So,  instead  of  returning  to
    Iran, the family went by train  and  later  by  lorry  to  Europe.  The
    appellant travelled in a separate lorry to  that  of  his  parents  and
    found himself in the United  Kingdom,  where  he  claimed  asylum.  The
    appellant believes the Iranian government will  arrest  him  if  he  is
    removed to Iran  as  the  son  of  a  person  who  was  sought  by  the
    authorities.


 4. The respondent rejected the claim. Amongst other things, the respondent
    did not believe that an arrest warrant from Iran would have been  given
    to the appellant's father by the  Iranian  authorities.   Overall,  the
    Secretary of State  considered  that  the  appellant  could  safely  be
    returned to Iran.

The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 5.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen (the
    FtJ) on 20 August 2015 but was not promulgated until 13 April 2016. The
    FtJ's principle findings of fact and reasons supporting those  findings
    are contained in paragraphs 42 to 47 of his decision. The FtJ  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's father had been involved  in  activities
    against the Iranian regime. At paragraph 42, the  FtJ  found  that  the
    appellant's father had not been in  possession  of  an  Iranian  arrest
    warrant, as had been claimed. This was because the evidence relating to
    such warrants, referred to in  paragraph  27  of  the  refusal  letter,
    rendered it incredible that the  Iranian  authorities  would  give  the
    subject of a warrant a copy of it prior to arresting him  "thus  making
    it clear to him that he should abscond".


 6. At paragraph 43, the FtJ found that the appellant's father had returned
    to a Kurdish area of Iraq and there was  no  evidence  to  suggest  the
    Iranian authorities could execute  a  warrant  against  him  there.  In
    general, the FtJ was not satisfied that  flight  from  Iraq  to  Europe
    "would have been necessary to avoid the consequences of such a warrant"
    (paragraph 43).

 7. At paragraph  44,  the  FtJ  found  that,  since  the  details  of  any
    involvement of the appellant's father in the activities of the KDPI had
    not been communicated to the appellant, the FtJ was not satisfied  that
    the appellant's mother would have told him that people  they  regularly
    visited were involved in the  activities  of  that  organisation.   The
    accounts given by the appellant of visits by the  KDPI  to  the  family
    home and of evenings away from the home spent by his father, were  not,
    the FtJ said, specifically linked to any evidence of political activity
    and were consistent with  many  other  explanations,  including  social
    activities by the appellant's father. At paragraph 46, the FtJ found he
    could not be satisfied that if the appellant's father had been involved
    in KDPI activity, the latter would  have  returned  to  Iran  with  the
    intention of making arrangements for his wife and child  to  move  back
    there with him.

 8. Having made those findings, the FtJ turned, beginning at paragraph  48,
    to the issue of risk on return. The FtJ said that he had considered the
    country guidance decision in SB (Risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00053.  According to the FtJ, that decision indicated that
    "there would be no risk to an asylum-seeking person returning  to  Iran
    merely on account of being a failed asylum seeker, unless there were  a
    further  risk  factor  such  as  having  been  involved   in   criminal
    proceedings in Iran before leaving".


 9. At  paragraph  50,  however,  the  FtJ  noted  a  report  from  Amnesty
    International, mentioned  in  the  respondent's  refusal  letter,  that
    asylum seekers were "interrogated on return, whether or not  they  have
    been political activists in Iran or abroad".  At paragraph 51, the  FtJ
    found that it must be "highly likely that the appellant would be  asked
    whether he had applied for asylum in the UK, and what  grounds  he  had
    given for  seeking  asylum".   Assuming  that  the  appellant  must  be
    expected  to  respond  truthfully,  "this   would,   perhaps   somewhat
    paradoxically, mean that he would, regardless  of  the  truth  of  such
    claim, have to state that he had claimed that his  father  was  a  KDPI
    activist".

10. According to the FtJ, this was sufficient to put the appellant at  real
    risk. The FtJ therefore allowed the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds.

The grant of permission, the error of law decision,  the  remaking  decision
and the remittal from the Court of Appeal

11. The respondent sought permission on the basis that  the  facts  of  the
    case fell "squarely within the country guidance case law" of  SB,  that
    there were no further risk factors advanced by the appellant, and that,
    on the FtJ's reasoning, anyone who claimed asylum in the UK would be at
    risk from the authorities.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on
    4 May 2016.  At paragraph 3, Judge Holmes considered it  arguable  that
    the FtJ had failed to follow  the  current  country  guidance,  without
    giving any adequate reasons for  departing  from  it.  The  judge  also
    raised, on his  own  volition,  the  issue  of  whether  the  delay  in
    promulgating the FtJ's decision rendered the hearing unfair.

13. The 'error of law' hearing was heard by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hutchinson (the Deputy Judge). In a written decision dated 20 June 2016
    the Deputy Judge found that the FtJ's decision,  allowing  the  appeal,
    contained "an error of law capable of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and that part of the decision is set aside".   She  stated  that
    the "decision on risk on return will be re-made by the Upper Tribunal".

14. The Deputy Judge's reasons for finding an error of law are set  out  in
    the preceding paragraphs of her decision.  On the basis that the  FtJ's
    findings, regarding the lack of any KDPI involvement on the part of the
    appellant's father, were  to  stand,  the  Deputy  Judge  accepted  the
    submission of the respondent's representative that "the most  that  the
    [appellant] could say was that he unsuccessfully applied for asylum  on
    the basis that he claimed that his father  was  involved  in  political
    activity but this claim had not  been  accepted"  (paragraph  13).  The
    Deputy Judge found that the FtJ was not entitled to  allow  the  appeal
    for the reasons given and that this constituted a material legal error.
    The Deputy Judge also  dealt  briefly  with  the  delay  in  the  FtJ's
    decision and concluded that such delay did not amount to  an  error  of
    law. Having found that the findings of fact in relation to  credibility
    and the appellant's circumstances in Iran could stand, the Deputy Judge
    adjourned the hearing.

15. The "re-making" hearing took place on 21  September  2016.  The  Deputy
    Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant on the issue  of  risk  on
    return, and considered an expert  report  from  Professor  Joffe.  That
    report, however, was "predicated on  the  basis  that  the  appellant's
    account was true, which it is not" (paragraph 18).   The  Deputy  Judge
    accepted Professor Joffe's conclusion that the appellant's return "as a
    failed asylum seeker in itself did  not  expose  him  to  a  particular
    danger" (ibid). After further findings in relation to Professor Joffe's
    report, the Deputy Judge examined in detail the appellant's case  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR. She concluded that the appellant's removal  from
    the United Kingdom would  not  disproportionately  interfere  with  his
    Article 8 rights. In a decision issued on 4 October  2016,  the  Deputy
    Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

16. Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal contended that
    the Deputy Judge had committed a "jurisdictional error" in refusing, at
    the re-making hearing, to re-visit her error of law  decision,  insofar
    as that decision preserved the findings of the FtJ.  It  was  contended
    that the Deputy Judge had wrongly assumed that she had no discretion to
    re-visit her error of law decision, even though the proceedings in  the
    Upper Tribunal were not at an end. Ground 2 attacked the  reasoning  of
    the FtJ for his factual findings. The attack  included  the  submission
    that the FtJ had failed to consider or assess the appellant's  evidence
    in the context of his age at the relevant times.

17. In a written decision of 1 December 2017, Beatson LJ granted permission
    on the "jurisdiction ground" and the related ground 3, which  was  that
    the Upper Tribunal's decision could not stand "because it was  infected
    by the UT's jurisdictional  error  and  in  consequence  its  error  in
    failing  to  consider  and  determine  where  the   FtT's   credibility
    assessment was sound in law".

18. Beatson LJ, however, refused permission in respect of the challenge  to
    the FtJ's factual findings.  He said:-

         "The FtT judge gave reasons for finding the appellant's account  to
         be incredible at [42] (not credible that the authorities would give
         the subject of a warrant a copy of the warrant before arresting him
         thus giving him time to abscond), [43] (flight from Iraq to  Europe
         was not necessary to avoid consequences  of  an  Iranian  warrant),
         [45] (no link of visits by others to the family home to evidence of
         political activity), and [46] (not satisfied that,  if  father  was
         involved in KDPI activity, he would have returned  to  Iran).   The
         FtT judge found these features of the  applicant's  (sic)  evidence
         not to be credible for the reasons he gave. There was no obligation
         on him to give the further explanations listed at paragraph  29  of
         the skeleton argument."

19. On 12 February 2018, by  consent,  the  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal and remitted the matter to the Upper  Tribunal  "for
    reconsideration of the grounds of appeal in respect of which permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal was granted by Lord Justice  Beatson".
    In the accompanying statement  of  reasons,  settled  by  the  Treasury
    Solicitor, the parties were said to  be  "agreed  that  the  matter  be
    remitted back to the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal for re-hearing of the [appellant's] appeal by the Tribunal  in
    respect of grounds 1 and  3  only".  A  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    consisting of Mr Justice Lane, President of the Upper  Tribunal  (IAC),
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, heard the remitted  appeal  on  12  June
    2018.


The Upper Tribunal's decision

20. In its decision promulgated on 5 July 2018  the  Upper  Tribunal  panel
    approached the remittal from the Court of Appeal on the basis that  the
    Court of Appeal had set aside  the  Deputy  Judge's  decision,  to  the
    extent that she was to be  taken  as  having  held,  at  the  re-making
    hearing, that she did not have jurisdiction  to  re-visit  the  "delay"
    ground. The Deputy Judge's re-making decision therefore also had to  be
    treated as set aside. It did not appear to  the  Upper  Tribunal  panel
    that any issue was taken by the Court of Appeal regarding  the  setting
    aside of the FtJ's decision as  to  risk  on  return.  If  his  factual
    findings (at paragraphs 41 to 47) were sound, then  his  assessment  of
    risk was plainly flawed.

21. Accordingly,  at  that  hearing  on  12  June  2018,  the  panel  heard
    submissions from the parties  as  to  whether  the  FtJ's  findings  at
    paragraphs 41 to 47 of his decision could be allowed to stand,  in  the
    light of the delay in promulgating that decision. At the  hearing,  the
    Upper Tribunal panel went through the paragraphs in question.  In  each
    case, Mr Smyth, representing the appellant, was unable to  advance  any
    coherent  reason  why  the  findings  were,  in   any   way,   rendered
    questionable by the delay between the  FtJ's  hearing  the  appeal  and
    promulgating his decision. The panel therefore  had  no  hesitation  in
    coming to the same conclusion that the  Deputy  Judge  reached  in  her
    error of law decision.

22. The Upper Tribunal panel then  considered  an  application  under  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to  adduce
    evidence that was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  This  evidence
    comprises a witness statement of the appellant, in  which  he  gave  an
    explanation as to how it came to be that he was recorded  by  the  Home
    Office, in connection with his asylum claim, as  having  described  the
    document shown to him by his father as an arrest warrant.  The issue of
    whether this was an arrest warrant or, perhaps, some form  of  summons,
    was a material reason why the respondent, and, later, the FtJ  rejected
    the appellant's assertion that his father had  been  involved  in  KDPI
    activities in Iran.

23. In connection with the rule 15(2A) application, the  panel  heard  oral
    evidence  from  Mr  Turner,  who,  together  with  his  wife,  are  the
    appellant's foster carers. Mr Turner explained how the significance  of
    the description of the document (both in English  and  Kurdish  Sorani)
    had not been appreciated by the appellant or Mr Turner until after  the
    first set of Upper Tribunal proceedings.  Around this time,  there  had
    been a family barbeque, at which a friend (who, it appears, is Kurdish)
    had explained the distinction and its significance. Mr Turner then  did
    some internet research on the subject. The upshot was  that,  according
    to Mr Turner and the appellant, at the time the appellant was  recorded
    by the Home Office as referring to an arrest warrant, he  assumed  that
    this was the correct term for the document that he had seen and he  did
    not, at that time,  have  any  reason  to  doubt  it.  The  panel  were
    impressed by Mr Turner,  as  a  witness  and  satisfied  that,  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case, there had not been  unreasonable
    delay in producing  the  evidence  in  question.  The  panel  therefore
    decided to grant the rule 15(2A) application concerning  the  issue  of
    the document which he said his father showed him. For this reason,  the
    Upper Tribunal panel indicated that the FtJ's  findings  regarding  the
    appellant's father would not necessarily be material to the outcome  of
    the appeal. The re-hearing was adjourned to enable the  Upper  Tribunal
    to consider further oral and written evidence. The panel indicated that
    it would be for the Upper Tribunal to determine the factual matrix,  in
    the light of the rule 15(2A) and other evidence, along with evidence as
    to the general position (as regards both risk on  return  to  Iran  and
    Article 8), as existing at the present time.


The further evidence and the hearing on 11 February 2019

24. The appellant's  representatives  served  a  substantial  Supplementary
    Appellant's Bundle. This included, inter-alia, further statements  from
    the appellant, Heather Turner, Stephen Turner, a witness statement from
    [AH] (the Kurdish friend from the barbeque),  and  a  large  number  of
    additional statements and letters of support from other family  members
    of the foster carers and their friends, and friends of  the  appellant.
    Also included was a Refworld document published by the Immigration  and
    Refugee Board of Canada 'Iran: Court  summonses  and  arrest  warrants,
    including issuance procedures, methods of delivery, description of  the
    documents and the information they contain;  prevalence  of  fraudulent
    court documents', dated 29 September 2014. At the  hearing  Mr  Bramble
    served  a  copy  of  HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00430  (IAC),
    promulgated on 20 December 2018, and the Country Policy and Information
    Note (CPIN) 'Iran: Kurds and Kurdish political  groups',  version  3.0,
    January 2019.

25. I heard oral evidence from the appellant, from Mr and Mrs  Turner,  and
    from Mr A Pinnock, a friend of the  Turners.  I  will  refer  to  their
    evidence only in so far as it is necessary and relevant to my decision.
    It is however important to note at the outset that  the  appellant  was
    asked about  his  answer  to  question  61  of  his  asylum  interview,
    conducted on 20 August 2012, when he described his departure  from  the
    Kurdistan region of Iraq. The appellant said his father  showed  him  a
    letter called, 'Amir Bil Kabiz'. Later, in answer to question 89 of the
    asylum interview, the appellant repeated this term and, in  parenthesis
    next to the term, the interviewing officer wrote "arrest warrant".  The
    appellant explained that, the time of his substantive asylum interview,
    he did not know what the term meant but that he knew the  document  had
    been issued by the Iranian government  and  sent  to  his  father.  The
    appellant explained that, during  the  asylum  interview,  he  and  the
    interpreter had a discussion just  between  themselves  concerning  the
    nature  of  the  document.  As  a  result  of  this  conversation   the
    interpreter suggested that the document was  likely  to  be  an  arrest
    warrant. The applicant was, at the time  of  his  asylum  interview,  a
    minor and did not appreciate the relevance of designating the  document
    as an arrest warrant. The appellant again explained that the term  used
    in his interview, and subsequently in his statements, was one suggested
    by the interpreter which he freely adopted.  In  cross-examination  the
    appellant  agreed  that  he  accepted  the  original  translation,  but
    explained how a discussion with Mr [H] during a foster family  barbecue
    made him aware that the document may have been a court  summons  rather
    than an arrest warrant.


26. I heard very helpful submissions from both representatives and reserved
    my decision.

Findings and reasons

27. The understanding that the document  shown  to  the  appellant  by  his
    father was an "arrest warrant" was a material reason relied on  by  the
    FtJ in rejecting  the  appellant's  claim  that  his  father  had  been
    politically active. At the hearing on 12 June 2018 the  Upper  Tribunal
    panel were persuaded to allow further evidence to be admitted  relating
    to the appellant's use of the  term  "arrest  warrant".  In  a  witness
    statement dated 10 May 2018 the appellant  explained  that  his  father
    never specifically used the word "arrest warrant". His father told  the
    appellant that the authorities were after him because of his  political
    activities and the appellant was aware that  the  document  his  father
    showed him was "an official document."  The  document  was  written  in
    Farsi and, although the appellant could read Farsi, he was too young to
    understand what it meant. The appellant claimed that the  term  "arrest
    warrant" was suggested by an interpreter when he arrived in the  UK  in
    an attempt to clarify the nature of the document, and the appellant had
    gone along with that term ever since. He did not previously  appreciate
    the difference between a court summons and an arrest  warrant.  In  his
    oral evidence before the Upper Tribunal panel Mr Turner described  how,
    during a family barbecue, the appellant was discussing his case with Mr
    [H]. Mr [H], who is a Kurdish Iranian who had been  granted  asylum  in
    Norway, explained that the document may have been a court  summons,  or
    that, if it was an arrest warrant, the appellant's father may have been
    able to obtain it through payment of a bribe.  Mr  [H]  repeated  these
    assertions in a witness statement dated  20  June  2018.  In  his  oral
    evidence before the panel on 12 June 2018 Mr Turner  explained  how  he
    conducted some Internet  research  into  the  possible  nature  of  the
    document, and in his evidence before me on 11 February 2019  Mr  Turner
    described how he tried to look for the document using the term detailed
    in the asylum interview, but was not sure of the correct spellings  and
    didn't get far.


28. When evaluating this new element of  the  appellant's  account,  it  is
    important to appreciate that the FtJ did not actually make any  adverse
    credibility finding against the appellant personally. If one  carefully
    analyses the FtJ's findings at  paragraphs  42  to  47,  whilst  it  is
    apparent that he did not find it credible that the Iranian  authorities
    would give the appellant's father a copy of an arrest warrant prior  to
    arresting him, the FtJ did not suggest that the appellant  himself  was
    lying when he described his father showing him a  document.  The  FtJ's
    other findings, from paragraphs 43 to 46, are to the  effect  that  the
    description given by the appellant of the family uprooting  itself  and
    leaving Iraq, and of the biweekly visits to the appellant's father, did
    not necessarily point to any political  activity  by  the  father.  The
    FtJ's finding at paragraph  47  was  that  there  was  no  satisfactory
    evidence, on the lower standard of proof, that the  appellant's  father
    was involved in activities against the Iranian regime as the  appellant
    had  suggested.  Nowhere  does  the  FtJ  actually  conclude  that  the
    appellant himself has been untruthful. This observation was accepted by
    the Presenting Officer, Mr Bramble,  in  his  submissions.  Mr  Bramble
    stated that "there has never been an issue as to  the  appellant's  own
    credibility" and Mr Bramble indicated that he  did  not  challenge  the
    appellant's credibility. For my part I found the  appellant  to  be  an
    impressive witness. His account  has  been  measured  and  without  any
    perceptible attempt at embellishment. He  has  consistently  maintained
    that he has no firm knowledge of his father's  activities  or  why  the
    Iranian authorities would be interested in his  father.  The  appellant
    also gave his evidence before me in a direct and straightforward manner
    and without any hesitation.

29. I find the appellant's account of the circumstances in which he came to
    adopt the term "arrest warrant"  to  be  inherently  plausible.  Having
    observed  and  presided  over   countless   judicial   hearings   where
    individuals  were  questioned  about  their   asylum   claims   through
    interpreters,  the  appellant's   description   of   having   a   brief
    conversation  with  the  Home  Office  interpreter  during  his  asylum
    interview, clarifying the nature of the document shown to  him  by  his
    father, rings true. It is very often the case that an interpreter  will
    ask an individual to clarify what they mean to ensure  the  translation
    is accurate, and that there is  often  no  objection  and  no  specific
    recording by the person asking the questions. I bear in mind  that,  at
    the time of the appellant's asylum interview, he was a child of 15, and
    that he has consistently maintained throughout his  asylum  application
    and the appeal process,  that  he  did  not  have  any  opportunity  to
    consider the document in detail, merely noting that it appeared  to  be
    an official document as it had  an  Iranian  logo  on  it.  I  find  it
    inherently plausible that a child of  15,  with  limited  knowledge  of
    Farsi, would innocently adopt and maintain a suggestion made to him  by
    an official interpreter relating to the nature  of  the  document.  The
    Upper Tribunal panel previously found  the  evidence  from  Mr  Turner,
    relating to  the  circumstances  in  which  the  possibility  that  the
    document was not an arrest warrant became known to the appellant, at  a
    family barbecue, had the ring of truth about it, and that Mr Turner was
    a credible witness. There was no challenge to Mr  Turner's  credibility
    by Mr Bramble.

30. The FtJ's finding in relation to  the  arrest  warrant  was  a  central
    reason for his rejection of the appellant's claim that his  father  had
    been politically active and had been sought by the Iranian authorities.
    The new evidence, which I have found credible, suggests the appellant's
    father showed him an official Iranian document, but that  the  document
    was not necessarily an arrest  warrant.  I  have  considered  the  2014
    Refworld document published by the Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
    Canada. This indicated that summonses are issued by the competent court
    and forwarded by  the  police  to  the  person  in  question.  It  also
    indicated that a neighbour might  accept  to  receive  the  summons  on
    behalf of the suspect. Based on this background evidence  the  document
    shown to the appellant by his father could credibly have been  a  court
    summons. Whilst it remains impossible to determine the actual nature of
    the document I am satisfied, on the lower standard of proof, and having
    regard to the emphasis placed by the appellant's father on the document
    as an indicator of the adverse attention of  the  Iranian  authorities,
    that it is likely to have been a court summons.

31. In light of the  above  it  becomes  necessary  to  revisit  the  other
    findings by the FtJ at paragraphs  43  to  46.  The  FtJ's  finding  at
    paragraph 43 were made in the context of the document being  an  arrest
    warrant rather than a summons. I do not find however  that  this  makes
    any  material  difference  to  the  FtJ's  reasoning.  If  the  Iranian
    authorities were unable to execute an  arrest  warrant  in  Iraq,  they
    would similarly be unable to issue a summons. The  FtJ's  finding  that
    the Iranian authorities  would  have  been  unable  to  execute  either
    document in Iraq is entirely  reasonable.  There  does  not,  at  first
    glance, appear to be any reason why the family could not have  remained
    in Iraq if the appellant's father feared being targeted by the  Iranian
    authorities. The appellant was however a child  at  the  time  and  was
    clearly unaware of the  full  circumstances  surrounding  the  father's
    visit to  Iran  and  the  decision  to  leave  Iraq.  I  note,  on  the
    appellant's account, that the region of Iraq in which he and his family
    were living was relatively close to the Iranian  border.  There  is  no
    evidence as  to  whether  the  appellant's  parents  were  entitled  to
    lawfully reside in  Iraq,  or  whether  their  immigration  status  was
    precarious and secure. In these circumstances,  and  mindful  that  the
    burden of proof continues to rest on the appellant, I do not  find  the
    flight from Iraq materially undermines the appellant's claim  that  his
    father had been targeted by the Iranian authorities and that the family
    were sufficiently concerned for their wellbeing that they had to  leave
    the life they had established in Iraq.

32. At paragraph 44 the FtJ was not satisfied that the  appellant's  mother
    would have told  him  that  the  people  they  regularly  visited  were
    involved with the KDPI given that the details of his father  activities
    with, presumably the same organisation, were not disclosed  to  him.  I
    find this to be a neutral point. If the appellant's father was involved
    with the KDPI there would be obvious safety and  safeguarding  concerns
    if his minor son knew of the details. From a security point of view, it
    would make sense not to disclose one's involvement in  an  organisation
    targeted by a government authority to a child. Whilst the disclosure by
    the appellant's parents about their friends' involvement with the  KDPI
    would equally be a potential safety concern,  the  appellant  was  told
    nothing about their involvement in the organisation  and  politics  was
    never raised when the  appellant  and  his  mother  visited.  In  these
    circumstances I do not find this point undermines the appellant's claim
    that his father is likely to have been politically active.

33. At paragraph 45 the FtJ found that the accounts of visits  by  the  two
    men to the family home, and of  the  evenings  the  appellant's  father
    spent away from that home, were not specifically linked to any evidence
    of political activity, and was consistent with many other explanations,
    including social activity by the appellant's  father.  The  appellant's
    description must  however  be  considered  in  its  full  context.  The
    appellant was never informed of the reasons for  the  visit,  which  is
    unusual if the visit was purely social. The appellant heard the name of
    the Iranian president being mentioned. If the meetings were related  to
    political activity, and specifically  a  Kurdish  separatist  movement,
    this would be consistent with the appellant's father's subsequent  fear
    that the Iranian authorities had an adverse interest in him.  Whilst  I
    cannot exclude the possibility that  the  visits  and  the  appellant's
    father's absence from the family home could be  for  other  reasons,  I
    find,  having  considered  the  evidence  before  me  holistically  and
    applying the lower standard of proof, that the  visits  did  relate  to
    political activity.


34. At paragraph 46 the FtJ was not  satisfied  that,  if  the  appellant's
    father was involved in KDPI activity, that he would have returned  with
    the intention of making arrangement for the family to move back  there.
    Certainly if one was involved with an organisation banned in Iran,  one
    would be very cautious in moving back  there  with  one's  family.  The
    natural inference from the appellant's account of his father's visit to
    Iran however suggests that his father may have  believed  it  was,  for
    whatever reason, safe for the family to return to the country but that,
    during his visit, he became aware that the authorities had  an  adverse
    interest in him and that it was not therefore safe. I do not find  this
    reason undermines the appellant's claim that his father was  likely  to
    be involved with the KDPI.

35. Having considered the appellant's evidence 'in the round',  and  noting
    that the KDPI is a banned organisation in Iran (see, most recently, HB,
    I find, on the lower standard of proof, that the appellant's father was
    involved with the KDPI, that he and his family fled from Iraq after  he
    visited Iran and became aware  that  the  Iranian  authorities  had  an
    adverse interest in him, and  that  the  family  subsequently  fled  to
    Europe.

36. I must now consider whether these facts would expose the appellant to a
    real risk of persecution  if  he  were  removed  to  Iran.  Mr  Bramble
    helpfully accepted, and I did not  consider  it  to  be  in  any  event
    disputed, that the appellant is a Kurdish national of Iran who lived in
    the KRI (Kurdish Region of Iraq) from the age of 8  until  15  when  he
    left. The decision in HB, which held that SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2018] UKUT  00430  (IAC)  remains  valid
    country guidance, indicates, inter alia, that although  Kurds  in  Iran
    face discrimination this, in general, is not at  such  a  level  as  to
    amount to persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment,  and  that  the  mere
    fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or without  a  valid
    passport, and even if combined with illegal exit,  does  not  create  a
    risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment. Since 2016 the  Iranian
    authorities  have  however  become  increasingly  suspicious  of,   and
    sensitive to, Kurdish political activity and those of Kurdish ethnicity
    are  regarded  with  even  greater  suspicion  than  hitherto  and  are
    reasonably likely to be subjected to heightened scrutiny on  return  to
    Iran. Kurdish ethnicity is therefore a risk factor which, when combined
    with other factors, may create a real risk of persecution or Article  3
    ill-treatment. Another risk factor is a period of residence in the  KRI
    by  a  Kurdish  returnee.  This  is  reasonably  likely  to  result  in
    additional questioning by the authorities on return. However, this is a
    factor that will be highly fact-specific and  the  degree  of  interest
    that such residence  will  excite  will  depend,  non-exhaustively,  on
    matters such as the length of residence in the  KRI,  what  the  person
    concerned was doing there and why they left. The  Tribunal  found  that
    Kurds involved in Kurdish political groups or activity are at  risk  of
    arrest,  prolonged  detention  and  physical  abuse  by   the   Iranian
    authorities. Headnote 10 reads, "The  Iranian  authorities  demonstrate
    what could be described as a 'hair-trigger' approach to those suspected
    of or perceived to be  involved  in  Kurdish  political  activities  or
    support for  Kurdish  rights.  By  'hair-trigger'  it  means  that  the
    threshold for suspicion is low and the reaction of the  authorities  is
    reasonably likely to be extreme."

37. Although the appellant's father was involved in political activity, and
    was targeted by the Iranian authorities as a consequence, the appellant
    himself has not been politically active. He was only 8 years  old  when
    he left Iran, and was still a minor throughout his, admittedly lengthy,
    residence in the KRI. He is however Kurdish and, given  his  length  of
    residence outside Iran, is likely to be subject to heightened  scrutiny
    on return to Iran. Given that his father was specifically  targeted  by
    the Iranian  authorities,  and  given  that  the  appellant  cannot  be
    expected to lie about his identity or his parentage, I find there is  a
    real risk that, on return, when  questioned,  the  Iranian  authorities
    will become aware that the appellant's father is a  person  of  adverse
    interest to them.

38. HB does not deal with  the  treatment  of  family  members  of  Kurdish
    political activists of interest to the authorities. Mr Bramble  however
    drew my attention to the Country Information  and  Policy  Note  (CPIN)
    'Iran: Kurds and Kurdish political groups', version 3.0, January  2019.
    Although there is no consensus in  the  sources  quoted  at  10.5.1  to
    10.5.6, with one source stating that descendants of politically  active
    parents will not in principle face any risk, there are  nevertheless  a
    number of individuals  and  organisations  that  consider  that  family
    members of activists could be sought out  and  could  face  arrest  and
    interrogations by the authorities, depending on the  particular  facts,
    and that the consequences for  the  family  member  could  be  serious.
    Having regard to the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity and the fact that he
    resided in the KRI for a number of years, albeit as a minor, and having
    found his father was politically active and was  specifically  targeted
    by the Iranian authorities, and having regard  to  the  'hair  trigger'
    approach of the Iranian authorities as described in headnote 10 of  HB,
    and the content of the CPIN note at 10.5 relating to the  treatment  of
    the family members of activists, I am persuaded, on the lower  standard
    of proof, that the appellant would be exposed to a real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment during any questioning on his return to Iran. I  consequently
    allow his appeal on asylum grounds.

Article 8

39. In the Reasons for Refusal Letter  the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    appellant had established a private life in the UK. Mr Bramble accepted
    that the relationship between the appellant and the Turners, his foster
    family,  constituted  family   life.   Indeed,   the   voluminous   and
    unchallenged evidence points  to  an  exceedingly  strong  relationship
    between the appellant and his foster family. Having found however  that
    the appellant faces a real risk of serious ill-treatment if returned to
    Iran, it is not necessary for me to consider the nature and quality  of
    the appellant's private life, or the impact on  his  relationship  with
    the Turners if removed, in any further  detail.  This  is  because  his
    exposure to a real risk of serious ill-treatment will, on any  rational
    analysis, constitute 'very significant obstacles' within the  terms  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), and would constitute such a powerful factor in
    the proportionality assessment under Article 8, having  regard  to  all
    the factors in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, such as to outweigh the public interest factors.  I  consequently
    allow the appeal under Article 8 as well.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds
The appeal is allowed on Article 8 human rights grounds


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


         Signed Blum

         [pic]                          Date 19 February 2019

