
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/04848/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|                                          |                            |
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 12 December 2014                       |On 02 January 2015          |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                              FARKHUNDA KAMRAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms N Ahmad for Denning Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Simpson which dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all
   grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 26 October 1963 and is a citizen  of  Pakistan.
   The Appellant entered the UK as a student on  2  February  2008  and  had
   leave to remain until 31 March 2009. She applied  for  further  leave  to
   remain on 27 March 2009 but her application was refused  on  10  December
   2009. She made a further application as a spouse on 3 February  2012  and
   this was refused on 9 April 2012. On 19  October  2012  she  applied  for
   leave to remain under the  domestic  violence  concession  and  this  was
   refused. She then claimed asylum on 19 April 2013 and this was refused in
   a letter dated 1 May 2013 and the reasons can be summarised  as  follows:
   it was acknowledged that sectarian violence was  an  ongoing  problem  in
   Pakistan but neither her nor any member of her family had  been  targeted
   as Shia Muslims; it was not accepted that she was the victim of  domestic
   violence; it was not accepted that her husband's family had any  interest
   in her or her daughter given the lack of any contact and her  claim  that
   they believed she was divorced 5 years ago; internal  relocation  was  an
   option


The Judge's Decision
4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Simpson ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found that the Appellant's  evidence  was  disjointed
   and vague; she did not accept  that  the  Appellant  was  the  victim  of
   domestic violence and found that she had fabricated the claim to  justify
   her asylum claim; she found that the Appellant was not at risk  from  her
   husband's family in Pakistan and therefore could return to her family  in
   Karachi  or  she  could  relocate  if  she  wished;  she  looked  at  the
   Appellant's case under Article 8 together with  that  of  her  child  and
   found that they could return to Pakistan together.
5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  2  May  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Page gave permission to appeal.

6. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Ms  Ahmad  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The judge was wrong to dismiss the suggestion that the Appellant was a
      victim of domestic violence. The  husband's  acquittal  at  the  Crown
      Court was not determinative of the issue.

   b) The medical evidence supported her assertion in that she was  in  anti
      depressants and had back pain which was consistent  with  her  account
      that her husband caused her an injury.

   c) The  weight  given  by  the  Judge  to  the  Appellant's  account  was
      irrational.

   d) The Judge failed to take into account, in stating that her account was
      confused, that as the Appellant was on anti depressants this may  have
      impacted on the quality of her evidence.

   e) The judge had failed to look at the country evidence  in  relation  to
      risk on retur.

7. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

   a) This was an attempt to reargue the appeal.

   b) The Appellant's husband was acquitted of any offence  in  relation  to
      her after a trial: the Judge was entitled to take  that  into  account
      while recognising that the standard of proof was different.

   c) The medical evidence did not support the Appellant's account as it all
      post dated the  history  complained  of:  there  was  no  contemporary
      evidence to suggest that she had a  miscarriage  as  a  result  of  an
      assault and the fact that she had depression  was  equally  consistent
      with her status.

   d) The fact of depression without more was  not  enough  to  explain  the
      confused nature of her evidence.

   e) In relation to risk on return to the Judge did not accept that she was
      at risk and at paragraph 51 gave her reasons.



The Law

8.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to   follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to  give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ
   367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:

   "Where, as in this case,  complaint  is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
   adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is   to   say
   credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that  the  criticism
   is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and does not merely
   reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate  tribunal  that  it  might
   itself have taken a different view of the matter from that that  appealed
   to the adjudicator."




Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. In  relation  to  the  first  ground  that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
   sufficient weight to the medical I am satisfied that the Judge  did  take
   the  medical  evidence  into  account  in  her  overall   assessment   of
   credibility but gave it little weight and she was entitled to do so.  She
   makes reference to taking into account evidence in the Appellant's bundle
   at paragraph 3 and then specifically refers at paragraph  11  to  medical
   issues and at paragraph 25 and 50 to her medical records.

12. However at its highest the medical records contained an account  of  her
   claim to her GP that she was a victim of  domestic  violence  some  years
   after the events in issue, confirm that she  had  a  miscarriage  without
   ascribing it to her claim that she was assaulted  and  confirm  that  she
   suffers from depression which again is not uncommon amongst  those  whose
   status is precarious. The suggestion that her  claimed  back  pain  (page
   24B) is supportive of her account of him causing injury to  her  back  in
   2012 is clearly unfounded given that her oral evidence as recorded by the
   Judge at paragraph 26 was that she already 'had a bad back' in 2008. I am
   therefore satisfied that the Judge has taken the  medical  evidence  into
   account such as it is but she was entitled to take the  view  that  where
   the medical evidence simply recounts a history which she  was  minded  to
   reject and contains nothing which did not depend on the  truthfulness  of
   the Appellant, the  part  which  it  could  play  in  the  assessment  of
   credibility was negligible.

13. The suggestion that the Judge failed to take into  account  the  medical
   evidence when making her finding that the Appellant's evidence was  vague
   and confused is without merit as there is nothing in the medical evidence
   to suggest that confusion is a symptom of the medication she  was  taking
   and to reach that conclusion  would  have  required  the  Judge  to  make
   clinical findings that were not open to her.

14. It is suggested that the Judge  misdirected  herself  when  taking  into
   account that the Appellant's husband was acquitted in his  trial  at  the
   Crown Court of assaulting her. I reject that suggestion: it  was  a  fact
   that the Appellant's husband was acquitted and the Judge was entitled  to
   take that into account but the Judge at paragraph 50  clearly  recognises
   that the standard of  proof  in  criminal  proceedings  is  'considerably
   higher' than that which applies in immigration matters.

15.  In relation to the argument that the Judge failed to take into  account
   the best interests of the Appellant's child I am  satisfied  that  having
   made a finding that she did not accept the Appellant's account  that  she
   was the victim of domestic violence or was of interest to  her  husband's
   family she directed herself accordingly taking  into  account  Zoumbas  v
   SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 . Given her findings in relation to  the  mother  and
   the fact that the child was not a British citizen  it  was  open  to  the
   Judge at paragraph 54-55 to find that  the  Appellant  and  her  daughter
   could return to her family in Pakistan together. This was a finding  that
   was open to her and one she explained with sufficient detail.

16. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning and the grounds are merely  an  attempt  to
   reargue the appeal.

CONCLUSION

17. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

18. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
1.1.2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell




