
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04784/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                               MR XHULJAN CANI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr D Sellwood of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr K Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Albania  born  on  23  March  1999.   He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N.M Paul dated 9 September 2015 against the decision  of
    the respondent dated refusing him asylum and humanitarian protection in
    the United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Garratt
    who found it  was  arguable  that  the  Judge  applied  a  muddled  and
    erroneous  burden  and  standard  of  proof  and  did  not  follow  the
    guidelines for the child vulnerable appellants.

    The First-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The Judge in his determination made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise. The appellant's claim is that he belonged  to  a  particular
    social group, namely that he is part of  a  blood  feud.  The  starting
    point of the analysis of the case is a consideration  the  case  of  EH
    (blood feuds) Albania CG UKUT 348 (IAC) ("EH"). The guidance shows that
    the number of active blood feuds are declining. It  was  accepted  that
    under Kanun blood feud, there was always a risk of pre-emptive  killing
    by a dominant clan. The Albanian state has taken steps to improve State
    protection, but is perhaps not that effective in Northern Albania.  The
    guidance provides for internal  relocation  which  may  be  sufficient,
    depending on factors such as the  nature  of  the  aggression  and  its
    extent.

 4. Further guidance was given to the Tribunal, as part of a  fact  finding
    exercise, in considering whether the blood feud exists. This involved a
    consideration of a number of factors related to the background  to  the
    feud; length of time the last death; the ability of the members of  the
    aggressive clan to locate the appellant and the likely future  attitude
    of the police at other authorities. In  particular,  there  had  to  be
    regard to producing satisfactory individual evidence in existence. This
    would relate to the appellant's  profile  as  a  potential  target  and
    whether or not any other members of his family had been attacked.

 5. Upon these considerations, in this case, a number of  factors  give  me
    rise for concern about the substance of the appellant's case. The first
    relates to the production of a  letter  from  the  headman  which  post
    -dates the departure of the appellant by 4 to 5 months, and the  actual
    coming into existence of the blood feud by nearly a year. Secondly,  it
    was not produced in any formal way, so that it is impossible to conduct
    an audit exercise. Thirdly, it was submitted to the Tribunal under  the
    cover of a letter dated 10 August 2015 and not served to the  Secretary
    of State in the intervening five month period.

 6. The evidence in relation to the  uncle  who  carried  out  the  alleged
    killing is also very much unsatisfactory. It seems  inconceivable  that
    this uncle had left the country and not had any  further  contact  with
    his family.

 7. Furthermore, it is also inconceivable that there would not be  evidence
    obtainable from some source - whether it be  police  records  or  press
    reports - of the actual killing itself. Particularly, if this  was  the
    large and powerful family with influence, that would  be  the  kind  of
    incident that would attract attention, both  from  the  press  and  the
    authorities.

 8. Inadequate evidence was given  in  relation  to  the  attempt  to  seek
    support from the police. The formulaic answer that the police were  not
    interested does not strengthen the case.

 9. No evidence has been adduced as to why it is not the  case  with  other
    members of the appellant's family, who are related to the  uncle,  that
    they themselves have not been placed at risk.

10. It is also taken into account that it is highly relevant the  appellant
    left the country shortly after completing his secondary education.

11. Applying all these factors as set out at the case  of  EH,  "I  am  not
    satisfied that there is any real substance to this  case.  In  reaching
    this conclusion, I had regard to the appellant's evidence  as  a  young
    man and it has to be considered carefully. However I am  satisfied  the
    core aspect of this story simply lacks credibility".

12.  The  background  evidence  does  not  add  anything  to  support   the
    appellant's case. It also adds nothing to the substantial issue of  the
    appellant's credibility.  Taking  as  a  whole,  therefore,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the appellant's case is one that  I  could  accept  been
    credible.

13. The Judge refused the appellant's appeal on "human  rights  grounds  on
    asylum grounds".

    The grounds of appeal

14. The appellant grounds of appeals are as follows which are  set  out  in
    summary. Judge Paul's findings are fundamentally flawed.  He  erred  in
    his approach to the  documentary  objective  information  evidence.  He
    failed to consider and properly addressed the objective information  in
    the COIS Report. The Judge has applied a rigorous standard of proof  to
    examine the evidence of the appellant, who is a minor.

15. The determination is based on speculation and is  unreasonable.  It  is
    biased and prejudiced. The Judge has  drawn  a  wrong  conclusion  that
    there  is  not  any  real  substance  to  the  appellant's  case.   The
    determination is against the objective evidence. The  Judge  failed  to
    consider the present situation in Albania in relation to the blood feud
    of the appellant's father's family with the  Sulaj  family.  The  Judge
    wrongly concluded that there is no problem for  the  appellant  on  the
    basis of the country of information guidance report that Karun problems
    relate to the areas in the north of the country and  the  appellant  is
    from Tirana. The appellant comes from Burrel area in Albania  which  is
    in the North areas of the country. Thus the risk upon  return  was  not
    properly addressed.

16. The  Judge  did  not  give  proper  consideration  to  the  appellant's
    submission that the lack of a police response was  entirely  consistent
    with the objective evidence and that the letter from  the  headman  was
    compelling and independent corroboration of the appellant's account and
    as a result of this, he was clearly a risk.  The  Judge  did  not  have
    regard to the country information and guidance of Albania which is very
    clear on the issue of sufficiency of protection.

17. The Judge failed to give appropriate consideration to s55 and the  best
    interests of children. He failed take into account that in  making  the
    proportionality assessment under Article 8, the best interests  of  the
    child must be a primary consideration. This means  that  they  must  be
    considered first. They can, of course, be outweighed by the  cumulative
    effect  of  other  considerations.  In  this  case  the  countervailing
    considerations were the  need  to  maintain  firm  in  the  immigration
    control, coupled with the appellant's  mother's  appalling  immigration
    history in the precariousness  of  a  position  when  family  life  was
    created. But as the Tribunal rightly pointed out, the children were not
    to be blamed for that. The inevitable result of  removing  the  child's
    primary carer would be that they had to leave with her. On  the  facts,
    it is at least as strong as Edore v Secretary of  State  for  the  home
    Department [2003] one WLR 2979 where Simon Brown LJ held  at  paragraph
    26 that "there is only room for one view". In those circumstances,  the
    Secretary of State was clearly right to concede that they could only be
    one answer.

18. The respondent and the Judge have challenged  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant on the basis of  minor  discrepancies  found  in  the  Asylum
    interview record in evidence at the hearing. The appellant  will  argue
    that the Judge has misled himself  from  the  clarifications.  Even  if
    there are some discrepancies they are of  a  minor  nature  and  cannot
    damage the credibility of the appellant. The Judge has failed  to  give
    detailed reasons that he found that the core aspects of  the  appellant
    story simply  lack  credibility  and  was  wrong  to  assert  that  the
    background material does nothing to support the appellant's  case.  The
    Judge did not give  proper  consideration  to  the  country  background
    information in support of the appellant's  claim.  The  appellant  gave
    reasonable explanations about his case and any lack of evidence  should
    not be taken that his account is not credible. The appellant's case has
    no  inconsistencies  and  his  account  corresponds  with  the  country
    information background. The findings of the Judge are flawed.

    The hearing

19. At the hearing and on behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Sellwood  submitted
    the following which I summarise. He first stated  that  the  solicitors
    have recently been instructed to represent the appellant and  they  the
    appellant's and the respondent's bundle of documents. He also said  the
    ground under s55 is not being pursued because the  appellant  has  been
    granted discretionary leave.

20. The Judge did not take the proper approach on key issues in the appeal.
    He did not have the  right  approach  to  the  background  evidence  on
    Albania. He made improper  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the
    appellant. He did not take  into  account  that  the  appellant  was  a
    vulnerable minor. He was aged 15 1/2 at  the  time  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

21. The burden of proof as set out by the Judge  in  the  determination  is
    muddled and erroneous. The Judge said that it was to a  relatively  low
    standard but did not say against what it was relative to.  He  did  not
    set out the full burden of proof as he should have done.  The  guidance
    for minor asylum seekers makes clear that adverse credibility  findings
    should not be made on  any  omissions  in  evidence.  It  is  also  not
    reasonable to expect the appellant to know everything is a  minor.  The
    only nod that the Judge knew that the appellant  was  a  minor  was  at
    paragraph 35 when he said that the appellant is a young man.

22. The Judge made adverse credibility findings at  paragraph  27  when  he
    said that the letter from the headmen post-dated the refusal letter. It
    was only when the appellant received the refusal letter did he  attempt
    to corroborate his claim and therefore no adverse inference should have
    been drawn. The appellant was too young to  know  the  details  of  the
    blood feud. There was an adverse inference drawn when  the  Judge  said
    that it is inconceivable that the appellant's uncle did not communicate
    with the family and why should a 16-year-old boy know  why.  The  Judge
    had an expectation of documentary evidence.

23. It is unclear what inference the Judge drew at  paragraph  34  when  he
    stated that he came to this country shortly after completing  his  high
    school education. The Judge should have put questions to the  appellant
    and given him an  opportunity  to  address  this  issue.  He  has  been
    informed by the appellant that the Judge did not ask the appellant  any
    questions at the hearing. The appellant's evidence was consistent  with
    the background evidence. There has been  no  anxious  scrutiny  in  the
    Judge's five-page determination. There is lack of proper reasoning.

24. Mr Kandola on behalf of the respondent made the  following  submissions
    which I summarise. The Judge gave adequate reasons and he  had  at  the
    back of his mind that the appellant is a minor and at paragraph  35  he
    states the appellant is a young man. The Judge had regard to  the  case
    of EH. He found that there is improved protection for victims of  blood
    feuds. He also said that blood feuds are normally in the north  of  the
    country  and  the  appellant  lives  in  Tirana.  There  has  been   no
    misdirection of the country guidance case.

25. This is a relatively simple case because the appellant claims that  his
    uncle shot a man and the nephews want to kill the  appellant.  He  also
    took into account that in EH it stated that letter from  NGOs  and  the
    unreliability of  documents  from  Albania  should  not  be  considered
    credible evidence of about a blood feud. There was no evidence that the
    appellant's uncle killed anyone. The Judge stated that  if  the  family
    was so powerful and  high-profile  there  would  definitely  have  been
    evidence of a killing either in the press or from the  authorities.  In
    respect of the  burden  of  proof  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  the
    direction the Judge gave to himself. He may have made  himself  clearer
    but it does not amount to a misdirection in law.

26. In reply Mr Sellwood stated that the latest reports say that there  are
    200 families in self-confinement in Tirana. The appellant  came  in  to
    the country at the age of  15  any  did  not  know  what  evidence  was
    required. It was only after refusal that he attempted to  gain  further
    evidence. As a minor he should be given the benefit of the doubt.

    Decision as to whether there is a material error of law

27. I have given  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  determination  of  first-tier
    Tribunal Judge, NM Paul and have taken  into  account  the  grounds  of
    appeal, the country  guidance  case  and  the  background  evidence  on
    Albania. The ground of appeal state that the Judge did  not  take  into
    account that the appellant is a minor and cannot be  expected  to  know
    all the details of the blood feud. The grounds of  appeal  also  assert
    that the Judge has  not  taken  into  account  background  evidence  on
    Albania in respect of blood feuds  and  has  made  adverse  credibility
    findings against the appellant without giving good  reasons  for  doing
    so. He has also applied a muddled and erroneous burden and standard  of
    proof.

28. It is clear from paragraph 35 of the determination that the Judge  took
    into account that the appellant is a minor. He stated "in reaching this
    conclusion, I had regard to the appellant's evidence as a young man and
    it has to be considered carefully. However, I  am  satisfied  that  the
    core aspects to this story simply lacks credibility". The appellant was
    15 1/2 at the date of the hearing. The Judge took into account that  he
    is a young man and his evidence has to  be  considered  carefully.  The
    Judge therefore  fully  took  into  account  and  was  aware  that  the
    appellant is a minor and his evidence has to be carefully considered.

29. The only evidence before the Judge that he was a victim of a blood feud
    on which the appellant relied was his own evidence and a letter from  a
    headman. At paragraph 27, the Judge stated that this  letter  from  the
    Headman "post-dates the departure of the  appellant  by  four  or  five
    months, and the actual coming into  existence  of  the  blood  feud  by
    nearly a year". The Judge found that it was not produced in any  formal
    way, so that it would be possible to conduct an audit exercise  and  it
    was not served on the respondent but sent to  the  Tribunal  under  the
    cover of a letter dated 10 August 2015. This demonstrated to the  Judge
    that the letter had not been sent to the  respondent  for  them  to  do
    attempt to verify it. In any event the Judge found that it could not be
    audited not having come from an official source.  These  are  perfectly
    sustainable findings.

30. The Judge found that other  than  this  evidence  there  was  no  other
    evidence in relation to the appellant's claim that  his  uncle  carried
    out the alleged killing of a powerful and large family  which  was  the
    catalyst for the beginning of the claimed blood feud. The Judge rightly
    asked himself the question why there was no other evidence  other  than
    the appellant's evidence and one  letter  about  this  blood  feud.  He
    stated that it was inconceivable that  the  appellant  could  not  have
    obtained evidence from some other source such as press reports and  the
    authority as to the actual killing itself.  He  found  that  given  the
    evidence that it was a large and powerful family  with  influence  that
    would be the kind of incident that would attract attention,  both  from
    the press and the authorities. The Judge was entitled to so find  given
    that the appellant came here at the age of 15 and is  in  contact  with
    his parents who he claims sent him the headman's letter  from  Albania.
    The Judge was entitled to take into account that other  evidence  which
    could have been produced from Albania was not provided.

31. The Judge found at paragraph 32 that the  appellant's  explanation  was
    adequate and formalistic  for  that  the  police  said  that  they  not
    interested in blood feuds when the matter was  reported  to  them.  The
    Judge took into account the background evidence and stated at paragraph
    24 that the Albanian state, though, has  taken  steps  to  improve  the
    protection for victims of blood feuds, but they are  perhaps  not  that
    effective in Northern Albania.  He  took  into  account  the  case  the
    guidance given in EH and found that the guidance provides for  internal
    relocation to an area less dependent on the Karun such as  Tirana.  The
    Judge was entitled to find that the appellant lives in Tirana  and  not
    in  northern  Albania  which  considerably  lowers  the  risk  for  the
    appellant to be a victim of a blood feud.

32. At paragraph 25 the Judge took into account the guidance in EH and said
    that as part of a fact-finding exercise, the first question  to  answer
    is whether the blood feud exists. He also found that this involved  the
    consideration of a number of factors relating to the background to  the
    feud such as length of time since the last death, the  ability  of  the
    members of the aggressive plan  to  locate  the  appellant  and  likely
    future attitude of the police and other authorities.

33. The Tribunal found in EH that the following matters will be relevant in
    determining the nature of the risk on return in cases where a claim  is
    based on the existence of a 'blood feud' in Albania:

    (a)    whether the dispute can be characterised as a 'blood feud' at
         all;

      b) even if it can, the extent to which its origins and development (if
         any) are to be regarded by Albanian society as falling  within  the
         classic principles of the Kanun;

      c) the history of the feud, including the notoriety  of  the  original
         killings and  numbers killed;

      d) the past and  likely  future  attitude  of  the  police  and  other
         authorities towards the feud;

      e) the degree of commitment  shown  by  the  opposing  family  towards
         prosecuting the feud;

      f) the time that has elapsed since the last killing;

    (g)    the ability of the opposing family to locate the alleged
         potential victim anywhere in Albania;

    (h)    that person's profile as a potential target for the blood feud;
         and

    (i)    the prospects for eliminating the feud, whether by recourse to
         the payment of money, a reconciliation organisation or otherwise.

34. Given that the only piece  of  evidence,  other  than  the  appellant's
    evidence, that the appellant provided to prove he  is  a  victim  of  a
    blood feud, was the headman's letter. I note here that  it  was  argued
    that because the appellant was a minor he could not be expected to have
    that much knowledge of the blood feud. Therefore the  only  independent
    evidence provided, to prove he is a victim of  a  blood  feud  was  the
    headman's letter. The Judge was entitled not to  place  any  weight  on
    this letter as he  took  into  account  the  general  unreliability  of
    documents coming from Albania set  out  in  the  guidance  in  EH.  The
    appellant was not able to provide answers or give  information  on  the
    various other factors which need to  be  considered  by  the  Judge  as
    outlined in EH, set out above as an indicia of a continuing blood feud.
    There was no  credible  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant  of  the
    existence of a blood feud or that the appellant was a victim of it.

35. The Judge also found that at paragraph 33 that  no  evidence  has  been
    adduced as to why other members of the appellant's family, who are also
    related to the uncle,  have  not  been  put  at  risk  themselves.  The
    appellant's evidence is that his father and other family members are in
    Albania. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the  absence  of  any
    credible explanation for why other members of  the  appellant's  family
    would also not at risk and but only the appellant would be at risk, was
    not credible. There is no perversity of reasoning in this conclusion.

36. The Judge at paragraph 21 stated "the burden is on the appellant, to  a
    relatively low standard, to show that he is at risk of persecution". It
    has been argued that this  is  an  erroneous  and  muddled  burden  and
    standard of proof as stated by the permission  Judge.  While  I  accept
    that the Judge could have put it better and set it out in more  detail,
    I do not find that this amounts to a material error of law. I  did  not
    find that the Judge applied the wrong burden and standard of  proof  in
    his analysis of the evidence and the conclusions that  he  reached.  No
    differently constituted Tribunal would come to a different conclusion.

37. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach his conclusion
    that he did based on his consideration and evaluation of  the  evidence
    as a whole. I find there is nothing unreasonable  or  perverse  in  the
    Judge's conclusions and nor was his conclusions perverse. The Judge was
    fully aware that the appellant was a minor. He took  into  account  the
    background evidence and the country guidance case of EH and found  that
    the appellant's claim is not credible.  I  find  that  the  Immigration
    Judge's reasoning is understandable, and not perverse.

38. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:

         15.      It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls  used  the
         words "vital" and "critical" as synonyms  of  the  word  "material"
         which we have used  above.  The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants
         attention, because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not
         to overturn a judgment at first instance unless  it  really  cannot
         understand the original Judge's thought processes when  he/she  was
         making material findings.

39. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning in  the
    Judge's determination for why he reached his conclusions. I  find  that
    the grounds of appeal and no more than a disagreement with  the  Judges
    findings of fact and the conclusions that she drew from such  findings.
    The Judge noted at paragraph 34 that he finds it highly  relevant  that
    the appellant left the country shortly after completing  his  secondary
    education, correctly infers that the appellant came to this country for
    further education and not because he fears anyone in Albania.

40. I find that no error of  law  has  been  established  in  Judge  Paul's
    determination. I find  that  he  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant is not entitled to be  recognised  as  a  refugee  or  to  be
    granted humanitarian protection in this country. I uphold his decision.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed


                                        Dated this 21st day of November 2015
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................
Mrs S Chana
