



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04902/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 29th October 2013                            |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                              ms abygail makope
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Billie, IEI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born 6th June 1970. This is  her
    appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (Judge
    Reed) dismissing her appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse
    to grant her asylum and to remove her from the UK by way of  directions
    under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The Appellant left Zimbabwe and arrived in the UK on 9th  October  2002
    in possession of entry clearance as a student  valid  until  9th  April
    2003. Her leave was then extended until May 2004 when she  submitted  a
    further application for leave to remain as  a  student,  but  this  was
    refused in July 2004. The Appellant did not leave  the  United  Kingdom
    but instead claimed asylum on 15th September 2008. That application was
    made after the discovery of a false stamp in her passport purporting to
    grant her indefinite leave to remain. The asylum application was  based
    upon her claimed involvement with the MDC. It was refused.  Her  appeal
    against this refusal was allowed in a determination promulgated on 18th
    December 2008, but upon  the  Respondent  seeking  reconsideration  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed by Senior Immigration  Judge  Waumsley
    on 20th May 2009.

 3. Further submissions seeking a fresh claim to asylum were made in  2009,
    2010 and 2011. All of those applications were rejected under  paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules. On 29th June 2012 the Appellant submitted
    an application using form SET(O) seeking  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules and relying upon her family  and  private
    life under Article 8 ECHR. She  further  claimed  that  any  return  to
    Zimbabwe would place her at risk  of  destitution   and  thereby  would
    breach her Article 3 ECHR rights.

 4. The Respondent  considered  those  applications  and  refused  them.  A
    decision to remove her from the United Kingdom  was  made  on  2nd  May
    2013. The  Appellant  appealed  that  decision  claiming  it  would  be
    unlawful as any removal would be contrary to the UK's obligations under
    the Refugee Convention; contrary to the Immigration Rules (Humanitarian
    Protection) and unlawful as being in breach of Articles 3 and 8 of  the
    ECHR. The  appeal  came  before  Judge  Reed  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 1st July 2013, dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal. The  grounds
    seeking  permission  were  lengthy  and  in  the  main  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the negative credibility findings of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. But in summary the grounds in particular advanced  that
    he should have taken a different  view  of  the  risk  created  by  his
    acceptance of the Appellant's  political  profile,  including  risk  on
    arrival at Harare Airport. It was also advanced that the Judge  reached
    the wrong  conclusion  about  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities.
    Further the Judge's alternative internal relocation finding and Article
    8 conclusions were criticised on the basis that the  evidence  was  not
    assessed properly.

 6. In granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Storey said,

         "Given the equivocal nature  of  the  FTTJ's  findings  as  to  the
         appellant's political profile acquired through sur place activities
         (see  para30)  and  the  judge's  apparent  disregard  for   Danian
         principles at para 26 (see Articles 4 and 5  of  the  Qualification
         Directive), I consider it  at  least  arguable  that  he  erred  in
         concluding that the appellant would not  face  risk  on  return.  I
         would observe, however that I see no arguable error in the  judge's
         findings on the appellant's past experiences in Zimbabwe or in  the
         judge's Article 8 findings".

The First-tier Hearing

 7. The Appellant's claim before Judge Reed can  be  summarised  thus.  The
    Appellant at a previous Tribunal hearing, had been found to  be  a  low
    level supporter of MDC. Her present claim is that since that claim  was
    last considered her profile has change to a sur place activist and this
    situation has pertained for the last four years. She also  states  that
    she has now lived in the UK for the past eleven years and therefore  is
    not noted as a Zanu-PF supporter.

 8. In furtherance of the above the Appellant claimed;

     i) In 2009, she became a subscribing member of the  MDC,  joining  the
        South Yorkshire branch of the party and has remained a member  ever
        since. She also joined the Restoration of Human Rights Group (ROHR)
        and rose up to be a member of its co-ordinating committee. In March
        2010 she was elected to gender secretary and  is  presently  acting
        treasurer.  Her  duties  include  coordinating   ROHR   recruitment
        activities and organising monthly meetings. The Appellant is also a
        member of the Zimbabwe Vigil Coalition and participates  in  weekly
        anti-Mugabe demonstrations outside the Zimbabwe Embassy.  At  these
        meetings, she collects petitions and distributes flyers.

    ii) The  protest activities  of  these  groups  are  high  profile  and
        included for example a campaign to exclude Robert Mugabe  from  the
        AU/EU summit in Portugal in 2007. This campaign was  criticised  in
        Zimbabwe and  press.  The  Appellant  says  she  has  been  heavily
        involved in the anti-Mugabe activism.

   iii)  If returned to Zimbabwe she would be at immediate  risk  immediate
        at Harare Airport because of her political profile. She  refers  to
        infiltration of anti-Mugabe groups by the Zimbabwean  CIO  and  the
        publication of  her  activities  on  the  Internet  and  Zimbabwean
        television. If asked what she had been doing,  she  would  have  to
        disclose her political activism which would  again  expose  her  to
        persecution. Even if  she  were  able  to  exit  the  airport,  her
        homeland is the rural  area  of  Chiweshe  in  Mashonaland  Central
        Province, which is still under the sway of Zanu-PF.

    iv)  She has no one there to turn to as all her family  have  left  the
        country and she would be virtually destitute. She says that she has
        no continuing connections in Zimbabwe as her two sons aged  18  and
        23 are now in South Africa. She is divorced from their  father  and
        has no contact with him. Her parents are both deceased.

     v) In relation to her family and private  life  here  in  the  UK  the
        Appellant says that  she  has  been  living  with  Mr  Cherechedzai
        Mudyambaje, a Zimbabwean national with indefinite leave  to  remain
        in the U.K. since August 2011. They met at a church  conference  in
        Manchester in June 2010 and started a relationship in February  the
        following year. They live as a married couple  and  would  wish  to
        marry, but require the Appellant's passport to prove  her  identity
        and this is presently with the Home Office. The Appellant has  been
        supported financially by her partner and they share  a  joint  bank
        account. He has also sent money to her son in South Africa and they
        have been on holidays together. She has also   h established social
        relationships with members of the local community  and  has  bonded
        closely with church members. She has undertaken voluntary work  for
        vulnerable members of the community and made regular  contributions
        to cancer research and other worthy causes.

 9. Having fully analysed the country background material the Judge came to
    the conclusion that the Appellant had purposely  manufactured  her  sur
    place activities in order to bolster her claim to asylum. Nevertheless,
    he did accept that there was evidence  of  the  Appellant's  sur  place
    activities available on  the  Internet.  He  recognised  he  was  still
    obliged to assess the potential risk on return to the Appellant. Having
    assessed that risk he found that the Appellant had  not  made  out  her
    claim and dismissed the appeal.

10. The grounds seeking permission are protracted and run to a lengthy nine
    pages. In the main they amount  to  a  disagreement  with  the  adverse
    credibility findings of the Judge.  However  UT  Judge  Storey  granted
    permission on two distinct elements from those grounds. (See  paragraph
    6).

    Thus the matter came before me in Bradford  on  29th  October  2013  to
    decide if Judge Reed's determination discloses an  error  of  law  such
    that the decision has to be set aside and remade.

The Hearing Before Me

11. Both representatives made submissions. Mr Billie's submissions followed
    the lines of the grounds seeking permission concerning the two elements
    upon which permission was granted. He conceded there  was  no  arguable
    error on the Judge's findings on the Appellant's  past  experiences  in
    Zimbabwe and that the Judge's findings on Article  8  ECHR  claim  were
    unarguable.

12. He submitted however that the Appellant could not return  to  her  home
    area as she has no support system there. He wished  to  emphasise  that
    the Judge's error revolved around his lack  of  understanding  of  what
    would happen to the Appellant should she be returned  to Zimbabwe,  via
    Harare Airport.

13. He said that there is a "two stage interrogation" at Harare Airport and
    risk of persecution depends upon whether you are distinguishable as  an
    "ordinary traveller" or "a person of interest". The  Appellant,  simply
    by her association with  or  support  of  the  MDC  in  her  sur  place
    activities places herself into  the  risk  category  identified  in  CM
    (Zimbabwe) and becomes of interest to the CIO at the airport.

14. Any disclosure of mere  association  with  the  MDC,  whether  past  or
    present makes it impossible for  the  Appellant  to  explain  away  the
    current video and photographic evidence of her political activism.  The
    Judge accepted that this evidence existed.  Any risk of persecution  at
    Harare Airport is not dependent on the level of one's political profile
    but on whether that profile however low, has come to the notice of  the
    Zimbabwean authorities.

15. Finally, he submitted that the Judge had not given anxious scrutiny  to
    the Danian guidelines. Thus he had fallen into error and  the  decision
    needed to be remade.

16. Mrs Pettersen submitted that I should to look at paragraph 30,  of  the
    determination and read that in its full context. When   paragraphs  27,
    28 and 29 are factored in they show that the Judge   fully  dealt  with
    internal relocation and any associated risk on return.  Paragraph 32 of
    the determination deals fully with this.

17. Danian is a proposition that an opportunistic claim has to be  assessed
    in the context of whether the claim is well-founded. This  was  plainly
    the exercise which the Judge had carried out. A reading of paragraph 30
    would show the Judge's reasoning in the determination was  sustainable,
    it revealed no error and therefore the decision should stand.

Has the Judge Erred in Law?

18. Having heard submissions from both parties I reserved my decision which
    I now give with reasons. It is appropriate to  start  my  consideration
    with  the  Danian  point.  As  Mr  Billie  correctly  pointed  out  the
    principles enunciated in Danian and approved  in  YB  (Eritrea)   state
    "opportunistic activities sur place is not an automatic bar to asylum".
    In other words even if the claimant's activities in the  UK  have  been
    entirely opportunistic  what  has  to  be  looked  at  is  whether  the
    consequences of that opportunistic activity give rise to a well-founded
    fear of persecution. That is an objective question. If the  persecution
    if well-founded then an Appellant is entitled to the protection of  the
    United Kingdom authorities. It is a risk assessment. It is correct that
    Judge Reed found (with well set  out  reasons)  that  "The  Appellant's
    involvement with various anti-regime organisations in the UK  has  been
    solely designed to promote a claim for asylum here.  I  find  that  the
    evidence before me does nothing  more  than  demonstrate  that  she  is
    anything other than a self-styled "dissident  human  rights  activist",
    who has done her upmost to push herself forward as being connected with
    those who are genuinely  actively  opposed  to  the  Mugabe  regime  to
    bolster her claim". If that were all that  the  Judge  had  said  there
    would have been  an  error.  However  that  was  not  the  end  of  the
    assessment so far as the Judge's reasoning was concerned, because it is
    clear from paragraph 30 that the Judge has directed himself properly on
    the Danian principles by saying, "The important  questions  for  me  to
    consider about what would happen at the airport or whether or not  upon
    arrival the Appellant would have been identified as someone who was  of
    possible interest to the regime, and if so and the Appellant were to be
    questioned whether or not those questioning her would accept a truthful
    answer from the Appellant of the sort I have set out above and let  her
    go on her way or would she face a real risk of persecution  or  serious
    ill-treatment". In my judgment that shows the  Judge   had  in  mind  a
    proper evaluation of the Danian principles. It is also clear  that  the
    Judge recognises Danian is not a trump card, because as  the  Court  of
    Appeal said, "Opportunistic post-flight activity will  not  necessarily
    create a real risk of persecution". What has to be  carried  out  is  a
    risk evaluation and this the Judge did. The findings  which  the  Judge
    made at paragraph 26 have to be seen in the light  of  the  context  of
    paragraph 30. I find no error in the Judge's assessment. His  reasoning
    cannot be said to be perverse.

19. On the evaluation of risk of persecution at Harare Airport,  again  the
    starting point  is  paragraph  30  of  the  Judge's  determination.  He
    properly identifies there what it is he has to consider (see  paragraph
    18 above) and  refers  to  HS  which  is  still  the  accepted  Country
    Guidance.

20. Much has been made by  Mr  Billie  of  what  he  terms  the  'equivocal
    findings' by the Judge. However paragraph 30 has to be read fully. What
    the Judge is saying is as follows;

21.  He accepts that there is a real risk that  a  check  of  the  Internet
    could reveal the name of the Appellant.

      i) Nevertheless the checks at Harare Airport are intelligence led.

     ii) An intelligence led organisation, having carefully  considered  the
         evidence, would come to the  conclusion  that  the  evidence  which
         posted on the Internet shows she is nothing more than a hanger-on.

    iii) It  is  claimed  on  the  Appellant's  behalf  that  the  CIO  have
         infiltrated anti-regime organisations in the UK. That being so, the
         CIO will know very well who the serious activists are  and  equally
         that this Appellant is plainly doing nothing more that  "trying  to
         promote a false claim in the UK".

22. The Judge  reinforced  those  findings  by  referring  to  the  Country
    Guidance in CM. Thus he  fully evaluated the risk to the Appellant  and
    concluded as he does,

         "I find that the Appellant has not shown to the low  standard  that
         she would be a (sic) real risk at Harare Airport".

23. He then went on to look at the Appellant's situation on return  to  her
    homeland of Mashonaland Central. He accepted that she could be at  risk
    there; but also accepted that matters do not rest there. Following  the
    Country Guidance  in  HS  the  Judge  found  at  paragraph  32  of  his
    determination,

         "The Country Guidance states however that relocation from  a  rural
         area  to  Harare  can  be   realistic,   but   the   socio-economic
         circumstances in which a person finds themselves would need  to  be
         considered".

    For the remainder of paragraph 32  the  Judge  carefully  analyses  and
    details the Appellant's circumstances. Having carried out that analysis
    he concludes,

         "I therefore find that the Appellant has not shown that it would be
         unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect to  relocate  to  Harare  to
         avoid any problems in her home area".

24.  The  Judge's  findings  in  this   well   constructed   and   detailed
    determination are findings which are fully open to him on the  evidence
    before him. They cannot therefore be said to be perverse.

25.  DECISION

The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Reed discloses not  error  of
law, requiring the decision to be remade. The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made. The Appellant has been competently
represented throughout and I am satisfied one would have been sought had
those representing thought it necessary.


Signature                                              Dated  26th  November
2013
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

