
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04253/2014
                                                               AA/04241/2014
                                                               AA/04244/2014
                                                               AA/04246/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 20 February 2015                  |On 2 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     S A
                                     U A
                                     S A
                                      V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott instructed by IAS solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary  to  make  any  change  in  the
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Burns promulgated after a hearing on 28 July 2014  which
    dismissed the Appellants appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellants are a mother  and  her  three  children.  The  principal
    Appellant was born on 2 December 1978 and the remaining Appellants were
    born on 23 June 2006, 12 July  2007  and  5  May  2013.  They  are  all
    nationals of Pakistan.

 4. On 4 December 2012 the Appellant applied for a family visit visa  which
    was granted after an appeal and a valid visa was issued for the  period
    10 August 2013 to 10 February 2014. On 24 October  2013  the  Appellant
    came to the United Kingdom and returned  to  Pakistan  on  28  November
    2013.

 5. On 9 January 2014 the Appellant together with her 3 children arrived in
    the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on her own behalf and that of her
    children on the basis that her and her children  were  the  victims  of
    domestic violence at the hands of her husband and they were all at risk
    on return.

 6.  On  9  June  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a. The claim that the Appellants were  all  the  victims  of  domestic
         violence at the hands of Amir Mehmood her husband was accepted.

      b. It was accepted that her husband's family supported him.

      c. The claim that on 21 October 2013 after she  had  returned  to  her
         parents' home her husband had visited accompanied by two  gangsters
         and a policeman and made threats to her was not accepted.

      d. The Appellant's claim to have been attacked on 13 December 2013  by
         her husband is not corroborated by the medical  report  which  does
         not identify any injuries.

      e. It s accepted that the Appellant lodged a case of harassment and  a
         FIR against her husband and initiated  a  khula  to  force  him  to
         divorce her although there are  discrepancies  in  the  documentary
         evidence in relation to the FIR.

      f. The claim of domestic violence having  been  largely  accepted  the
         letter considered the Appellants risk on return by reference to  KA
         and others (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG  [2010]
         UKUT 216 (IAC).

      g. The Appellant is an  educated  woman  with  a  support  network  in
         Pakistan and not from a tribal area.

      h. The telephone calls from her in laws may amount to  harassment  but
         is not persecution.

      i. The authorities have taken action against her husband and therefore
         there  has  been  no  sustained  and  systematic  failure  by   the
         authorities in protecting her and the children.

      j. The Appellants could live in Lahore with her family  and  there  is
         also help and support available from women's shelters.

      k. The situation for divorced women is improving in Pakistan.

      l. The best interests of the children are to return to  Pakistan  with
         the children.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Burns ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision.

 8. The Judge summarised:

      a) The refusal letter in some detail at paragraphs 5-20.

      b) The bundle of documents before him that included witness statements
         and a report from a Roger Ballard. He summarised the claim based on
         the witness statements.  At paragraphs 23-25.

      c) The Appellant's oral evidence at paragraphs 26-30.

      d) The brother's evidence.

      e) The submissions made by Ms Baines on behalf of the  Respondent  who
         highlighted the change in the Appellant's evidence to suggest  that
         there had been contact after the harassment order was made although
         this had never been suggested in any statement; that there  was  an
         ongoing criminal case against the Appellant's husband and therefore
         there was sufficient state protection for  the  Appellant  and  her
         children; that the Appellant's father was  explicitly  offering  to
         support her so she could return to her family; and she pointed  out
         a number of issues with the expert report such as conclusions based
         on factual inaccuracies such as the Appellant having male guardians
         and his inaccurate assessment of legal issues.

      f) The submissions of Ms Cooke whose skeleton argument he detailed  in
         relation to risk on return and sufficiency of protection

 9. The Judge found that there was a discrepancy  in  relation  to  whether
    there had been any contact after the harassment  order  was  made;  her
    credibility was not enhanced by  her  and  her  brother  having  signed
    statements giving her bothers address when she no longer  lived  there;
    found that there was sufficiency of protection in that the  Appellant's
    husband had  been  charged  with  serious  criminal  offences  and  was
    awaiting trial and the civil courts were  seized  of  the  divorce;  he
    attached little weight to the report of Mr Ballard as he considered  Mr
    Ballard's approach was that of an advocate on  the  Appellant's  behalf
    rather than an expert and found his legal observations (given  that  he
    was not a lawyer) were 'contentious and inflated.'; he found no  reason
    to believe  that  the  husbands  family  had  influence  and  that  the
    Appellant could live as an independent woman as she had before; her and
    her children could return together.

10. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing  that  the  credibility  findings
    were flawed and the Judge had failed  to  give  proper  weight  to  the
    expert's evidence and that of the background material  referred  to  in
    the skeleton argument. On 5 September 2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chambers gave permission to appeal.

11. As a preliminary issue Dr Mynott sought to amend the grounds of  appeal
    to include the failure to assess the best interests of the children. Mr
    Harrison did not object. I agreed to allow the amendment.

12. At the hearing I heard submissions from Dr  Mynott  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that in essence:

      a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) In relation to the negative credibility findings he suggested  that
         apart from the issue in relation to whether  there  was  harassment
         before or after the court action  the  issue  over  the  change  of
         address took the matter no further.

      c) The heart of this case related to risk on  return.  The  Judge  had
         failed to consider all of the background material  referred  to  in
         the skeleton arguments.

      d) The Judge failed to take into account the risk  of  honour  killing
         was no longer referred to in the Respondent's own guidance as being
         limited to tribal areas.

      e) The Judge did not  sufficiently  take  into  account  the  terrible
         history of abuse in this case

      f) The Judge failed to take into account the evidence from her  lawyer
         at Annex j suggesting that there had been  an  incident  after  the
         hearing of the court case when he attacked the Appellant and  tried
         to snatch her daughter.

      g) While the divorce was ongoing  the  background  material  suggested
         that the legal system would fail to protect her.

      h) The suggestion that the Appellant could support herself as she  had
         before failed to take into account that the Appellant had supported
         herself before she married and had children.

      i) The Judge was not entitled to reject Dr Ballard's report  who  from
         his previous publications appeared to be an expert.

      j) The Judge failed to have  regard  to  the  best  interests  of  the
         children: there was no consideration of the Appellant's claim  that
         the father would abduct the children and seek custody and the legal
         system would favour the husband.

13. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Harrison submitted that :

      a) He relied on the Rule 24 response.

      b) The Judge would have been assisted by the submissions of Dr  Mynott
         but this is an error of law hearing not a re argument of the  case.
         On the basis of the evidence before him the  Appellants  claim  was
         not made out.

      c) The Judge when considering the Guidance was  entitled  to  conclude
         that these Appellants were not going to  fall  into  the  situation
         anticipated in the Guidance in that  the  principal  Appellant  had
         supportive family in her parents and extended family who had  taken
         her back when she left her husband.

      d) The Judge was entitled to take into account that the Appellant  was
         educated and resourceful and had shown that she could use the court
         system to seek protection and this was apparently successful.

      e) Demonstrating that there would be societal discrimination  was  not
         enough.

      f) The Judge had considered the best interests of the children.

14. In reply Dr Mynott on behalf of the Appellants submitted :

      a) There was evidence that the Appellants family were  supportive  but
         the assessment had to factor in past persecution.

      b)  The  degree  of  discrimination  was  relevant  to  the  issue  of
         relocation.

      c) He conceded that section 55 did not require the  use  of  a  strict
         formula but the Judge had to assess their interests in the  context
         of international protection.

Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

16. This was an appeal against a refusal of asylum by the Appellant and her
    three children who the Respondent accepted  had  been  the  victims  of
    domestic violence by her husband. The Respondent's case  was  that  the
    Appellant had a supportive family and had resorted to  the  courts  and
    both the criminal courts and the civil  courts  had  taken  action  and
    therefore they were not at risk on return.

17. The first challenge raised  in  the  grounds  was  to  the  credibility
    findings made by the Judge although Dr Mynott clearly accepted that the
    main issue in this case was the risk on return. I am satisfied that the
    very limited credibility findings made by the Judge were  open  to  him
    reminding myself of what was said recently  by  the  President  of  the
    Tribunal in Nixon (permission to appeal:  grounds)  [2014]  UKUT  00368
    (IAC).

         "Credibility assessments by first instance fact  finding  Tribunals
         will normally be challengeable only on the basis  of  irrationality
         (or, as it is sometimes inelegantly termed, perversity): Edwards  -
         v - Bairstow [1956] AC 14."

18. The issue of whether the Appellant's  husband  made  contact  with  her
    after the harassment order was made by the courts was an important  one
    as it was clearly relevant to the issue of risk on return  and  whether
    the protection offered by the state had been effective. The  Judge  was
    entitled in paragraph 40  to  identify  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    interviewed and made statements and her clear evidence  had  been  that
    there was no contact after the court order but  in  oral  evidence  had
    suggested that it occurred after the court order. He  was  entitled  to
    draw an adverse inference from this and  her  failure  to  explain  the
    change in her account.

19. Dr Mynott also submitted that the Judge was not  entitled  to  draw  an
    adverse inference from both her and her brother  making  statements  in
    which it was asserted that she lived with him at a time when  this  was
    not the case as the statement was amended in court. The Judge did  make
    reference to this no doubt given that she is repeatedly described as an
    educated and intelligent woman and those who  sign  witness  statements
    are confirming the truth of their  contents.  Nevertheless  the  Judges
    observation is just that: he  states  that  her  'credibility  was  not
    enhanced'. This I consider to be a remark rather than a  clear  finding
    and not one that was determinative in any way in  the  outcome  of  the
    case and therefore immaterial.

20. The thrust of Dr Mynotts argument was that the  Judge  failed  to  take
    into account both the experts report and all of the background material
    in assessing the risk on return for the Appellants. I am satisfied that
    in a detailed, careful and well reasoned decision the Judge set out the
    material that was before him. I am satisfied that  he  was  obliged  to
    take as his starting point  in  assessing  the  Appellant's  claim  the
    country guidance case of KA  whose ratio he had set out  at  paragraphs
    10-11 and  he was obliged to follow the  guidance  unless  very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence, were adduced justifying  him  not
    doing so.

21.  I reject the suggestion made in the grounds that  the  Judge  did  not
    consider the skeleton argument or  background  material  as  these  are
    clearly referenced in his decision at paragraph 37 when summarising  Ms
    Cooke's arguments. I am satisfied that the Judge gave adequate  reasons
    at paragraph 42 why he placed little weight  on  the  report  of  Roger
    Ballard a Consultant Anthropologist as it is not necessarily  the  case
    that expert  evidence  is  synonymous  with  independent  and  reliable
    evidence: in essence he found that Mr Ballard's approach appeared to be
    that of an  advocate  rather  than  an  independent  expert;  that  his
    expertise and very limited local field work  did  not  appear  directly
    relevant to the issues he was addressing and that although he was not a
    lawyer he was 'very  free  with  his  opinions  with  regard  to  legal
    matters'  which apparently included a lengthy discourse in relation  to
    Article 8. The Judge was entitled to take into account in assessing the
    reliability of the report the failure of  Dr  Ballard  in  appreciating
    what matters he should be addressing.

22. I am satisfied that the factual matrix against which the Judge assessed
    the risk on return for the four Appellants  and  the  country  guidance
    case entitled him to conclude that they were  not  at  risk  on  return
    (paragraph 41).those conclusions were that the adult Appellant was well
    educated and came from  a  supportive  family  whose  male  members  in
    Pakistan had taken her and her children back after her  marriage  broke
    down and made clear that she could live with them; she had invoked  the
    aid of the criminal courts in respect of her  husband's  behaviour  and
    serious criminal charges had been put for which he  awaited  trial  and
    the civil courts where divorce  proceedings  had  been  initiated.  The
    Judge acknowledged the shortcomings in  the  system  and  attitudes  in
    Pakistan  at  paragraph  41  and  found  that  'there  is  no  absolute
    guarantee' but rightly observed that this was not the test. It was open
    to the Judge to conclude there was sufficiency of protection  and  that
    the Appellant could return with her children to her family.

23. While there may be some force in the argument that relocation was not a
    reasonable option given that she  had  three  young  children  and  her
    previous experience of living independently had  been  before  she  had
    children this was not a conclusion that was  material  to  the  outcome
    given that the Judge was satisfied that the Appellant and her  children
    could return together to her supportive family.

24. Dr Mynott argued that there had been insufficient consideration of  the
    best interests of the children. The Judge  expressly  referred  to  the
    children's best interests in paragraph 20 and 45 of  the  decision  and
    their best interests must be read in the context of all of the findings
    in the case. I am satisfied that the  children's  best  interests  were
    taken into account given his findings  that  the  Appellants  were  not
    British citizens and there was limited evidence of roots established to
    the United Kingdom that would be affected by their removal, they had no
    right to future education and health care in this country, their mother
    was well educated and came from a supportive family, that their mothers
    complaint about the father's behaviour had led to him being the subject
    of criminal charges and therefore  the  family  were  not  at  risk  on
    return. In those circumstances their best interests would be served  by
    living with their mother. It was difficult to see  how  the  children's
    best interests would be adversely affected by  their  removal  together
    with the Appellant to Pakistan. Even if the Tribunal had considered the
    best interests of the children in more detail there was no  basis  upon
    which it could have concluded that those interests  would  be  so  much
    better served by allowing the Appellant to remain in the UK  that  they
    outweighed all other considerations.

25. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

27. The appeals are dismissed.



Signed      Date 1.3.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
