
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04776/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Head at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 January 2018                   |On 18 January 2018                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  CK (DRC)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Sarah Rogers, Legal representative with the
                    Immigration Advice Centre Limited
For the respondent:    Mr Myroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13 of the Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of publication
thereof shall identify the original appellant, whether directly or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal refusing him leave  to  remain  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection or human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of  the
    Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

Background

 2. The credibility of the appellant's core account is not  disputed.   She
    is the family member of an APARECO  oppositionist  in  her  country  of
    origin.  In 2012, during a raid on the  family  home,  her  father  was
    killed.  The appellant was detained, abused and raped.

 3. The appellant subsequently left the DRC via Kenya, from where  she  was
    trafficked to Saudi Arabia as the domestic servant of a  family  there.
    The appellant was repeatedly raped during that employment.  She came to
    the UK with the Saudi family and once here, she  claimed  asylum.   The
    respondent accepts that the appellant is a victim  of  trafficking  for
    domestic servitude.  For reasons which are not clear to  me,  she  does
    not accept that the appellant was also trafficked for sexual  purposes,
    but nothing turns on that in these proceedings.

 4. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the evidence was that the appellant had
    been involved in low-level APARECO activities  on  a  sur  place  basis
    while in the UK.

 5. The appeal was dismissed by both  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tribunal.  The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal.

Permission to appeal

 6. On 11 September 2017, Master Bancroft-Rimmer sitting in  the  Court  of
    Appeal allowed the appeal by consent,  directing  that  the  appeal  be
    remitted to a freshly constituted Upper Tribunal  for  reconsideration.
    In the Statement of Reasons, also by consent,  the  parties  agreed  as
    follows:

         "5.  Having considered the case, the  Respondent  agrees  that  the
             Upper Tribunal erred in their consideration of the appellant's
             circumstances and in  seemingly  dismissing  her  grounds  [of
             appeal] in relation to her relationship to her father  soleley
             on the basis that family members were not  listed  as  a  risk
             group in BM and others.

         6.   The parties are agreed that the appeal should  be  allowed  to
             the extent that the matter should be  remitted  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal for a de novo hearing."

 7. The effect of that agreement is not only that the appeal came  back  to
    the Upper Tribunal for an error of law hearing, but  that  the  parties
    and the Court of Appeal had agreed that there was an error  of  law  in
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal to dismiss the appeal.

 8. After discussion with the parties, I approach this appeal on the  basis
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside, but the
    findings of fact and credibility in the First-tier Tribunal  preserved.
    That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

 9. I have heard oral submissions from Ms Rogers and Mr Diwnycz, which  are
    recorded in my notes.  It is not necessary to  set  them  out  in  full
    here.  The accepted facts are that this appellant is the family  member
    of a known APARECO member who was killed in 2012,  in  a  raid  on  the
    family home, in which the appellant herself was  detained,  abused  and
    raped.

10. The most  recent  country  guidance  remains  that  in  BM  and  Others
    (returnees - criminal and non-criminal) (CG) [2015] UKUT 293 (IAC):

         "3.  A national of the  DRC  who  has  a  significant  and  visible
             profile within APARECO (UK) is, in the event of  returning  to
             his country of origin, at  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
             Convention reason or serious harm or treatment  proscribed  by
             Article 3 ECHR by virtue of falling within  one  of  the  risk
             categories identified  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in MM  (UDPS
             Members   -   Risk   on   Return)   Democratic   Republic   of
             Congo CG [2007] UKAIT 00023. Those belonging to this category
             include persons who are, or  are  perceived  to  be,  leaders,
             office bearers or spokespersons. As a general rule, mere  rank
             and file members are unlikely to fall  within  this  category.
             However, each case will be  fact  sensitive,  with  particular
             attention directed to the likely knowledge and perceptions  of
             DRC state agents."

11. It is well-established that a family is a particular social  group  and
    this appellant is therefore a member of a particular social group which
    caused her to experience  past persecution and  pursuant  to  paragraph
    339K:

         "339K.   The fact  that  a  person  has  already  been  subject  to
         persecution  or  serious  harm,  or  to  direct  threats  of   such
         persecution or such harm, will be regarded as a serious  indication
         of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons  to  consider
         that such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated."

12. For the respondent, Mr Diwnycz was not able  to  identify  any  country
    evidence to indicate that there were good reasons for considering  that
    the appellant's previous ill-treatment would not  be  repeated  if  she
    were returned now.

13. In addition, Ms Rogers asserts, and Mr Diwnycz accepted at the hearing,
    that  the  factual  matrix  has  moved  on  and  that  the  appellant's
    activities in APARECO in the UK today are such as to make her an active
    oppositionist in her own right, creating an additional risk  on  return
    for her.  That risk sounds  both  under  the  Refugee  Convention,  and
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

14. On the basis of the country guidance and the factual matrix above, I am
    satisfied that the appellant is entitled to protection  and  I  allowed
    the appeal at the hearing.

DECISION

15. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.




Date:    16 January 2018   Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

