
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04157/2015
                                                               AA/04169/2015
                                                               AA/04170/2015
                                                               AA/04171/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 1 December 2015                   |on 15 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     AA
                                     NA
                                     MA
                                     SA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D McGlashan, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are husband, wife, and two  children,  all  citizens  of
    Libya.  They appeal against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Doyle, promulgated on 17 July 2015, dismissing their  appeals  on
    Refugee Convention and all other available grounds.

 2. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are as follows:

    '2.    The FTT erred in law because:

          1. He left out of account  evidence  he  should  have  take  into
             account.  There were 2 items of evidence that  the  appellants
             would  be  persecuted  if  returned:  first  that   a   report
             identified the first appellant  as  a  Gaddafi  loyalist;  and
             second that when the second appellant went to Libya, a militia
             group threatened to harm the first appellant  if  he  returned
             (see  paragraph  12  in  the  first  appellant's   statement).
             Although the FTT does not believe the first item, he  has  not
             considered whether the second is made out.  He has referred to
             the second only in the context of damage to the credibility of
             the first appellant (see paragraph 15(s) in his decision), and
             not in terms of whether the events  spoken  to  by  the  first
             appellant occurred.  Since these events were a  material  part
             of the claim, findings in fact should have been made.

          2. He applied the wrong test in holding that the appellants  were
             not entitled to humanitarian protection (see paragraphs 19 and
             20 in his decision).  The test is not whether a  person  is  a
             refugee, but whether there is a "...  serious  threat  ...  by
             reason  of  indiscriminate  violence  in  situations  of   ...
             internal armed conflict ..."  (Article  15(c)).  Even  if  the
             FTTIJ concluded that no "... indiscriminate violence ..."  was
             present in Libya on  the  basis  of  AT  and  Others  (Article
             15(c)); risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318) he erred in
             law because he  has  not  taken  account  of  changed  country
             circumstances.  AT was decided on 14 July 2014 on the basis of
             evidence heard between  18  to  22  November  2013.   Evidence
             before the FTTIJ indicated a serious deterioration in  country
             conditions since the relevant dates in AT. (see generally  the
             items in the third Inventory  of  Productions  for  the  first
             appellant and particularly  Dr  George's  report  between  (i)
             paragraph 43 - 54 (dealing with the effects  of  militia  rule
             and events later in 2014; and  (ii)  74  (referring  to  USDoS
             report published 25  June  2015)  and  75  (referring  to  The
             Foreign Office report 29 May  2015  which  states  inter  alia
             (fourth  paragraph)   that   terrorist   attacks   "could   be
             indiscriminate ...").  A decision maker is not bound by  a  CG
             case  if  there  has  been  a  material  change   in   country
             conditions.    The   FTTJ   erred   in   law   in   concluding
             notwithstanding evidence before him that there  has  not  been
             such a change in Libya.

          3. He was not entitled to find that the first appellant was not a
             credible witness (see paragraph 15(q) because:

                - Paragraph 15(l): the basis of the conclusion here is  that
                  there is no evidence that the report was sent  to  persons
                  in Libya because the list of email addresses were  limited
                  to those with "yahoo" or "hotmail" accounts.   Examination
                  of the list will disclose that the report was also sent to
                  persons with accounts suffixed by ".com".  Accordingly  it
                  is possible it was sent to persons in Libya and  the  FTTJ
                  has made a material error in fact amounting to an error in
                  law.

                - Paragraph 15(r): Section 8 of the 2004 Act  does  no  more
                  than raise a rebuttable presumption that evidence  is  not
                  credible in certain circumstances,  one  of  which  is  if
                  there is no valid reason for any delay in claiming asylum.
                   The FTTIJ  states  that  the  expectation  of  the  first
                  appellant that matters in Libya would become resolved  was
                  "... unrealistic  ...".   Given  the  uncertainty  in  the
                  country  conditions,  there   is   no   basis   for   this
                  conclusion.'

 3. On 19 September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Taylor  granted  permission,
    observing as follows:

    "1.    The challenges to the judge's credibility findings are  unlikely
         to be made out, save for the lack of a finding in relation  to  the
         threat from the militia group,  which  could  be  arguable  (Ground
         2.1).  The judge was entitled to conclude that  the  production  of
         the report did not establish that it had been sent to Libya.  There
         is no misapplication of the law in relation to  section  8  of  the
         2004 Act.

    2.     It is however arguable that the judge ought to have engaged with
         the evidence  before  him  in  relation  to  the  deterioration  of
         conditions in Libya since AT and or (Article 15c; risk  categories)
         Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318."

 4. The SSHD filed a Rule 24 response in these terms:

    '3.    Permission for leave to appeal was granted on the basis that  it
         is arguable that the FTJ ought to have engaged  with  the  evidence
         before him in relation to the deterioration of conditions in  Libya
         since AT and Others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG  [2014]
         UKUT 318.  The respondent will contend that this ground is not made
         out.

    4.     The FTJ made a reasonable and sustainable finding that  "at  its
         highest the appellants would simply  be  black  Libyans  without  a
         noticeable profile ... The case of AT indicates  that  is  it  only
         those with a significant profile in the Gaddafi regime who would be
         at risk.  That  profile  is  entirely  lacking  for  any  of  these
         appellants.  I there find that none of the appellants discharge the
         burden of proving that they have a well founded fear of persecution
         for a convention reason."  [Paragraph 15(w)  Determination].   This
         finding is entirely in keeping with AT  and  Ors  where  the  Upper
         Tribunal found that the majority of the  population  in  Libya  had
         either worked for or had some association with the Gaddafi  regime,
         and  that  such  employment  or  association  alone  would  not  be
         sufficient to establish persecution or ill-treatment on  return  to
         Libya.  The grounds advanced by the appellant in this  regard  fail
         to establish a material arguable error of law.

    5.     Finally paragraph 2 of the head note in AT confirms  that  there
         is not such a high level of indiscriminate violence in Libya within
         the meaning  of  Article  15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC
         (Qualification Directive) so as to mean  that  substantial  grounds
         exist for believing that solely by being present in  Libya  that  a
         person would face such a risk to his life or person.   The  grounds
         advanced  by  the  appellant  are   opportunistic   and   in   mere
         disagreement with the findings of the FTJ that  he  has  failed  to
         discharge the burden of proof to the requisite low standard to show
         that he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm or that he
         would face a real risk of being subjected to torture or inhuman  or
         degrading treatment or punishment.'

Submissions for Appellant

 5. Mr McGlashan confined his submissions to paragraphs 2.1 and 2.2 of  the
    grounds, as follows.  The judge made no finding on the allegation  that
    militias threatened family members at their home on  2  occasions.   It
    might be said that this was covered by the general adverse  credibility
    conclusions, or by the judge's finding that the  appellant's  wife  and
    child would not have returned if there  was  a  danger.   However,  the
    judge failed to address the significant issue of the "mindset"  of  the
    second appellant  regarding  her  return  to  Libya.   In  his  witness
    statement the first appellant said that his  wife's  brother  had  been
    missing, presumed dead.  In his oral evidence the matter was put to him
    and he replied, "My wife wanted to go back, I could not stop her."  The
    judge failed to deal with specific  matters  which  had  a  significant
    bearing on the credibility of the claim.

 6. I enquired whether  there  had  been  any  written  statement  or  oral
    evidence from the second appellant.  Mr McGlashan advised that she  had
    not provided a written statement or given oral evidence.

 7. Mr McGlashan turned to ground 2.2.  I enquired whether this had been  a
    ground of appeal in the First-tier Tribunal.  On reference, the grounds
    there turned out to  be  detailed  and  specific,  set  out  under  the
    headings "credibility", "plausibility", "internal relocation", "section
    8 of the 2004  Act",  "sur  place",  "humanitarian  protection",  "best
    interests of the child",  and "discretionary leave:  Article  3  ECHR".
    They do not contain any proposition that country  guidance  has  become
    outdated.

 8. Those grounds were prepared by previous agents.   Mr  McGlashan's  firm
    was instructed after the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  filed,
    but well before the date of the hearing.  He confirmed that  there  had
    been no application prior to or at the hearing to amend the grounds  of
    appeal, but he said  that  the  issue  had  been  raised  in  the  oral
    submissions.

 9. An expert report by Dr George was in the respondent's bundle  and  also
    in the appellant's first bundle (item 2).  It was  obtained  after  the
    respondent's decision but prior to the hearing and after Mr McGlashan's
    firm was instructed.  Mr McGlashan said this had been one of  the  main
    items relied upon for the submission that risk factors were  no  longer
    limited to those expounded in AT.  He said that such  factors  extended
    to the activities of  militias;  discrimination  against  dark  skinned
    Libyans; and suspicion of those who had been  in  the  UK  as  students
    during the Libyan regime.  He accepted that  all  these  features  were
    considered in AT.  He said however that  there  had  been  considerable
    expert  and  background  material  to  show   that   such   risks   had
    "intensified" since AT, and that dangers arising at road blocks  manned
    by militias now present a risk to anyone returning to  the  appellant's
    home area.

Submissions for the Respondent

10. Mrs Saddiq submitted that the grounds disclose no error of law, and are
    only an attempt to have  the  case  in  effect  reheard  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, elaborating on it in a way which was not  formulated  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The determination showed that there had  been  no
    clear argument put to the judge that there was general risk to everyone
    in Libya.  If the judge had been asked to distinguish AT, he would have
    dealt with that submission in his careful and  thorough  determination.
    Dr George had supplied a report, but  it  did  not  go  so  far  as  to
    disclose a protection need  for  all  Libyans,  for  all  dark  skinned
    Libyans from the south of the country, or for all those  who  had  been
    abroad as students during the Gaddafi period.  The core of the case  in
    the First-tier Tribunal was as reflected at paragraphs 15(l) to (q)  of
    the determination: it was presented as a credibility case,  turning  on
    the allegation that information about  the  first  appellant  had  been
    circulated to influential  persons  in  Libya.   His  account  in  that
    respect had been found not credible, and no error of law was  suggested
    in those findings.  The judge gave thorough reasons for  rejecting  his
    evidence.  It was significant that no evidence had been presented  from
    his wife.  There had been no analysis before the judge to identify  any
    evidence substantially different from that which was considered in  AT.
    Risks of the nature referred to in this case had all been considered in
    AT, and there had been no focus on how such risks  had  been  shown  to
    have materially increased.  The judge had been  correct  to  apply  AT,
    there having been no structured submission on why he should  go  beyond
    it.

Reply for Appellant

11. Mr McGlashan in response said that the judge had  not  dealt  with  the
    explanation for the wife's return to Libya.   Dr  George's  report  had
    contained evidence  of  black  Libyans  being  targeted  since  AT  was
    decided.  The judge had "not engaged with any of the evidence" although
    he had been addressed on the changing situation since AT.  There was no
    risk factor which was new, rather it was the intensity of  all  factors
    which had increased.  Dr George's report was subsequent to  AT  and  so
    such evidence had not been before the Tribunal at that time.

Discussion and Conclusions

12. The appellant's grounds and submissions disclose no error of law in the
    judge's  generally  adverse  credibility  finding.   That  finding  was
    sufficient to encompass the alleged threats made during the period when
    the second appellant returned to Libya.

13. Any greater focus on that alleged episode discloses only that there was
    no good reason to accept that it occurred, especially once it is  noted
    that there was no  direct  evidence  from  the  second  appellant.  The
    allegation of a failure to consider the explanation for the  return  of
    the first appellant's wife to Libya reveals a weakness not  a  strength
    in the appellants' case.

14.  Mr  McGlashan  submitted  that  the  judge  fell  into  the  error  of
    speculation when he thought it implausible  that  the  first  appellant
    would have permitted (or acquiesced in) his wife's return to their home
    area if this were a dangerous move, especially when she was accompanied
    by their 18 month old child (the third appellant) and  while  5  months
    pregnant (she has since given birth  to  the  fourth  appellant).   The
    allegation is that  the  second  appellant  was  determined  to  return
    despite the risk and her husband's advice.  If so, her  story  did  not
    have to be related at second hand through the first appellant.  Such  a
    strong willed and decisive individual could readily have given evidence
    herself.  I think the judge's view was not speculative but sensible.

15. Dr George's report was presented in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  one
    which supported the first appellant's claim, conditioned upon his being
    found credible.  It is dealt with accordingly in the  determination  at
    paragraph 15(o) and (p).  There  was  no  ground  of  appeal  that  the
    appeals might succeed on general risk, or on enhanced  risks  since  AT
    was decided.

16. There were before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  four  inventories  of
    productions.  Inventory 2 comprises 15  items  of  background  evidence
    running to 160 pages.  There was also a schedule of 28 page references.
     No analysis of the evidence was presented to support the argument that
    the country guidance is outdated.

17. At paragraph 15(t) to (w) the determination takes over a page to  apply
    AT.  It does not  record  any  submission  that  the  case  had  become
    outdated, or deal with that possibility.  That  would  be  a  startling
    error of approach if the appeal had expressly been taken on  the  basis
    that AT was no longer sound.  I note that although ground 2.2 says that
    the judge erred by not taking account of changed country circumstances,
    it does not specifically aver that the judge  failed  to  deal  with  a
    submission made to him.

18. The First-tier Tribunal in terms of Practice Direction 12.2 is to treat
    a country guidance case as authoritative so far as the appeal before it
    relates to the country guidance issue in question, and depends upon the
    same or  similar  evidence.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  is  of  course
    entitled (indeed bound) to depart from such guidance if it is shown the
    evidence to displace it.  Any such argument should be made clearly  and
    openly.  There was no ground of appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to lead it to consider whether  the  guidance  should  continue  to  be
    treated as  authoritative.   The  determination  is  well  focused  and
    consciously applies the country guidance.  It is inconceivable that  if
    there  had  been  any  meaningful  submission  that  the  guidance  was
    superseded that the judge would have ignored it.

19. No error of law has been shown.  The determination shall stand.

20. No anonymity order has been requested or made




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           3 December 2015
