
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04596/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     AU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Querton, counsel instructed by Lords Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision  of  FTTJ  Zahed,  heard  on  11
       November 2014, in which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against a
       decision to refuse to grant him asylum.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted on 8 May 2015 by FTTJ Grimmett.

Background


    3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  clandestinely  in  November
       2003. When apprehended in March 2009, he applied for  asylum  on  the
       basis that the authorities of Uzbekistan had an adverse  interest  in
       him owing to his refusal to follow an order of his commanding officer
       when he was in the Presidential Protection Unit (PPU)  of  the  Uzbek
       Army

    4. In refusing the application, the  Secretary  of  State  rejected  the
       appellant's claim that he had been a  member  of  the  PPU  owing  to
       inconsistencies between his accounts. Furthermore an adverse view was
       taken on the credibility of the appellant's asylum claim owing to his
       delay in seeking asylum; that he travelled through other countries en
       route to the United Kingdom and had been working unlawfully  in  this
       country.

    5. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, oral
       evidence was  heard  from  the  appellant,  his  partner,  JM  and  a
       journalist, ST. The FTTJ concluded  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
       witness of  truth  owing  to  inconsistencies  between  the  accounts
       provided in the appellant's medical notes, his witness  statement,  a
       letter from the president of  the  Association  of  Human  Rights  in
       Central Asia and his oral evidence.  The  evidence  of  JM  was  also
       considered to be incredible. Reference was made  to  the  appellant's
       adverse immigration history.

Error of law


    6. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that the FTTJ made findings on  the  appellant's  credibility,  which
       were unsupported by the evidence before him. Particular reference  is
       made to the weight given by the FTTJ to the medical  evidence,  which
       was described as "littered with inaccuracies."  It  was  also  argued
       that the credibility issues had not been looked at in the  round  but
       in isolation. It was said that no good reason was given for rejecting
       the appellant's evidence and that of his two witnesses.  The  grounds
       stressed that  the  FTTJ  had  not  had  regard  to  the  appellant's
       complaint about the manner in which his asylum  interviews  had  been
       conducted with respect to  interpretation.   It  was  said  that  the
       appellant encountered the same difficulties during his appeal hearing
       before the FTTJ and that the FTTJ erred in continuing with  the  same
       interpreter despite a number of mistakes. Criticism was also made  of
       the delay of more than three months between the hearing date and  the
       promulgation of the decision.

    7. FTTJ Grimmett granted permission to appeal on  the  basis  that  FTTJ
       Zahed failed to take into account the evidence of ST.  While  adverse
       comment was made about some of the other grounds, permission was  not
       refused.

    8. The Secretary of State's Rule 24 response  of  29  May  2015  stated,
       essentially,  that  the  respondent  opposed  the   application   for
       permission to appeal as it was considered that the FTTJ appropriately
       directed himself; that it was difficult to see that the  evidence  of
       ST would have made a material difference to the outcome and that  the
       grounds amounted to no more than mere disagreement with the  findings
       of the FTTJ.




The hearing


    9. Ms Querton submitted a skeleton argument, which organised the grounds
       of appeal into five categories. Mr Whitwell submitted the note of the
       presenting officer before the First-tier Tribunal.   He  stated  that
       his was relevant in relation to the evidence of ST.

   10. As a preliminary point, Ms Querton sought an indication as to whether
       it was necessary for her to make a formal application  to  amend  the
       grounds, given what she thought was Judge Grimmett's limited grant of
       permission as a result of comments at [2] and [3] of the  grant.  For
       his part, Mr Whitwell, did  not  view  the  grant  of  permission  so
       restrictively given that Judge Grimmett did not refuse permission  on
       any particular ground. Thus he did not oppose the proposed amendment.
       My view was that  no  application  to  amend  was  necessary  in  the
       circumstances.

   11. In relation to the first ground in her skeleton argument, Ms  Querton
       argued that the evidence of TS was ignored.  While  she  acknowledged
       that there was mention of  TS  at  [13],  the  FTTJ  failed  to  make
       findings regarding his evidence.  She argued that TS was an important
       witness, who knew the appellant and who had considerable  and  up-to-
       date expertise on Uzbek matters. The FTTJ should have  given  reasons
       for placing no weight on his evidence, if that is  what  he  did.  At
       this juncture, Ms Querton turned to Ground 5, in relation to the time
       between the hearing and  promulgation.  She  rightly  restricted  her
       arguments to the 2-month plus delay between the hearing and the  FTTJ
       signing off the decision and reasons.  Ms  Querton  argued  that  the
       relevance of timing to the evidence of  TS,  was  that  it  was  more
       likely that the FTTJ overlooked evidence of this witness. The  delay,
       which was approaching 3 months,  was  also  an  issue  regarding  the
       credibility findings made by the FTTJ.

   12. The second ground related to the psychological report of Dr  Benjamin
       Piper, to which the LTTE attached little weight as it  was  based  on
       the account  provided  by  the  appellant.  Dr  Piper  diagnosed  the
       appellant with Post-traumatic Stress Disorder, the cause of which was
       said to be his ill-treatment in Uzbekistan. Reference was  also  made
       to [21] in which the FTTJ said that the  appellant  contacted  mental
       health professionals solely in furtherance of his  asylum  claim.  Ms
       Querton advised me that the appeal had been adjourned  previously  at
       the instigation of a different FTTJ, for the  purpose  of  up-to-date
       medical reports.

   13. Ms Querton included a further  ground  which  was  not  mentioned  in
       either the grounds or her skeleton argument; that  of  the  issue  of
       exit permits and the failure of the FTTJ  to  consider  the  relevant
       Country  Guidance  case  law.  The  FTTJ  had  not   considered   the
       appellant's evidence on the manner of his  exit  from  Uzbekistan  as
       provided in his asylum interview. Even if the appellant had  an  exit
       permit, the analysis did not end at  that  point,  as  the  appellant
       would face investigation and possibly detention on his return.

   14. There was little expansion on the last two grounds. Ms Querton  asked
       me  to  note  that  the  appellant  had  raised  the  issue  of  poor
       interpretation throughout his claim;  that  his  interview  had  been
       postponed for this reason and  the  FTTJ  had  erred  in  relying  on
       inconsistences in rejecting his  account.  She  had  nothing  to  add
       regarding the purported delay between the hearing  and  the  decision
       and reasons being typed.

   15. Mr Whitwell objected to  the  additional  ground,  regarding  illegal
       exit; and indicated that his earlier comments  did  not  include  the
       introduction of a new matter.  He conceded that the FTTJ had made  no
       express findings regarding the witness ST, however  at  [13]  it  was
       apparent that he was aware of his evidence. The key issue was said to
       be the materiality of ST's evidence. ST was not independent;  he  was
       not aware of the appellant's status in the United Kingdom and even if
       his evidence were to have been considered, it would not have led to a
       different decision, as the appellant was not credible. Continuing the
       theme of the appellant's credibility, Mr Whitwell asked  me  to  note
       that the FTTJ had regard to more than one source  and  did  not  just
       consider  the  discrepancies  within   the   medical   evidence.   He
       specifically referred me to [16],[17] and [19] of  the  decision  and
       reasons. Furthermore, the FTTJ had noted at [25] that  the  appellant
       delayed in seeking asylum  until  after  his  arrest.  The  FTTJ  was
       entitled to find that the appellant  had  put  forward  a  thoroughly
       incredible account.

   16. With regard to the psychological report, Mr Whitwell asked me to bear
       in mind that issues of weight were a matter for the  FTTJ.  At  [21],
       the FTTJ took into account the timing of report and cross-compared it
       to  the  medical  notes.  While  the  respondent  accepted  the  PTSD
       diagnosis, the expert did not engage with alternative scenarios  such
       as that the appellant  was  affected  by  his  uncertain  immigration
       status and that his symptoms had worsened over the time he  had  been
       in the United Kingdom.

   17. In relation to ground 4, Mr Whitwell had nothing to say.  Whereas  in
       relation to ground 5,  he  noted  the  absence  of  any  post-hearing
       evidence from  the  FTTJ  as  to  when  he  reached  his  credibility
       findings.

   18. In reply, Ms Querton submitted  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  take  into
       account the diagnosis of PTSD and how this might  have  affected  the
       appellant's  ability  to   give   evidence   with   regard   to   the
       inconsistencies, which were not related to medical notes.  The  point
       in [19] was one of plausibility rather than inconsistency.  Once  the
       discrepancies arising from the medical evidence were taken out of the
       equation, there was little left.

   19. At the end of the hearing, I decided that the FTTJ  materially  erred
       in relation to his treatment of the appellant's credibility  as  well
       as in relation to the treatment of the medical evidence.

   20. The FTTJ provided a number of  specific  reasons  for  rejecting  the
       credibility of the appellant's account, which  are  set  out  between
       [15] and [25] of the decision and reasons. At [17],  [18],  [22]  and
       [23], the FTTJ relies on inconsistencies between medical records made
       when the appellant was detained under the Mental Health Act 1983; was
       psychotic and did not have the benefit of an  interpreter.  The  FTTJ
       relies on other apparent discrepancies between  his  account  at  the
       hearing and during his asylum interviews  at  [15]  -  [18],  however
       there is no reference made to the interpretation difficulties,  which
       were noted by the interviewing officer at length on the face  of  the
       asylum interview record. The matter referred to at [19] is  one  that
       does not affect the core of the appellant's claim.

   21. At [21], the FTTJ is critical of the appellant's recent  approach  to
       his psychotherapist, having been discharged in 2007.  Yet  when  this
       appeal was previously listed for a hearing on  8  August  2014,  FTTJ
       Khawar was of the view that there was a need for  up-to-date  medical
       information and adjourned the appeal  for  that  reason.  The  FTTJ's
       comments regarding the appellant's motivation for  obtaining  further
       medical evidence were, accordingly, unwarranted.

   22. The evidence of Dr Piper was  accorded  little  weight  by  the  FTTJ
       solely because he considered it was "based on the  account  given  by
       the appellant." It is notable that the  FTTJ's  consideration  of  Dr
       Piper's report takes place at [23], following the FTTJ's  conclusions
       as to the appellant's credibility. It is therefore  abundantly  clear
       from reading the decision that the FTTJ failed to consider all of the
       evidence before him in the round prior to making  findings  of  fact,
       Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] INLR 122 applies.

   23. The FTTJ was incorrect in stating that Dr Piper's opinion  was  based
       solely on the appellant's account. It is apparent  from  the  report,
       that Dr Piper observed the appellant's clinical  symptoms,  diagnosed
       PTSD and concluded that there was  no  reason  to  suggest  that  the
       appellant would  be  experiencing  those  psychological  symptoms  of
       trauma if he was not being  pursued  by  the  Uzbek  authorities.  Dr
       Piper's report makes reference to the appellant's immigration  status
       and the effect of this on his mental state but nonetheless  concludes
       that the appellant's diagnosis is directly linked to his  experiences
       in Uzbekistan.  The  FTTJ  provides  no  reasons  for  rejecting  the
       diagnosis of PTSD, if that is indeed what he did in according  little
       weight to the report.

   24. While the FTTJ erred in failing to assess the evidence  of  TS,  this
       was not a material error given that TS was unable, through  no  fault
       of his own, to corroborate core parts of the  appellant's  claim  and
       the remainder of  his  statement  concerned  matters  in  the  public
       domain.

   25. The respondent was not put on notice that it would be argued that the
       FTTJ failed to have regard to Country Guidance, namely LM  (returnees
       - expired exit permit) Uzbekistan CG [2012] UKUT 00390.  Furthermore,
       no application was made to amend the  grounds,  in  that  Ms  Querton
       referred to the said case in passing, while arguing  another  ground.
       Clearly, it is an error of law for the  FTTJ  to  fail  to  refer  to
       applicable country guidance, regardless of whether he  was  expressly
       referred to it. However, as I have found the FTTJ erred  in  relation
       to  his  credibility  findings  and  the  treatment  of  the  medical
       evidence, I need say no more on this matter.

   26. The ground relating to interpretation difficulties was not  developed
       and I was advised of no specific instances of such matters during the
       appellant's evidence at his hearing. I therefore reject the  argument
       that the FTTJ erred in not taking this into consideration in relation
       to his credibility findings. I also reject the  argument  that  there
       was such a delay between the appeal hearing and  the  typing  of  the
       decision and reasons that the FTTJ's findings were  rendered  unsafe.
       The delay was a little  over  two  months  and  in  any  event,  this
       argument was not pursued by Ms Querton.

   27. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are  errors  of  law
       such that the decision be  set  aside  to  be  remade.  None  of  the
       findings of the FTTJ are to stand.

   28. There was little prospect of my proceeding  to  remake  the  decision
       following the error of law decision, owing to  the  absence  of  both
       witnesses the appellant wished to call. I was also advised  that  the
       appellant's wife had recently appealed a refusal  of  an  application
       made under Appendix FM of the Rules and there may be a possibility of
       linking their appeals. I accordingly,  remitted  the  matter  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

   29. Further directions are set out below.

   30. An anonymity direction was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
       appropriate that this be continued and therefore make  the  following
       anonymity direction:

       "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law.

       I set aside the decision to be re-made.

       Directions

         . This appeal is remitted to be heard de novo by any First-tier
           Tribunal Judge except FTTJ Zahed.
         . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Hatton Cross.
         . An interpreter in the Uzbek language (Uzbekistan dialect only)
           is required
         . Time estimate is 3 hours


Signed      Date: 22 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
