
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th September 2015               |On 21st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                   Ms O A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Knorr, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant is a Nigerian national with a date of birth of 6th August
    1973 who appeals with permission a decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
    Judge Paul,  promulgated  on  2nd  January  2015  in  which  the  judge
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum and international protection
    grounds.

 2. The significant issue before the First-tier  Tribunal  arose  from  the
    judge's finding that the Appellant had been trafficked.  At  that  time
    the Respondent Secretary of State had failed to complete the  processes
    set out in her trafficking policy and had not made a concluded decision
    on the issue of trafficking.  It was argued in  the  grounds  that  the
    failure to follow her policy resulted in a misdirection by  the  judge,
    who should have found that the decision was not in accordance with  the
    law for failure to follow policy, and it was on  that  principal  basis
    that permission was  granted  to  run  this  appeal  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. Since that time matters have moved on because the  Secretary  of  State
    has in fact  reached  a  concluded  decision  to  the  point  that  the
    Appellant has indeed been  trafficked.   The  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State has now granted the Appellant limited leave to remain.

 4. Before me the parties' representatives were agreed that the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside in its entirety and  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal with no findings preserved.

 5. In the context of the remitted hearing I understand from Mr Duffy  that
    it is likely that the Respondent will wish  to  look  at  the  decision
    again in light of the concluded trafficking decision, and, in the event
    that she does so and determines that the Appellant  should  be  granted
    status under the Refugee Convention, then I would invite the  Secretary
    of State to advise the Tribunal at the earliest possibility  so  as  to
    avoid any unnecessary court hearings at the First-tier.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the  First  tier  tribunal  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

