

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04695/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2014                            |On 31st October 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                                     S R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant did not appear and was not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Walker,   Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 4  January  1981,
      has been granted permission to appeal against the decision  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Birk who, by a  determination  promulgated  on  14
      August 2014, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  removal
      decision that accompanied refusal of his  application  on  asylum  and
      human rights grounds.


   2. The appellant did not attend the hearing and nor was  he  represented.
      This might be thought  surprising  because  he  had  been  represented
      before the First-tier Tribunal and  had  been  granted  permission  to
      appeal in response to professionally produced  grounds.  A  number  of
      telephone  calls  were  made  to  the  telephone  numbers   shown   on
      correspondence from his solicitors but it was not possible  to  secure
      an answer from either the land line or the mobile number provided. The
      notice of hearing had been correctly served upon  both  the  appellant
      and his representatives and so the hearing proceeded in his absence.

   3. The nature of the appellant's asylum claim has been neatly  summarised
      by the judge at paragraph 5 of the determination:

           "The appellant's uncle whom he lived with after the death of his
           parents was an LTTE supporter. In 2007 his uncle was detained by
           the army and the appellant has not seen him since. The appellant
           had no problems until in October 2013 when a member of the  LTTE
           who knew his uncle came  to  him  and  asked  him  to  help  him
           financially. This person was then caught by the authorities  and
           he informed them that the appellant had helped him  financially.
           As a result of this the army  began  to  look  for  him  and  in
           October searched for him at his home. The appellant was informed
           of this by his wife. He left for Colombo on the same  day  where
           he remained for 5 months. He states  that  the  authorities  are
           still looking for him."

   4. The appellant had said also that the reason  why  the  uncle's  friend
      sought financial help was because, having "escaped from the army grip"
      he needed money to escape to India. The appellant had  been  reluctant
      to provide that financial assistance but did so in the face of threats
      that if he did not do so  then  his  uncle's  friend  would  tell  the
      authorities that he had in fact done so and that would  bring  adverse
      attention upon the appellant. He said that he had been working in  the
      fields when his wife telephoned him on his mobile phone  to  tell  him
      that the army had been to their home  looking  for  him.  He  did  not
      return home again, leaving that afternoon for Colombo.


   5. The judge dismissed the appeal because, for the detailed  reasons  set
      out between paragraphs 24-32, he did not accept to be true any part of
      the appellant's account of the  uncle's  friend  being  provided  with
      financial assistance or of the authorities  coming  to  his  house  as
      consequence, having learned that the appellant had provided  financial
      support to a LTTE sympathiser. Those  reasons  may  be  summarised  as
      follows:

   6. The appellant gave an inconsistent and contradictory account of  these
      relatively straightforward events in interview, saying  both  that  it
      was in July 2013 that the uncle's friend had visited and been provided
      with financial assistance and that  this  occurred  in  October  2013.
      Since it was the appellant's account that it was very soon  after  the
      visit that the army came looking for him and he moved  immediately  to
      Colombo where he stayed for 5 months before travelling to  the  United
      Kingdom, it was reasonable to expect  a  consistent  account  of  that
      event to be given if it had really occurred;

   7. A further significant contradiction  is  disclosed  by  the  interview
      concerning whether or not the authorities continued to search for  him
      at the family home after he had moved to Colombo. He  said  both  that
      there had been no further visits after the one  on  October  2013  and
      that, after he had moved to Colombo, he heard from his wife  that  the
      army continued to come to the family home looking for him, saying that
      they came "once in a week, one in 3 days they used to come  in  search
      for me". Having noted  the  apparent  contradiction,  the  interviewer
      asked three times whether there had been any visits by the authorities
      after the initial one in October 2013 and three  times  the  appellant
      said there had not been before correcting that and saying that he  had
      heard from both his wife and his brother that the army  had  continued
      to make frequent visits to the family home in the hope of finding him.




   8. The explanation offered by the appellant for  this  contradiction  was
      that he was confused and thought that he was being  asked  about  what
      had been happening before October 2013 and not  after  then.  In  that
      regard he relied upon  a  psychiatric  report  produced  by  Dr  Robin
      Lawrence that made a diagnosis of PTSD arising from the trauma of  the
      death of his parents two decades earlier when he  was  just  13  years
      old. The judge had regard to Dr Lawrence's report  and  reached  these
      conclusions:

           [The report] states that his depression is moderate but that  he
           has marked anxiety at the  thought  of  being  returned  to  Sri
           Lanka. It further states that he has considered the capacity  of
           the appellant to face a court hearing and concludes that  he  is
           able to be cross-examined. However, he remains  concerned  about
           his mental health state and that, "... he might have  difficulty
           in recollecting events and he might get  confused."  It  is  not
           clear as to how the expert reaches its conclusion as no analysis
           is  provided  for  this  capacity  assessment  and   it   cannot
           necessarily simply flowed from the diagnosis of PTSD.


           In any event I found that the  appellant  did  not  display  any
           confusion or difficulty in recalling events when  asked  at  the
           hearing. He was able to understand  the  questions  and  provide
           answers.


           I find that allowing (for) the anxiety that would be felt in  an
           important interview ... that he did  give  inconsistent  answers
           about critical matters. He provides no explanation as to why  he
           made a mistake of several months in  relation  to  when  he  was
           approached by the man and he does  not  state  that  it  was  an
           interpreting error when he was asked three times  about  whether
           there was a threat after October 2013. He simply states that  he
           was confused and thought that he was being asked about prior  to
           October 2013.  He  does  not  make  other  such  errors  in  his
           interview and again this is about a critical fact.


           I do not find that his  explanations  for  those  errors  to  be
           credible because they are both with regards to those details  of
           his accounts which were most important and therefore it would be
           reasonable that he  would  provide  accurate  information  about
           since his account is not  a  complicated  or  detailed  one  and
           happened so recently and because the rest of his interview  does
           not show confusion or lack of understanding on his part which it
           would be reasonable to see if he was getting  confused.  I  find
           that on the key elements of his account he has failed to provide
           a consistent and accurate account."

   9. The judge noted also that the appellant  had  offered  no  information
      about the frequency of visits from the authorities more recently, even
      though he was in contact with his wife who remained in the family home
      and it was his case that adverse attention in him persisted.


  10. The judge had regard to the submission that as the appellant  did  not
      put himself "at the heart of an account"  therefore  his  account  was
      less likely to be fabricated but rejected that argument on  the  basis
      that the peripheral involvement claimed meant the appellant would have
      less detail to remember.

  11. Finally, the judge noted the delay in claiming asylum which reinforced
      his  conclusions  about  the  appellant's  lack  of  credibility.   He
      therefore dismissed the appeal.

  12. The grounds for seeking permission to appeal complain that  the  judge
      failed adequately to engage with the  report  from  Dr  Lawrence  with
      regard to whether a propensity to become confused might  represent  an
      answer  to  the  concerns  expressed  about  the   contradictory   and
      inconsistent answers given in interview and in giving oral evidence at
      the appeal hearing. In the light of the  content  of  the  report  the
      finding of the judge that  no  analysis  had  been  provided  for  the
      "capacity  assessment"  made  by  Dr  Lawrence  was  not  sustainable.
      Further, it is said that the judge failed to make a clear  finding  in
      respect of the doctor's diagnosis.

  13. In my judgement that challenge is without  merit.  The  report  of  Dr
      Lawrence is not a lengthy document. His observations  upon  "capacity"
      are very brief and set out in a concluding paragraph to his report:


           "Capacity


           I have given some consideration to whether this man is  actually
           fit to face a court hearing and my conclusion is that he is fit.
           He is able to be  cross-examined.  However  I  remain  concerned
           about his mental health state and he might  have  difficulty  in
           recollecting events and he might get confused.


           He tells me he is sure he will be killed if he  is  returned  to
           Sri Lanka."

      It was plainly open to the judge to  conclude  that  was  an  entirely
      unreasoned addition to the report that provided no basis at  all  upon
      which to disregard the contradictory account the appellant  had  given
      about a matter at the very heart of his claim to be at risk on return.
      The judge has not relied only upon the contradictory evidence said  to
      be the result of confusion  on  the  appellant's  part  but  upon  his
      assessment of the evidence as a whole.

  14. It was for the judge to reach an assessment of issues  of  credibility
      and, having heard oral evidence from the appellant, he was best placed
      to do so. He has looked carefully at everything the parties  chose  to
      put before him and has given clear and legally sufficient reasons  for
      reaching conclusions that were plainly open on that  evidence.  In  my
      judgement the decision of the judge is unassailable.


  15. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  judge  Ransley
      noted also that the grounds complained that the judge failed to assess
      whether the appellant's mental health would deteriorate if removed  to
      Sri Lanka. However, given that the judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
      findings of fact that he did, the position is that the  appellant  had
      lived without apparrant difficulty in Sri Lanka  with  his  wife  and,
      more recently their young child. Under headings in his report of "Past
      Medical History" and Past Psychiatric History" Dr  Lawrence  had  said
      simply "Nil" and, although his view was that the PTSD he had  detected
      was treatable in the United Kingdom no evidence was offered before the
      judge that the appellant had sought or received any form of treatment.
      In any event, at paragraph 4 of the determination the  judge  recorded
      that at the beginning of the hearing  the  appellant's  representative
      had confirmed that no claim was  being  pursued  "in  respect  of  his
      medical condition and Article 8 was not being pursued".

Summary of decision


  16. The First-tier Tribunal did not make any error of law.


  17.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the  determination
      of Judge Birk is to stand.



                               Signed


                               Date: 30 October 2014




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

