
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04931/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14th November 2014                         |On 19th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                           MR CHARMIN BALASINGHAM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 10th July  1989.  He
       arrived in the UK on 15th February 2012 with a valid  student  visa.
       He then returned to Sri Lanka on 5th  July  2013  and  says  he  was
       kidnapped, tortured and detained. He returned to the UK on 22nd July
       2013 and claimed asylum on arrival. This application was refused  on
       3rd July 2014 and he appealed. His appeal against the  decision  was
       dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Carroll  in  a  determination
       following a hearing on the 18th August 2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Nicholson on the 29th September 2014 on the basis  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in accordance  with  E
       and R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49 due  to  factual  mistakes  made  by
       Judge Carroll  which  then  materially  and  unfairly  affected  the
       assessment of the appellant's credibility.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    4. Mr Jarvis conceded that Judge Carroll had made factual  mistakes  in
       his determination and that it was clear from  the  asylum  interview
       that Judge Carroll had blended two friends (one called  Kanthan  and
       one who was not named) which had  then  caused  him  to  assess  the
       appellant's credibility negatively in an unfair way.

    5.  Mr  Jarvis  accepted  that  in  these  circumstances  it  would  be
       appropriate for me to set the determination of Judge Carroll aside

    6. Both parties were in agreement that given  the  extent  of  remaking
       required that it would be appropriate to remit  the  appeal  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

    7. I informed the parties that I  found  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       erred  in  law  for  the  reasons  set  out  below  and   that   the
       determination was therefore set aside with no findings preserved.

Conclusions

    8.  Judge  Carroll's  determination  contained  a  number  of   factual
       misunderstandings and  statements  which  were  not  correct  (three
       examples of which are set out below). These amount to errors of  law
       as they were not the  fault  of  the  appellant  and  have  impacted
       materially and unfairly on his assessment of the credibility of  the
       appellant's, which in turn had a central role in  the  determination
       of his asylum claim.

    9. As Mr Jarvis has stated  one  such  error  relates  to  whether  the
       appellant's friend who gave information about him to the authorities
       in 2008 was the same person  who  gave  information  in  2013.  They
       clearly were not the same person but Judge Carroll had assumed  that
       they were both the person called Kanthan, see paragraph 18(a) of the
       determination. It is also clear that the appellant did  mention  his
       kidnap at paragraph 4.1 of his screening interview, contrary to what
       is said at paragraph 18(b) of the determination. I also  have  grave
       concerns about the treatment of the medical evidence  of  Mr  Andres
       Martin consultant in emergency medicine by Judge Carroll.  This  did
       not find that self-infliction by proxy was a possible cause for  the
       appellant's scaring as was said at  paragraphs  19  and  20  of  the
       determination of Judge Carroll,  but  that  it  was  only  a  remote
       possibility given the significant number of scars and  the  severity
       of the injuries, and that there  was  a  high  likelihood  that  the
       injuries were caused by a third party as described by the  appellant
       (see pages 5 & 6 of the report).

   10. In the circumstances I find that the determination must be set aside
       in its entirety and remade de novo.

   11. I find it appropriate to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal
       for rehearing given the extent of judicial fact-finding required  in
       this case. I have had regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice
       Statement at paragraph 7.2 and the views of the  parties  that  this
       was the correct and fair course.

Decision

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   14. The appeal is  remitted  for  hearing  de  novo  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal by a Judge other that  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Carroll on 11th March 2015.

   15. The estimated length of hearing is two hours and a Tamil interpreter
       is required.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
17th November 2014



FEE AWARD:
It is not appropriate to make a fee award at this stage in the proceedings
and in any case no fee was paid.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
17th November 2014



