
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04014/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th November 2015                |On 1st December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                               yahy baqer hadi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Canter, Counsel, instructed by AMZ Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Iraq, appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 25th  February  2015
    to refuse his application for asylum in the  UK.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parker dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds and on the basis of
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   The  Appellant
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant originally  entered
    the UK on 11th May 2004 and subsequently married a Portuguese  national
    and applied for a residence card as a family member of an EEA national.
    This application was refused and the appeal against that  decision  was
    dismissed. The appellant then claimed asylum on 13th September 2006 but
    was encountered on 22nd February 2007  working  and  produced  a  false
    Danish passport. He was convicted on two counts of obtaining  leave  to
    enter the UK by means of deception and was sentenced to two  years  and
    six months imprisonment and was  subsequently  served  with  notice  to
    deport, his appeal against that  decision  was  dismissed  and  he  was
    deported on 9th May 2011. However he re-entered the UK  on  16th  march
    2014 and was arrested and subsequently convicted on 19th June  2014  of
    entering the UK in breach of a Deportation Order and sentenced  to  six
    months imprisonment. He claimed asylum on the basis that  he  has  been
    threatened by  Al-Sadar  militants  as  a  result  of  a  dispute  over
    ownership of his father's land. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    that the appellant's account was not credible and  that,  even  if  the
    appellant was under threat from the militant organisation, there  would
    be an internal relocation option.

 3. The appellant also claimed that his removal would breach his  right  to
    private and family life under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
    Human Rights based on his relationship with his parents who live in the
    UK. The Judge considered this part of the appeal under  Article  8  and
    found that the Appellant has a family life with his  parents  [45]  but
    that his removal would be proportionate. The Judge found that there was
    a conflict in the evidence as to the care undertaken by the  Appellant.
    The Judge found that the Appellant does help his father  bit  that  his
    behaviour is 'in no way exceptional or beyond the norm' and that  there
    are others who help the Appellant's father [52], namely the Appellant's
    mother and sister [49].

 4. In granting permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew
    indicated that she considered that the grounds criticising the  judge's
    decision in relation  to  the  asylum  aspects  did  not  disclose  any
    material errors.  However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew did  accept
    that the judge made contrary findings in the decision as to whether  or
    not the Appellant enjoys family life in the UK and found that  this  is
    an arguable error of law.   At the outset  of  the  hearing  Mr  Canter
    accepted that the grant of permission was limited to Article 8 only.

 5. Mr Canter relied on the Grounds of Appeal and submitted that the  judge
    made material errors of law in relation to  his  assessment  of  family
    life and in relation to his assessment of proportionality.  In relation
    to family life, Mr Canter submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    contradicted himself as to whether family life is engaged.  He  pointed
    out that at paragraph 45 of the determination the judge said  that  the
    Appellant has a family life with his parents but that at paragraph  52,
    having set out  the  relevant  case  law,  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant's family life with his father was 'in no way  exceptional  or
    beyond the norm'.

 6. He submitted  that  there  were  further  errors  in  relation  to  the
    assessment as to family life. He submitted  that  one  of  the  reasons
    given for the apparent finding at paragraph 52 that there was no family
    life was that the Appellant did  not mention in  his  asylum  interview
    that he gave any personal care  to  his  father.   However,  Mr  Canter
    referred to questions 119, 120 and 121 of the  asylum  interview  where
    the Appellant said that his father was dependent on him as,  since  his
    father's accident, he takes him to hospital  sometimes  three  times  a
    week and translate for him and that his mother is  elderly  as  she  is
    almost 79.  He submitted that  the  Appellant  described  his  father's
    medical condition in answer to question 120 and in answer  to  question
    121 he said that he also took care of his father at home and  also  did
    the shopping for his parents. Mr Canter submitted that, in  failing  to
    take account of these answers, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not
    arrive at his conclusion safely.

 7. Mr Canter also submitted that in the final  sentence  of  paragraph  52
    where the judge said; 'There are others who can  help  the  father  and
    they do so', he took account of an  irrelevant  factor  in  determining
    whether the Appellant has family life with his  father.   He  submitted
    therefore that there was an error in relation to  the  first  stage  of
    Article 8.

 8. Mr Canter submitted also that the judge  also  made  an  error  in  his
    assessment  of  proportionality.   He  submitted  that  it   would   be
    impossible to reach a  correct  proportionality  assessment  given  the
    first mistake but that there were also other  mistakes.   He  submitted
    that the judge made a mistake  at  paragraph  57  where  he  said  that
    Sections 117B (4) and (5) require the Tribunal to ascribe little weight
    where a person has formed a private or family life  whilst  in  the  UK
    unlawfully 'as in this case'.  He submitted that  this  provision  does
    not apply in relation to family life.

 9. Mr Canter submitted also that the judge erred in the first sentence  in
    paragraph 58  where  he  said;  'However,  no  exceptions  apply'.   He
    submitted that this appears to indicate that the judge was applying  an
    exceptionality test.  Mr Canter submitted that the judge made an  error
    at paragraph 55 where he says that the Appellant is a financial  burden
    on society whereas in fact he says there was no evidence at the hearing
    in relation to the Appellant's financial circumstances,  the  Appellant
    is not in receipt  of  any  benefit  and  in  fact  he  cares  for  and
    translates for his father which is a saving  on  public  finances.  The
    Appellant's parents are both refugees, the Appellant  lives  with  them
    and he said that the financial circumstances were not an issue  at  the
    appeal. He submitted that there is a  further  error  at  paragraph  58
    where in the third sentence the judge appears to take into account  the
    factors at Section 117D whereas in fact this is not a deportation case,
    this is an asylum appeal.

10. He submitted that the judge did not set out  the  correct  question  at
    paragraph  58.  The  correct  question  would  have  been  whether  the
    Respondent has justified the interference with the  Appellant's  family
    life.  He submitted that this is a material error  and  the  Article  8
    issue needs to be addressed properly.

11. Mr Staunton submitted  that  the  judge  did  properly  deal  with  the
    Appellant's answers in the asylum interview  at  paragraph  48  of  the
    determination.  This, read with paragraph 52, indicates that the  judge
    did find that the Appellant does help with his father and in fact there
    are no contradictory findings here.  The judge said that the  Appellant
    helps with his father but not to the extent claimed in  oral  evidence.
    He submitted that it was open to the  judge  to  find  that  there  are
    others who can help the Appellant's  father.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's evidence about his claimed assistance  to  his  father  was
    inconsistent and it was open to the judge to make the findings he did.

12. In relation to paragraph 58 Mr Staunton submitted  that  there  was  an
    application in this case to withdraw this decision for the Secretary of
    State to remake it by considering making a deportation order. The judge
    refused that application but indicated that this  was   a  matter  that
    could  be dealt with in the course of the hearing. This is  dealt  with
    at paragraphs 12 and 13 of the  judge's  determination.   He  submitted
    that that is why the judge considered Section 117D.

13. Mr Canter responded by submitting that the judge did fail  to  set  out
    what the Appellant said in the interview. He submitted that  there  was
    no reason put forward by the judge for not believing what the Appellant
    claimed he does for his father and there was no basis for his findings.
    He submitted that the judge confused himself in relation to family life
    and made a distorted assessment.

Error of Law

14. I have considered all of the evidence and the submissions in this case.
      I accept that the judge could perhaps have structured his  assessment
    under Article 8 better.  Although he found at  paragraph  45  that  the
    Appellant has a family life with his parents the judge then set out the
    relevant case law and concluded at paragraph 52  that  the  Appellant's
    behaviour was not 'exceptional or beyond  the  norm',  a  reference  to
    the test set out in Etti-Adegbola v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1319. I do not
    consider that these findings are contradictory in this case.  It  would
    have been open to the judge, on the basis of this conclusion,  to  have
    found that there is no  family  life  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    parents over and above that normally found between  parents  and  adult
    children.  However the judge did not so find but went on to  conduct  a
    full proportionality assessment.  This may have  been  over  and  above
    what was necessary in this case given the conclusions at  paragraph  52
    but this does not make such consideration a material error.

15. In  considering  proportionality  the  judge  considered  all  relevant
    matters.  I note in particular at  paragraph  48  that  the  judge  did
    consider the answers in the asylum interview in relation  to  the  care
    said to be  provided  by  the  Appellant  and  found  that  these  were
    different from the oral evidence given by the Appellant.   This  was  a
    finding open to the judge.  The  judge  expanded  on  this  finding  at
    paragraph 52 when he noted that  the  Appellant  did  not  mention  any
    personal care provided to his father in the asylum interview.  This  is
    correct.   The  Appellant  mentioned  taking  his  father  to  hospital
    appointments and translating for him and he  mentioned  doing  shopping
    for his father and mentioned helping him at home but  did  not  specify
    any personal care.  Therefore the judge's conclusions were open to him.

16. I consider that it is clear from reading the assessment under Article 8
    as a whole that the judge found that the Appellant does help his father
    but not to the level claimed and not to a level which would bring their
    relationship into the sphere of 'exceptional or  beyond  the  norm'  as
    required to show family life between parents and adult children.

17. In terms of the  proportionality  assessment,  I  do  not  consider  it
    material that the judge found that the Appellant is a financial  burden
    on society.  The issue is whether under Section 117B an  Appellant  can
    show that they are financially independent.  Mr Canter  submitted  that
    there was no evidence before the judge in  relation  to  this  and  the
    judge would have been entitled to conclude that there was  no  evidence
    that the Appellant was financially independent. However as there was no
    evidence as to this matter before the Judge he could not have concluded
    that the Appellant is financially independent. It is not enough to  say
    that this was not an issue at the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This was a matter the Judge  was  required  by  statute  to  take  into
    account and it was up to the Appellant to submit  evidence  to  support
    any claim that he is financially independent. Therefore the wording  at
    the end of paragraph 55 is not a material error.

18. I do not consider that the first sentence of paragraph 58, 'However, no
    exceptions apply', amounts to a  requirement  of  exceptionality.   The
    judge goes on to say that there are no qualifying children and it is in
    this context that the  judge  referred  to  exceptions  to  the  public
    interest provisions.

19. I accept that the fourth sentence of  paragraph  58,  which  refers  to
    section 117D and the deportation rules, is confusingly worded.  However
    this Appellant was previously deported and there was an application  at
    the outset of the hearing for the matter to be withdrawn in order  that
    a revocation of deportation order decision could  be made and in  these
    circumstances these issues may have been  in  the  judge's  mind.   The
    Judge made no material error in referring to section 117D.

20. The judge took  account  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  used
    deception in the past, made a false immigration claim and  had  entered
    the UK in breach of his deportation order.  The judge took  account  of
    the circumstances of the Appellant and his parents who  live  with  his
    adult sister and 8 year  old  nephew.   I  consider  that  reading  the
    judge's assessment of Article 8 as a whole the judge  took  account  of
    all relevant factors in assessing family life and  proportionality  and
    considering all of this section as a whole  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge made no material error in his assessment of Article 8.

Notice of Decision

21. The judge made no material error of law and the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

29.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 25th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

