


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04012/2012
      AA/04013/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 12 June 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    B H M
                                    A S M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Akther, instructed by Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

These appeals come before me following the grant of permission to appeal  on
25 October 2012.

The appellants are nationals of Afghanistan, born  respectively  in  January
1951 and  January  1979,  and  are  mother  and  son.  The  first  appellant
travelled to India and applied for, and was issued with, a visitor visa  for
the United Kingdom. The  second  appellant  was  issued  with  a  six  month
medical visa for the United Kingdom.  They  then  travelled  to  the  United
Kingdom. After three and a half months, in September  2011,  they  travelled
to Belgium and claimed asylum there, but were sent to the United Kingdom  by
the Belgian authorities for their asylum claims to be considered here.  They
arrived in the United Kingdom on 19 January 2012 and were interviewed on  22
February 2012.  Their claims were refused on 4  April  2012  and  they  were
refused leave to enter the United Kingdom the same day.

The Appellants' claim

The appellants claim to be at risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan  because  of
their relationship to Ahmad Shah Massoud, founder of the Northern  Alliance,
and Ahmad Zia Massoud, Chairman  of  the  Afghanistan  National  Front.  The
first appellant said that Zia Massoud was  her  step-son,  the  son  of  her
husband from another of his wives.  She  left  Afghanistan  because  of  the
security situation and she referred to a bomb attack  by  the  Taliban  four
years previously where Zia Massoud was the target. The  attack  was  on  his
home, where she was living at the time with the second appellant.  Her  son,
the second appellant, had previously visited the United Kingdom for  medical
treatment for his epilepsy but it had become worse since he had returned  to
Afghanistan and so he obtained another medical visa for the  United  Kingdom
and she had accompanied him here. They  went  to  Belgium  from  the  United
Kingdom and, whilst there, Ahmed Zia's father-in-law,  Burhanuddin  Rabbani,
the former president of Afghanistan, was killed  and  Ahmed  Zia  called  to
tell them that he could no longer protect them and  advised  them  to  claim
asylum. The second appellant claimed that he was the step-brother  of  Ahmed
Zia Massoud and Ahmad Shah Massoud and that he had been  threatened  by  the
Taliban and Al Qaeda, since 2001,  with  being  kidnapped  and  killed.  The
Taliban had previously announced that  they  intended  to  kill  any  family
members of Ahmad Zia Massoud  and  he  also  referred  to  an  assassination
attempt against his brother when he was staying at his house, two  to  three
years previously. He had previously been protected by  bodyguards  paid  for
by his brother, but when his father-in-law was  killed,  Ahmad  Zia  Massoud
had told him that he could no longer guarantee his safety.

The respondent accepted that  the  appellants  were  related  to  Ahmad  Zia
Massoud but  considered  that  they  would  have  sufficient  protection  in
Afghanistan and would not be at risk on  return.  It  was  considered,  with
respect to the second appellant, that it was his brother  and  not  himself,
who was the target of the  assassination  attempt  and  that  there  was  no
evidence that  the  Taliban  had  been  targeting  him.  Two  of  his  other
brothers, Ahmad Wali Massoud and Yahya  Massoud,  had  never  been  targeted
whilst living in Afghanistan and that was evidence  that  the  Taliban  were
not targeting all the family members. The  respondent  considered  that  the
appellants' removal would not breach their human rights  and  refused  their
claims and made a decision to refuse them leave to enter United Kingdom.

The appellants' appeals against that decision came  before  Judge  Hembrough
in the First-tier Tribunal on  21  May  2012.  Judge  Hembrough  heard  oral
evidence from the appellants and found them to  be  credible  witnesses  who
had a genuine subjective fear of serious harm if  returned  to  Afghanistan.
However he concluded that  their  fear  was  not  objectively  well-founded,
since they had never been involved in any political activity themselves  and
neither had they been targeted  previously.  He  accordingly  dismissed  the
appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal that decision was sought on the grounds that the  judge
had erred in  law  in  his  findings  on  risk  on  return,  sufficiency  of
protection and humanitarian protection.

Permission to appeal was initially refused,  but  was  subsequently  granted
upon a renewed application on 20 July 2012 on the grounds raised.

Appeal hearing

The appeal came before me on 12 June 2013 and I  heard  submissions  on  the
error of law.

Ms Akhter expanded upon her grounds of appeal,  submitting  that  the  judge
had failed to consider that membership of the Massoud family was  sufficient
to place the appellants at risk and that the risk was  continuing.  All  the
family members lived outside Afghanistan because it was  too  dangerous  for
them in the country. The judge was wrong to  equate  protection  from  Ahmad
Zia  Massoud  with  state  protection  and  did  not  consider  the  state's
inability to protect. The Country of  Origin  Information  report  that  was
before the First-tier Tribunal referred to the inability of  the  police  to
provide a sufficiency of protection.

Mr Parkinson submitted that the judge had not erred in law  as  he  properly
found that Ahmad Zia Massoud had provided protection in the past  and  would
do so in the future. All those subjected to  failed  assassination  attempts
were high profile and the appellants were not. The letter  from  the  police
showed that the police would provide protection. It was clear on what  basis
the judge had come to his conclusions and  he  was  entitled  to  reach  the
conclusions that he did. The facts  of  the  case  did  not  show  that  the
appellants were at enhanced risk.

Ms Akhter, in reply, submitted that the judge had erred in  his  application
of the test in Horvath v SSHD [2000] UKHL 37 since  that  case  referred  to
the availability of state protection, whilst he was relying upon  protection
from a family member. The background  information  showed  that  the  police
were unable to protect the  appellants.  The  appellants  were  at  enhanced
risk.

Both parties agreed that if an error of law were found, the  decision  could
be  re-made  on  the  evidence  before  me  and  they  made  further,  short
submissions. Ms Akhter referred to a news article concerning recent  threats
of attack against Ahmad Zia Massoud and to the more recent  COI  report  for
February 2013. Mr Parkinson submitted that the article was relevant only  to
prominent people. He submitted further that the country guidance  cases  for
Somalia made it clear that sufficiency of  protection  did  not  just  arise
from the state.

Consideration and findings.

In my view the judge made errors of law in his determination such  that  the
decision has to be set aside and re-made.

It is indeed the case, as Mr Parkinson submitted and  as  the  judge  found,
that the appellants' situation cannot be compared to  those  who  have  been
the subject of  attempted  assassinations,  given  that  they  have  had  no
political involvement themselves, they are not high-profile  and  they  have
never  previously  been  threatened  or  targeted.  However,   it   is   the
appellants' case that there are also risks to those whose  only  profile  is
being a family member of such people,  and  that  such  risks  substantially
increased  following  the  assassination  of   the   former   president   of
Afghanistan, Burhanuddin Rabbani.

Judge Hembrough recognised, at paragraph 37 of his determination,  that  the
reason given by the appellants for that increased risk was that as a  result
of the deteriorating security situation leading to the assassination of  the
former president, the person who had previously been able to  protect  them,
Ahmad Zia Massoud, would no longer be able to do so. Indeed, it  appears  to
be implicit in his findings at paragraph 38 of  his  determination  that  he
accepted that the absence  of  previous  risk  arose  as  a  result  of  the
availability of protection from Ahmad Zia Massoud. What he did  not  accept,
however, was that that protection would no longer be available to them,  and
it was on that basis  that  he  found  that  they  could  safely  return  to
Afghanistan. It is with those findings that I consider  the  judge  to  have
erred in law.

In the latter part of paragraph 38, the judge found that Ahmad  Zia  Massoud
would be able to provide such protection if he were so  minded  and  he  did
not accept that he would deny the appellants such  protection.  However,  it
seems to me that such a finding  was  speculative  and  was  not  consistent
with, or open to him upon the evidence before him. The appellants' case  was
that he had specifically told them that he could no longer protect them  and
could not even  protect  himself  (question  85  of  the  first  appellant's
interview and  question  74  of  the  second  appellant's  interview).  They
produced a letter from Ahmad Zia Massoud, which appeared at Annex D  in  the
respondent's  appeal  bundle,  advising  them  of   the   "gloomy   security
conditions". There was  background  material  before  the  judge  about  the
assassination of Rabbani and the security situation in  Afghanistan  at  the
time which supported such a claim. Both appellants  had  been  found  to  be
wholly credible by the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal and by  the
judge himself and there is thus no reason why their evidence, in  regard  to
Ahmad Zia  Massoud's  inability  to  provide  further  protection,  was  not
accepted, nor were any findings made to that effect. In the circumstances  I
do not consider that Judge Hembrough was entitled to make the findings  that
he did at paragraph 38.

In any event, as submitted by Ms  Akther,  what  the  judge  ought  to  have
considered, in line with the  principles  in  Horvath,  was  sufficiency  of
protection available to the appellants from the State, rather  than  from  a
family member. Mr Parkinson's submission in  response  was  that,  following
the country guidance cases for  Somalia,  protection  available  from  other
parties was a relevant matter. However that submission failed  to  recognise
that Somalia has  no  government,  whereas  Afghanistan  has  a  functioning
government and state apparatus. Although the  judge  gave  consideration  to
state protection at paragraph 39 of his determination, his findings in  that
regard were limited and appeared to focus upon the  state's  willingness  to
protect. It was not the  appellants'  case,  however,  that  the  state  was
unwilling to protect them, but the relevant issue was their  ability  to  do
so. In that regard they relied upon the letter of  24  September  2011  from
the national police quarters, at page 36 of the  appeal  bundle  before  the
Tribunal. Mr Parkinson submitted  that  that  letter  was  evidence  of  the
ability of the police to provide  protection,  but  I  do  not  read  it  as
stating such. In my view the letter  provides  a  clear  indication  of  the
state's willingness to protect but is not evidence of their  ability  to  do
so.

Ms  Akther  submitted  that  there  was  before  the   First-tier   Tribunal
background information about the security situation in Afghanistan  and  the
role of the police and she referred in particular to sections  of  the  UKBA
COI report for 11 October  2011.  Indeed,  paragraph  8.05  of  that  report
refers to the increasing number of suicide attacks in  Kabul  at  that  time
and the killings of civilians and police  and  section  10  deals  with  the
security forces in general, including the police  and  the  army,  providing
details of corruption and lack of proper  training  within  the  police  and
their lack of effectiveness when faced with  the  growing  threat  from  the
Taliban. None of that was considered by the judge  in  his  findings  as  to
sufficiency of protection.

It seems to me, therefore, that the judge erred in law in  his  approach  to
the issue of sufficiency of protection. Having  considered  the  willingness
of the police to protect the appellants, he failed to go  on  and  make  any
proper findings on their ability to do so. Instead, he  placed  reliance  on
the availability of protection  from  the  appellants'  relative  Ahmad  Zia
Massoud, such reliance being, for the reasons  given  above,  misplaced.  As
such, I find that Judge Hembrough's decision has to be  set  aside  and  re-
made.

In my view the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  namely  the  advice
from Ahmad Zia Massoud, his letter of warning  to  the  appellants  and  the
letter from the national police headquarters specifically referring  to  the
family members of Ahmad Shah Masood  and  naming  the  second  appellant  as
being under serious  threat  from  the  Taliban  and  Al-Qaida,  when  taken
together  with  the  background  information  referring  to   the   security
situation and the security apparatus in Kabul, was more than  sufficient  to
discharge the lower standard of proof to demonstrate a  risk  on  return  to
Afghanistan. The circumstances remain the same since the hearing before  the
First-tier Tribunal and, if anything, there has been a deterioration in  the
security situation in the country and in Kabul, as  evidenced  by  the  more
recent COI report for 2013, referred to by Ms Akther. I take  note  also  of
the more recent evidence of threats  to  Ahmad  Zia  Massoud,  in  the  news
report at page 24 of the appeal bundle, which  further  supports  the  claim
that the security and protection previously relied upon the  appellants  may
well not be available to them on return.

Accordingly, in re-making the decision, I  find  that  the  appellants  have
demonstrated, to the lower standard of proof, that they would be at risk  in
Kabul as a result of their  close  connection  to  their  very  high-profile
family members and that there would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of  protection
available to them.

I consider that the appellants have a well-founded fear of being  persecuted
in Afghanistan for one of the reasons set out in paragraph  6  of  the  2006
Regulations and that they are therefore entitled  to  protection  under  the
Refugee  Convention.  On  that  basis,  I  conclude  that  they  cannot   be
considered as  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.  I  find  that  their
removal to Afghanistan would breach Article 3 of the ECHR.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision and  re-make  it  by
allowing the appellants' appeals  on  asylum  and  Article  3  human  rights
grounds.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  continue
    that order (pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).



















                               Signed                                  Date




                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
