
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04955/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 4th January 2016              |19th January 2016                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                     S S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Paramjarthy (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Miss Savage (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Greasley promulgated on the 27th July 2015,  in  which
       she  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on   Asylum,   Humanitarian
       Protection and Human Rights grounds.

Background

    2. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  the  11th
       February 1984. On the 22nd January 2014  he  claimed  asylum  on  the
       basis of his imputed political opinion. That application was  refused
       by the Respondent in  a  decision  dated  the  5th  March  2015.  The
       Appellant sought to appeal that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal
       and that decision came on appeal  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Greasley on the 15th July 2015  sitting  at  the  Harmondsworth  IAC.
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley's decision is dated the 18th  July
       2015, but was promulgated on the 27th July 2015. Within that decision
       the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the  Appellant  had  been
       the victim of a physical assault by beating, as evidenced within  the
       medical report of Mr Martin, but did not  accept  the  Appellant  had
       given a credible account of his involvement with the LTTE or  of  his
       activities in Sri Lanka, such as to mean that he would be at  a  risk
       of persecution or ill-treatment upon return.

    3. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is firstly argued that the First-tier
       Tribunal Judge had given inconsistent reasons and failed to  properly
       explain  his  reasoning  for  rejecting   the   Appellant's   claimed
       membership of the LTTE, in circumstances where the Judge had accepted
       that there  was  credible  evidence  of  ill-treatment  supported  by
       medical evidence in relation to the scarring. It is further argued in
       ground 2 that  it  is  irrational  to  expect  the  primary  evidence
       transmitted to the UNHCR to be submitted to the Tribunal, when  there
       is an active investigation pending and that  there  was  insufficient
       basis for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to conclude that there was no
       credible evidence that the Appellant had given evidence  to  "such  a
       forum", in circumstances where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
       already found that the Appellant had been abused by  the  authorities
       and thereby effectively subjected to "a war crime". It is argued that
       as there is now a body for receiving such evidence, the Appellant  it
       is argued would fall into the expanded risk  category  identified  by
       Lord Justice Maurice Kay MAURICE in MP and NT [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829.
       Within grounds 3 it is argued that the Appellant is a member  of  the
       British Tamil Forum and has attended public demonstrations  and  that
       this is  a  proscribed  group,  such  that  the  Appellant  would  be
       questioned upon return about his involvement with  proscribed  groups
       and would be arrested and detained if found to be involved based upon
       the country information/guidance entitled "Tamil separatism" produced
       by the COIS in August 2014. It is argued that the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge erred in respect of his analysis of the  risk  upon  return  to
       those who are members of a proscribed organisation.

    4. The Appellant sought to appeal that decision to  the  Upper  Tribunal
       and permission to appeal has been granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Blum on the 1st October 2015, in which he found that  the  Judge  had
       given several reasons, each rational for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
       claimed involvement with the LTTE and the Judge was entitled to find,
       notwithstanding  the  scarring  evidence  that  the   Appellant   had
       fabricated his claimed involvement with the LTTE and would not be  at
       risk upon return to Sri Lanka. However,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blum
       found that it was nevertheless arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal
       had given  insufficient  consideration  to  the  consequence  of  the
       Appellant's membership of the British  Tamil  Forum  and  as  to  any
       possible risk that may flow from such membership, given that the  BTF
       is a proscribed organisation within Sri Lanka. He found that  further
       although less persuasive, he also granted permission  in  respect  of
       the First-tier Tribunal's rejection of the photocopy  of  the  letter
       purporting to come from the International Centre for  the  Prevention
       and Prosecution of Genocide, for  the  reasons  set  out  within  the
       Grounds of Appeal.

    5. Within the Rule 24 response it is argued by the Respondent  that  the
       First-Tier Tribunal Judge properly  directed  himself  and  that  the
       findings on credibility were a matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge and that the  judge  set  out  the  issues,  evidence  and  law
       properly  and  made  findings  of  fact  which  were   adequate   and
       sustainable. It is further argued that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       did not err in his approach when considering  the  photocopy  of  the
       letter from the International Centre for Genocide or the  Appellant's
       claimed membership of the BTF.

    6. In his oral submissions on behalf of  the  Appellant  Mr  Paramjarthy
       adopted his Grounds of Appeal. He argued that the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge at [27] had accepted that the Appellant had be assaulted by the
       authorities, resulting in scarring,  but  had  then  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons as to why the Judge did not  in  such  circumstances
       consider that the Appellant was involved with the LTTE as claimed.

    7. He further sought to argue that the Judge had not explained why there
       would be a difference between the original and  a  photocopy  of  the
       letter dated the 1st June 2015 in respect of the  evidence  given  by
       the Appellant to the International  Centre  for  the  Prevention  and
       Prosecution of Genocide, and that photocopy  evidence  was  the  best
       evidence available and that if the original copy was  not  available,
       why this would prejudice the Appellant's credibility in this  regard.
       He further argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed  to
       take account of the fact that the British Tamil Forum is a proscribed
       organisation and that at [54] the Judge has  misapplied  the  Country
       Guidance by simply looking at whether or  not  the  Appellant  had  a
       significant profile, rather than whether or not  the  authorities  in
       Sri Lanka will consider him to have a significant profile. He  argued
       that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
       question of the perception of the authorities and that here there was
       a person who had been assaulted previously by the authorities and  so
       had been a victim of war crime, whose evidence was that he had  given
       evidence  at  the  International  Centre  for  the   Prevention   and
       Prosecution Genocide and who had been  actively  using  social  media
       networks and was a member of the British  Tamil  Forum  and  who  had
       attended public demonstrations. He argued that the Judge  had  failed
       to give proper consideration as to why the Appellant sur place  would
       fail to place him at risk upon return.

    8. Miss Savage on behalf of the Respondent relied upon the  Respondent's
       Rule 24 reply. Although she conceded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge had not expressly mentioned whether or not  the  British  Tamil
       Forum was a proscribed organisation, she argued  that  there  was  no
       material error in that regard given the  Judge's  findings  that  the
       Appellant did not have any significant profile in Sri Lanka and  that
       pure membership or attendance at demonstrations would not  give  rise
       to a need for protection. She  argued  that  the  Judge  had  further
       properly considered the Appellant's LTTE profile and that he did  not
       have a significant involvement which  would  put  him  at  risk.  She
       further argued that the Judge made adequate findings  in  respect  of
       the Appellant's sur place activities. She argued that the  Judge  was
       obliged to consider the documents before him and as to whether or not
       weight could be attached to them and it was open to  the  Judge  that
       limited weight should be attached to the letter of the 1st June  2015
       and that there was no material error.

    9. I  reserved  my  decision  on  the  question  of  error  of  law  and
       materiality. Both parties agreed that if there was a  material  error
       of law, that the matter should be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

   10. Within [48] of the decision First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley  did
       accept that there was credible medical evidence  that  the  Appellant
       had at some stage been the victim of physical assault by  beating  as
       evidence  with  the   medical   report   of   Mr   Martin.   However,
       significantly, at [57] he went on to  find  that  "I  find  that  the
       Appellant's medical evidence of scarring, caused, I accept, by reason
       of assault by the authorities,  when  considered  in  the  round  and
       cumulatively, is insufficient in itself  to  give  rise  to  risk  on
       return, for the reasons I have stated."

   11. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave his reasons for finding  that  the
       Appellant was not a member of the LTTE to the extent claimed  by  him
       between [48] and [51]. I do accept that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
       has failed within these paragraphs to take account  of  the  material
       consideration, not only that the Appellant had been the victim  of  a
       physical assault by beating as evidenced within the medical report of
       Mr Martin, but his later  finding  at  [57]  that  such  assault  and
       scarring was caused by the authorities.  There  is  no  consideration
       within the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision as to the reason  for
       the Appellant having been assaulted by the authorities to the  extent
       that he was left with scars, and the finding that  this  assault  was
       caused by the  authorities  only  comes  at  [57],  after  the  Judge
       considered the Appellant's involvement with the LTTE. I therefore  do
       consider that there is a tension, as argued by Mr Paramjarthy between
       these two parts of the decision and that the Judge has failed to take
       account of the material factor, namely his finding that the Appellant
       had been subject to not only an assault, but an assault caused by the
       authorities, when considering the Appellant's  involvement  with  the
       LTTE. This I find is an error of law.

   12. Further, although at [53] the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that
       the Appellant had provided an original letter from the British  Tamil
       Forum dated  the  4th  December  2013  which  notes  the  Appellant's
       membership of the organisation and that there was also some  credible
       evidence that the Appellant had attended public demonstrations in the
       United Kingdom, where he claims  up  to  2000  people  had  attended,
       nowhere within the decision does First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley
       consider that the issue regarding the British  Tamil  Forum  being  a
       proscribed organisation and the affect that this may have   upon  his
       risk upon return, given the Appellant's membership  of  a  proscribed
       organisation and attendance at demonstrations, in circumstances where
       he found that the Appellant had  previously  been  assaulted  by  the
       authorities. The failure to consider the material fact of the British
       Tamil  forum  being  a  proscribed  organisation,  as   was   clearly
       established  within  the  Country  of  Origin   Information   Service
       background evidence, I do find is a material error  of  law  in  this
       regard.

   13. Further, I also find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley erred in
       failing to give adequate and sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the
       Appellant's claim to have given evidence to the International  Centre
       for the Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide, simply on  the  basis
       that the Appellant had produced a photocopied letter  dated  the  1st
       June 2015, rather than the original letter. Although  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge stated that ample opportunity had  been  available  to
       provide such documentation which continued to be silent, and that  in
       those circumstances could not be satisfied the Appellant had provided
       the best evidence available and that therefore he  found  that  there
       was no credible evidence of the Appellant having given such  evidence
       before such a forum, I do accept  the  arguments  on  behalf  of  the
       Appellant  that  if  the  Appellant  had  sent  a   letter   to   the
       International Centre for the Prevention and Prosecution of  Genocide,
       and had simply retained a  photocopy  of  that  letter  himself,  the
       evidence that he would actually have to present to the Tribunal would
       be the photocopy. The original letter had been sent and/or  given  to
       the International  Centre  for  the  Prevention  and  Prosecution  of
       Genocide, for the purpose of their investigation. Inadequate  reasons
       had been given as to why in such  circumstances,  it  was  considered
       that the Appellant would be in a position  to  produce  the  original
       letter, or why this should adversely effect upon his  credibility  in
       this regard. The Appellant would not have either access or control to
       the original letter, it having already been submitted on his  account
       to the International Centre for the  Prevention  and  Prosecution  of
       Genocide.

   14. I therefore do find that the first decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Greasley does contain material errors of  law,  such  that  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley should  be  set  aside
       and the matter remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing
       de novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Greasley.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Greasley  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside;

The matter is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  de
novo before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Greasley.


Signed      Dated 7th January 2016

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
