
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04093/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2015                        |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     EEA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made  an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance of any doubt,  that  order  continues.   The  appellant  is
       granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No  report  of  these
       proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her. This direction
       applies both to the appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Failure  to
       comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings  being  brought
       for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Iqbal   promulgated on 1st September 2015, in which  she  allowed  an
       appeal against the decision of the respondent of 20th  February  2015
       to refuse to grant asylum and to remove EEA from the  UK  by  way  of
       directions under s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.


    3. The appellant is the Secretary of State and the  respondent  to  this
       appeal, is EEA.  However for ease of reference, in the course of this
       decision I shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the First-
       tier Tribunal.  I shall in this determination, refer to  EEA  as  the
       appellant and the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  the
       respondent.


Background and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal


    4. The appellant is an Iranian national.  She  claimed  asylum  on  30th
       September  2014.   There  is  no  issue  as  to  her   identity   and
       nationality.  She is of Gashgai (or Qashqai) ethnicity.


    5. Three days before the hearing of the  appeal  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, on 24th July 2015, the appellant had  served  some  further
       documents that were relied upon by the appellant. [10]  They were, in
       particular, a letter  dated  22nd  July  2015  from  the  appellant's
       father's  attorney  and  two  photographs  showing  the   appellant's
       injuries sustained following an attack by the Iran security services.


    6. The background to the appellant's arrival in the UK and her claim for
       asylum is set out at  paragraphs  [11]  to  [30]  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  Suffice it to say for the purposes of this  decision  that
       the appellant provided details of two particular incidents  in  which
       her family were targeted.  Briefly stated the appellant's account was
       that in 2011, the appellant's  father  was  approached  by  the  Imam
       Khomeini Committee who confiscated 50 acres of land  from  him.   The
       appellant's father took legal action against the committee  but  lost
       the claim following a hearing  held  at  the  Engelab  Court.     The
       appellant's father owned a separate 10 acres of land  in  Akbad  Abad
       Shiraz and in 2014, Sepah group members visited him and told  him  to
       vacate that land.  On 23rd / 24th  August  2014,  the  appellant  was
       involved in a physical altercation with members of the  Sepah  group.
       Members of the Sepah group visited the site and there was a  physical
       encounter between the appellant and the group members.  The appellant
       claimed that she had attempted to protect her father and  was  pushed
       by the Sepah, falling backwards with her hands on  the  floor.   When
       she retaliated, she was further injured in the scuffle.  During  this
       time her brother arrived,  and  attempted  to  help.   The  appellant
       recalled hearing gunshots and then escaping  with  her  brother.  The
       appellant claimed to have been driven  to  the  hospital  to  receive
       treatment for the injuries sustained.  She claimed  that  her  father
       and uncle  had  been  detained  following  that  incident,  but  when
       interviewed  she  had  been  unable  to   clarify   basic   essential
       information,  such  as  whether  her  father  was  charged  with  any
       offences, and when her uncle was released.


    7.  The appellant also claimed that she has been attending church in the
       United Kingdom, however she  had  not  thought  about  converting  to
       Christianity.  The respondent, in her decision of 20th February  2015
       considered that the appellant's account of what she had learnt so far
       was credible, but concluded that the appellant is  not  a  practicing
       Christian convert.


    8. The findings of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Iqbal  are  set  out  at
       paragraph [31] to [51] of her decision.  She began by considering the
       issues surrounding the appellant's asylum claim noting, at  paragraph
       [34], that the appellant's case does not rest solely on the fact that
       she is of Qashqai ethnicity or that the incidents  that  occurred  in
       relation to the "land grab" were due to her ethnicity.  She found, at
       paragraph  [35]  that  "..what  has  exacerbated  the  Appellant  and
       family's  difficulties  with  the  authorities,  is   their   Qashqai
       ethnicity...", based upon the objective evidence  that  is  cited  at
       paragraphs [35] and [36].


    9. The Judge went on to consider both the events of 2011 and  2014.   As
       to the events of 2011, the Judge states at paragraphs [39] and [40]


             "39. In support of this element of her account  the  Appellant
             has provided a letter dated 22nd July 2015 from Mr JB, who was
             the attorney for her father and her uncle. I  have  considered
             the  letter  and  I  note  it  states  that  he  had  accepted
             instructions from the landowners in light  of  the  fact  that
             they were in possession of the property deed, further that  he
             had attended the revolutionary court to  defend  his  clients,
             however the verdict was issued against them and in  favour  of
             the committee.


             40.  I have considered this letter,  in  the  round  with  the
             Appellant's  evidence  and  I  find  it  is   consistent   and
             corroborative of the Appellant's account in  relation  to  the
             first "land-grab" as well as against the background  material.
             I therefore accept  the  incident  took  place  to  the  lower
             standard of proof applicable; however, it is not this incident
             that caused the Appellant to flee Iran."


   10. The Judge went on at paragraphs [41]  to  [43]  of  her  decision  to
       consider the incident that occurred on or around 23rd August 2014 and
       which caused the appellant to flee Iran.  The appellant's account  of
       the incident is set out  at  paragraph  [41].  The  Judge  states  at
       paragraphs [42] and [43]:


             "42. She claims that it  was  at  this  time  that  she  heard
             gunshots and her brother, who had arrived by this  time,  took
             her and fled. The Appellant  states  that  she  was  taken  to
             hospital and had stiches on her face. At the time her  brother
             did take a picture on his mobile of her face. In  relation  to
             this injury, she has now provided two photographs  which  show
             serious injuries, consistent with the nature of  the  injuries
             she has described.   In these circumstances, whilst  there  is
             no other documentary evidence to  corroborate  this  incident,
             when I consider the photographs of the  injury  in  the  round
             with all the other evidence in accordance with the guidance of
             Tanveer Ahmed [2003]  UKIAT  00439,  I  accept  to  the  lower
             standard of proof applicable, especially  as  I  have  already
             accepted the  first  incident  of  2011,  as  corroborated  by
             documentary evidence that the injuries were caused in the  way
             claimed by the Appellant.


             43.  I also  accept  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  the
             Appellant's  detailed  account  of  how   she   obtained   the
             photographs and the letter from the  attorney,  through  email
             from the daughter of their neighbour, who  she  contacted  and
             who was able to get these from her mother."


   11. The Judge then went on to consider whether the appellant would be  at
       risk upon return to Iran.  At paragraph [44]  of  her  decision,  the
       Judge states:


             "....I have accepted that she was present and was involved  in
             an altercation where the Sepah were attempting  to  confiscate
             her  father's  land  and  that  the  Appellant's  brother  has
             previously been  arrested  and  that  on  this  occasion,  her
             brother fired shots and she herself,  had  attacked  a  Sepah,
             such that she would have been identified, especially as having
             fled  the  scene.    Her  father  and  uncle  have  both  been
             detained, her father released after four days and her paternal
             uncle still in detention."


   12. The Judge went on at paragraphs [45] to [48] to consider whether,  on
       the profile found, the Appellant is someone who on the lower standard
       of proof applicable, would be identified and targeted on return.  She
       found that the appellant has established that she has a  well-founded
       fear of persecution on return to Iran.


The Grounds of Appeal


   13. The respondent advances three grounds of appeal.


   14. First, at paragraphs [39] to [40] of her decision the Judge failed to
       consider relevant objective evidence,  before attaching the weight to
       the documentation relied  upon  by  the  appellant,   such  that  the
       Judge's assessment of credibility is flawed.  The  respondent  claims
       that the COI report establishes that the Revolutionary Courts do  not
       allow for the involvement of defence attorneys in court, proceedings.
        The Judge should therefore not have accepted the letter  dated  22nd
       July 2015 from Mr JB, who was the attorney for  her  father  and  her
       uncle as being credible.  The respondent  submits  that  this  letter
       suggests that the  attorney  attended  the  Revolutionary  Court,  in
       respect of the land dispute. It is not clear, why the Judge  accepted
       that a land dispute would be dealt with in the  Revolutionary  Court,
       and the respondent submits it was not open to the Judge to find  that
       the land dispute would be dealt  with  by  the  Revolutionary  Court,
       based upon the objective evidence.  The respondent submits  that  the
       flawed assessment of the evidence in relation to the  event  in  2011
       has infected the Judge's subsequent assessment of the events in 2014.


   15. Second, the respondent submits that in light of  the  Judge's  flawed
       approach to credibility, there was  no  reason  to  accept  that  the
       appellant would be at risk upon return.  There was no evidence of  an
       arrest warrant, or that the appellant was of any continuing  interest
       to the authorities. The respondent submits that the Judge misdirected
       herself as to the risk upon return in light of what  is  said  in  SB
       [2009] UKAIT 00053.


   16. Finally, the Judge failed to make any  findings  as  to  whether  the
       appellant may be at risk upon  return  to  Iran  on  account  of  her
       attendance at church in the United Kingdom.


   17. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley
       on 21st September 2015.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
       whether or not  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Iqbal
       involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to  remake
       the decision.


The hearing before me


   18. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow adopted the grounds of  appeal
       and submitted that the COI report confirms that there  are  basically
       three types of courts in Iran: (a) Public Courts, (b) Clerical Courts
       and (c) Revolutionary Courts. Paragraph [11.07] goes on to state:


             "The Revolutionary Courts rule on serious offences related  to
             the country's security, drug trafficking, etc. There  are  two
             Revolutionary Courts in Iran. The  judgments  given  by  these
             courts  cannot  be  challenged  in  any  Court  in  Iran.  The
             Revolutionary Courts do  not  allow  for  the  involvement  of
             defence attorneys in  Court  proceedings  related  to  various
             legal matters addressed by these Courts.


             The  judges  of  these  courts  fulfil  additional  roles   as
             prosecutors and mediators.  All  judges  in  the  courts  have
             received a higher education in Islamic Law and  most  of  them
             are also members of the group of ruling clergies....


             ....


             The Constitution requires all trials to be open to the  public
             unless the court  determines  that  an  open  trial  would  be
             detrimental to public morality or public order, or in case  of
             private disputes, if both parties request that  open  hearings
             not be held."


   19. Mr Tarlow submits that in light of the matters set  out  in  the  COI
       report, the Judge's reliance upon the letter  dated  22nd  July  2015
       from Mr JB, who was the attorney for her father and  her  uncle,  and
       who claimed that he had attended the revolutionary  court  to  defend
       his clients, was perverse.  Mr Tarlow submits that in any  event  the
       proceedings in 2011 were dealt with, and  disposed  of.   He  submits
       that the appellant can be of no further interest to the  authorities.
        He submits that the Judge's finding in relation  to  the  subsequent
       incident that occurred on or about 23rd August 2014  is  infected  by
       the erroneous approach to the evidence of the 2011 event.  In support
       of that submission, he relies upon what is said in the final sentence
       at paragraph [42]:  "..I  accept  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
       applicable, especially as I have already accepted the first  incident
       of 2011, as corroborated by documentary evidence  that  the  injuries
       were caused in the way claimed by the Appellant."


   20. In  reply,  Mr  Hodson  relies  upon  the  matters  set  out  in  the
       appellant's rule 24 response to the appeal, dated 8th December  2015.
       Mr Hodson submits that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  not  been
       provided with a copy of the COI report that is now relied upon by the
       respondent and her attention was not drawn to the relevant  passages.
       He submits that it cannot be an error of law simply to make a finding
       which fails to take into account an extract  contained  in  a  report
       where that extract (or even the  point  it  makes),  has  never  been
       raised by the respondent.


   21. Mr Hodson submits that in any event, the COI report does  not  go  as
       far as that which the respondent contends.  For example,  the  report
       states that  "The  Revolutionary  Courts  rule  on  serious  offences
       related to the country's security, drug trafficking, etc..".  That is
       not to say that the Revolutionary Courts deal  only  and  exclusively
       with offences involving national security and drug trafficking.   The
       examples of offences related  to  the  country's  security  and  drug
       trafficking are plainly not exhaustive. Equally the reference in  the
       report to the Revolutionary Court not allowing for the involvement of
       defence attorneys in  Court  proceedings  related  to  various  legal
       matters  addressed  by  these  Courts,  is  not  to  say   that   the
       Revolutionary Courts do not allow for defence attorneys in any  cases
       whatsoever of whatever kind.


   22. Finally, Mr Hodson submits that the  material  now  provided  by  the
       appellant's representatives shows that there are such  other  matters
       within the jurisdiction of the  Revolutionary  Courts,  and  further,
       even the ban on Attorneys at  hearings  involving  national  security
       charges, was lifted in the 1990's.


Decision as to Error of Law


   20. The respondent's grounds of appeal  amount  to  a  challenge  to  the
       findings made by the Judge upon the evidence. In R (Iran) &  Ors  -v-
       SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, the  Court  of  Appeal  drew  together  the
       threads of the approach to be adopted in cases where  it  is  claimed
       that there is an error of law  in  the  Tribunal's  approach  to  the
       evidence.  Lord Justice Brooke stated:


             90.  It may now  be  convenient  to  draw  together  the  main
             threads of this long judgment in this way. During  the  period
             before its demise when the IAT's  powers  were  restricted  to
             appeals on points of law:


                  1. Before the  IAT  could  set  aside  a  decision  of  an
                  adjudicator on the grounds of error of law, it had  to  be
                  satisfied that the correction of the error would have made
                  a material difference to the outcome, or to  the  fairness
                  of the proceedings.  This  principle  applied  equally  to
                  decisions of adjudicators on proportionality in connection
                  with human rights issues;


                  2. A finding might only be set aside for error of  law  on
                  the  grounds  of  perversity  if  it  was  irrational   or
                  unreasonable in the Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was
                  wholly unsupported by the evidence.


                  3. A decision should not be set aside  for  inadequacy  of
                  reasons unless the  adjudicator  failed  to  identify  and
                  record the matters that were critical to his  decision  on
                  material issues, in such a way that the IAT was unable  to
                  understand why he reached that decision.


                  4. A failure without  good  reason  to  apply  a  relevant
                  country guidance decision might  constitute  an  error  of
                  law.


                  5. At the hearing of an appeal the IAT had to identify  an
                  error of law in relation to one  or  more  of  the  issues
                  raised on the notice of appeal before  it  could  lawfully
                  exercise any of its powers set out in s102(1) of the  2002
                  Act (other than affirming the adjudicator's decision).


                  6. Once it had identified an error of law, such  that  the
                  adjudicator's decision could not stand, the IAT might,  if
                  it  saw  fit,  exercise  its  power  to  admit  up-to-date
                  evidence or it might remit the appeal to  the  adjudicator
                  with such directions as it thought fit.


                  7. If the IAT failed  to  consider  an  obvious  point  of
                  Convention  jurisprudence  which  would  have  availed  an
                  applicant, the Court of  Appeal  might  intervene  to  set
                  aside the IAT's decision on the grounds of  error  of  law
                  even though the point was not raised  in  the  grounds  of
                  appeal to the IAT.


   23. I have carefully read through the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Iqbal and carefully  considered  the  criticisms  made  by  the
       respondent in the grounds of  appeal  and  in  the  submissions  made
       before me, by Mr Tarlow.    Having carefully considered the  findings
       and reasons set out at paragraphs [31] to [43] of the decision, in my
       judgment, the findings made as to the events of 2011  and  2014  were
       open to the Judge on the evidence.  The findings cannot be  described
       as being perverse,  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or findings that were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The
       findings were  made  based  upon  a  thorough  consideration  of  the
       appellant's account and the evidence before the Judge.


   24. I accept the submission made by Mr Holden that the extracts from  the
       COI report that the respondent relies upon, do not go as far as  that
       which the respondent contends. The COI report is in  any  event  only
       relevant to the Judge's assessment of the 2011 incident.  Insofar  as
       the 2014 incident is concerned, the appellant  relied  upon  the  two
       photographs that are referred to by the Judge at  paragraph  [42]  of
       her decision.


   25. In my judgement, it was open to the Judge to consider  the  documents
       relied upon by the appellant and it is plain that the Judge  did  so,
       by reference to the guidance in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2003]  UKIAT  00439.
       The Judge was entitled to  find,  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
       applicable, that the appellant was present and  was  involved  in  an
       altercation when the Sepah were attempting to confiscate her father's
       land, such that she would have been identified, especially as  having
       fled the scene.


   26. In my Judgement, on the findings made, it was open to  the  Judge  to
       find that the Appellant will be  at  risk  on  return  firstly  being
       identified  and  then   being   detained   in   line   with   further
       investigations given that it is likely that  she  will  be  seen  has
       having 'outstanding issues" with the authorities on return.


   27. In the circumstances, it seems to me that there  was  no  requirement
       for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider  any  protection  claim
       based upon the appellant's attendance at church in the  UK,  and  any
       failure to address that aspect of  the  claim  would  not  materially
       affect the outcome.


   28. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  discloses  no
       material error  of  law  and  the  respondents  appeal  is  therefore
       dismissed


Notice of Decision


   29. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       shall stand.


   30. An anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date




       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

FEE AWARD


   31. No fee has been paid and there can be no fee award.




       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia






