
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 04082 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 December 2013                            |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 Hamid Zaeri
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Iran against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of the respondent
    to remove him from the United Kingdom.  It is his  case  that  he  is  a
    refugee or otherwise entitled to international protection.

 2. Essentially, the First-tier Tribunal disbelieved the  appellant  in  all
    material particulars and, consequentially, dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    grounds  supporting  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal   are
    thoughtfully drawn and extensive.  Having heard argument this morning  I
    am persuaded the grounds are substantially justified.

 3. The real problem here is paragraph  64  of  the  determination  which  I
    consider to be pivotal.  I set out the paragraph below.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge said:

         "It is wholly unbelievable that the authorities, who the  appellant
         claimed had an adverse interest in him, would not choose to seek to
         detain him when he had visited the United Kingdom Embassy to make a
         visit visa application, and in particular when  he  had  visited  a
         Chamber of Commerce connected with the Iranian government to obtain
         documentation to further an application for a visit to South Korea.
          If the appellant had been detained and questioned about  returning
         to  Iran  in  2009  it  is  wholly  unbelievable  that   he   would
         subsequently be allowed to apply for and  visit  Dubai.   The  fact
         that he was able to  do  so  clearly  indicates  that  the  Iranian
         authorities had no interest in him whatsoever."

 4. There are here two quite separate points that are  somewhat  muddled  in
    the determination.

 5. Firstly, the appellant says that he was subject of some  attention  when
    he returned to Iran but the authorities made enquiries and decided  that
    his conduct was annoying or embarrassing rather than seriously wrong.  I
    do not see why it should  be  thought  unbelievable  that  he  would  be
    allowed to go anywhere else.  A great deal depends on  which  particular
    officials noted which particular features of an application.

 6. Secondly, the first part of the adverse finding in 64 assumes  that  the
    appellant cannot be telling the truth when he says that during his visit
    to the Chamber of Commerce the authorities noticed endorsements  in  his
    passport indicating some dealing with the British  Embassy  and  allowed
    him to go.  According to the determination that cannot be right. Rather,
    according to the determination, the  authorities  would  have  shown  an
    interest in him and detained him. The difficulty is that it is precisely
    the appellant's case that the authorities did show an interest  in  him.
    They did not detain him immediately but, if the appellant is telling the
    truth, very soon after his visit to the Chamber of  Commerce,  his  home
    was raided and his computer examined and so on.  The  interest,  if  not
    the detention, that the judge said ought to have happened  is  what  the
    appellant says did happen.  There is nothing in  the  papers  before  me
    that show it must be assumed that the  Chamber  of  Commerce  was  in  a
    position to organise his immediate detention and  arrest,  and  I  think
    that would be necessary before any  sense  can  be  made  of  the  logic
    allegedly applied in paragraph 64.

 7. I appreciate that there are other comments that  are  said  to  indicate
    adverse credibility on the part of the appellant.  They may  or  may  be
    justified, but they do not legitimise the alleged logic behind paragraph
    64 which I find is just not there.

 8. I am also concerned  about  the  summary  of  the  appellant's  case  at
    paragraph 17 of the determination where the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    said that the appellant believes his family home was raided  because  he
    was accused of spying and collaborating with terrorists.  This does  not
    appear to be right.  The allegation  of  collaborating  with  terrorists
    appears  to  relate  to  his  earlier  disbelieved  asylum  claim.   The
    appellant does seem to be saying that his home was raided because he was
    accused of spying, but the reference of collaborating with terrorists as
    far as I can see is based on a summary of a summary in the  reasons  for
    refusal  letter.  It  does  not  show  a  proper  appreciation  of   the
    appellant's case because, as far as I can see, he made no such claim.

 9. It follows therefore that there are, I find, two quite  seriously  wrong
    elements in an adverse credibility finding and I am persuaded  that  the
    determination as a whole is therefore unsatisfactory.   This  of  course
    does not mean that the appellant is entitled to the relief he seeks, but
    he is entitled to a proper decision.  At the moment he has not got  one.
    Mr Hodson argues, and I think he is right, that this is a case that  has
    to go back to the First-tier Tribunal.  This is not something  that  can
    be repaired.  It is something that needs to be done again.

8.   I therefore find an error of law.  I set aside the decision  and  order
    the case to be determined again in the First-tier.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 December 2013               |











