




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04898/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 15th June 2016                 |On: 3rd August 2016                  |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MRA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G. Patel,   Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr G. Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran  born  in
    1975. He appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated 9th March
    2015 to remove him from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  That decision followed from rejection
    of the Appellant's asylum and human rights claims.


 2. The decision in this appeal is being  re-made  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    because on the 10th April 2016 the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    was set aside in its entirety by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Baird.
    That decision appears at Appendix A but in brief summary the First-tier
    Tribunal was found to have erred in a) failing to give adequate reasons
    and b) failing to take material matters into account.


 3. In the re-making the  Appellant  asks  that  I  make  findings  on  one
    material matter:  has he converted to Christianity from Islam and would
    this, or the perception of this, put him at risk of serious  harm  upon
    return to Iran.   The burden of proof in respect of this matter lies on
    the  Appellant  and  the  standard  of  proof  is  one  of   reasonable
    likelihood.


    The Evidence


 4. The Appellant claimed asylum in February 2014. He claimed that  he  was
    born and raised Shi'a Muslim but that in December 2013  he  had  become
    interested in Christianity. A friend had converted to Christianity  and
    the Appellant had been struck by his change of character and demeanour.
    As an illustration of what he meant the Appellant explained  that  this
    man was a farmer and after his conversion he had stopped  adding  water
    to milk i.e. he had stopped cheating his customers. He seemed  happier.
    The Appellant spoke to this friend and decided to convert himself.   He
    attended meetings at this friend's farm every week and started to learn
    about Jesus, humanity and compassion.  In  approximately  January  2015
    the Appellant had a Christian cross tattooed on the inside of his  left
    upper arm. He wanted to do this to remind himself of the  path  he  had
    chosen.  About a month later the Appellant was on his way to a  meeting
    when he saw police at the farmhouse. He saw his friend and another  man
    being led away in handcuffs. The Appellant turned and fled. He told his
    mother he was going away for a couple of days and went with a friend to
    Tehran.  He called home after a few days and was  told  by  his  sister
    that plain clothed police officers had raided the house.  The Appellant
    travelled from Tehran to Orumiyeh and from there arranged  passage  out
    of Iran across  the  border  into  Turkey.  Because  the  Appellant  is
    disabled (he has difficulty walking) he made this journey on a mule.


 5. At his asylum interview in February 2014  the  Appellant  was  asked  a
    number of questions about Christianity. In response to some of these he
    gave "correct" answers, for instance he was able to say  that  the  Old
    Testament has 39 books. The Respondent found however that the Appellant
    also gave "incorrect" answers in response to a number of questions, for
    instance failing to identify the author of  the  fourth  gospel.    The
    Respondent concluded that the Appellant had demonstrated, by  his  lack
    of knowledge, that he was not a genuine Christian and the asylum  claim
    was refused.

 6. By the time that the appeal came before me to be re-made some two and a
    half years had passed. The Appellant relied on  his  written  statement
    dated 21st April 2015 and gave further oral evidence.  He  states  that
    when he first came to the UK  he  was  placed  in  Liverpool  where  he
    attended a church but he cannot remember its name. There were  lots  of
    other foreigners at that church including some Iranians.  He  was  then
    moved to Wigan in approximately April 2014 where he started attending a
    local Catholic church called St Mary's. He continues to  attend  there.
    This is where he was baptised.

 7. I heard evidence from Father John Johnson of St Mary's  and  St  John's
    Parishes, Wigan. Father Johnson relied on his written  statement  dated
    11th May 2015 and gave further oral evidence.  Father Johnson has  been
    a parish priest for 48 years serving various parishes in the  Liverpool
    Archdiocese.  He states that he first met the Appellant when he started
    attending Mass at St Mary's in April 2014.  The Appellant told him that
    he had become interested in Christianity whilst still in Iran and  that
    he had attended private meetings in order to find out about the  faith.
    He had left for England because the secret police  had  discovered  the
    church.   The Appellant told Father Johnson that he  wanted  to  attend
    the Catholic Church in Wigan, even though he  had  been  approached  by
    several  evangelicals  who   had   encouraged   him   to   join   their
    congregations.    Father  Johnson  explained  to  the  Appellant   that
    becoming a Catholic is not straightforward. You need to  be  instructed
    over several months before a baptism could be  contemplated.  He  would
    need to be helped through Catechetical instruction to appreciate how  a
    Catholic should live; he would be encouraged to read  the  bible  every
    day. The Appellant was not deterred and  started  attending  regularly.
    He was assisted by another Iranian man named [JM] from  a  neighbouring
    parish who came and translated for him. In  the  months  prior  to  the
    Appellant's baptism he attended  meetings  with  Father  Johnson  on  a
    weekly basis. In his letter of 11th May 2015 Father Johnson wrote:


         "I am happy that [M] understands and appreciates everything he  has
         been taught. I wish to say that I have been very impressed  by  his
         manner and co-operation during this time. He has been  faithful  in
         sharing our Sunday Mass each week. He is  clearly  growing  in  his
         understanding of the faith and I am convinced that his Faith is for
         life".


 8. In his oral evidence Father Johnson stated that to  his  own  knowledge
    the Appellant continues to attend Church twice a week. He  comes  on  a
    Sunday and Thursday. He attends mass and lessons and helps out.   There
    is one  other  Iranian  man,  possibly  Kurdish,   who  attends  fairly
    regularly although he himself is a member of a Pentecostal  Church.  He
    comes because his wife is Catholic.   Since Jamshed left the  Appellant
    has found it more difficult to follow what is going on but he has  been
    assisted by a lady who is helping him by recording the sermon  for  him
    so that he can listen to it slowly and play it back.  He  has  a  Farsi
    bible and she shows him which passages are being considered that  week.
    He is told in advance of the sermon so he can  pre-read  and  this  has
    helped him follow what is being said.  Father  Johnson  confirmed  that
    the Catholic Church  has  a  very  particular  process  which  must  be
    followed in cases of adult baptism.  The  subject  must  be  rigorously
    versed in the catechism and only when the parish Priest believes him to
    be ready would an application be made for authority to baptise him.  As
    a parish Priest he could not decide for himself whether someone  should
    be baptised (save in cases of emergency such as danger  of  death).  He
    must justify his application to the Bishop.  Father Johnson  has  never
    made such an application in respect of any other Iranian, nor foreigner
    as far as he could recall. At the date of the hearing  he  had  been  a
    Priest for 49 years. He believes that in that time  he  has  reached  a
    good understanding of people's motivations.  He spent several months in
    conversation with the Appellant. He would not have baptised him  if  he
    had any doubt at all about the sincerity  of  the  claimed  conversion.
    It's not just a matter of asking questions to ensure than someone has a
    good understanding of the  faith.  It's  about  observing  how  someone
    behaves. Having observed the Appellant over the two years he has  known
    him, he sees him as a genuine and humble person who lives as a Catholic
    should live.  This is a view shared by all of the congregation, all  of
    whom have given the Appellant their  support.  Father  Johnson  is  not
    aware that any member of the congregation  has  expressed  reservations
    about  the  Appellant's  faith.  They  have  supported  him,  acted  as
    witnesses to his baptism and indeed driven him to the appeal hearing.


 9. The Appellant has now been baptised. His baptism certificate shows that
    he was baptised by Father Johnson under the  auspices  of  Malcolm  the
    Archbishop of Liverpool on the 15th June 2015.

10. The court file contains a handwritten statement from a [JM] dated  21st
    June 2015. The writer confirms that the Appellant is known to him as  a
    fellow Christian from Iran. They met in the Post Office in  Wigan  town
    centre when [JM] observed the Appellant struggling because he could not
    speak English. [JM] helped him carry his shopping home  (the  Appellant
    being disabled) and they became friends. [JM] states that he has been a
    Christian for 22 years and that he was happy to assist the Appellant by
    translating for him and teaching him. He was witness to his baptism. At
    the hearing I was informed by both Ms Patel  and  Father  Johnson  that
    [JM] has now moved from Wigan and would not be attending the hearing.

    The Submissions

11. The Respondent's case rests on two planks. First it is  submitted  that
    it should be assumed that the Appellant has much to gain by obtaining a
    grant of asylum in the UK. He is an economic migrant who  is  motivated
    to lie about his claimed conversion to Christianity in order to found a
    false claim for asylum. Secondly, there  is  the  fact  that  when  the
    Appellant was interviewed about his "knowledge" about  Christianity  in
    2014 his knowledge was  found  to  be  deficient  by  the  officer  who
    interviewed him.


12. In  respect  of  the  former  the  Appellant  simply  states  that  his
    conversion is genuine and he asks  me  to  weigh  in  the  balance  his
    actions since his arrival in the UK, and indeed before he left Iran. In
    respect of the interview, Ms Patel did not attempt to persuade me  that
    the interviewing officer got it wrong and  that  it  was  in  fact  the
    Appellant who was correct.  She simply points to the inherent drawbacks
    in assessing a person's faith by a "tick box"  exam  approach.  Someone
    might be able to provide authoritative exposition of  the  contents  of
    the bible but be a militant atheist; equally someone may  have  a  deep
    and  spiritual  connection  with  God  whilst  having  only  a  cursory
    understanding of the written text. This was the conclusion drawn by the
    All-Party Parliamentary Group on  Religious  Freedom  in  their  recent
    report. She asks that the evidence be considered in the round.

    My Findings

13. I have considered the evidence in the round  and  I  have  applied  the
    lower standard of proof.


14. I bear in mind that it is relatively easy for someone to say that  they
    have changed faith in order to  found  a  false  asylum  claim.    This
    cannot however be the sole basis upon which  to  reject  a  claim,  nor
    indeed should it be the starting point. In this case the Respondent  is
    in addition able to point to the uncontested  fact  that  when  he  was
    interviewed the Appellant got some answers  "wrong".   I  have  weighed
    that matter in the balance.

15. Against it are the following matters.

16. First, the Appellant has given an account that has remained  internally
    consistent, and that is consonant with the country background material.
    Unlike many 'converts' the Appellant's account begins in  Iran  (rather
    than say Liverpool) and it founded the basis for  his  claim  from  the
    outset.

17. Secondly, I bear in mind that for someone who has been born and  raised
    a Muslim in a strict Muslim country it is no  small  thing  to  disavow
    that religion, to reject the prophesy of Muhammad and the Qur'an as the
    Appellant has done.

18. Thirdly, the Appellant has converted to a faith that requires not  just
    regular devotion but a strenuous  effort  on  his  part  to  learn  its
    central tenets: to put it bluntly, it would have been a lot  easier  if
    he had joined the Pentecostals.

19. Fourthly, the Appellant has satisfied the congregation  and  Priest  of
    the Parish of St Mary's in Wigan that he is  entirely  genuine.  It  is
    often said in such cases (although not by Mr Harrison  here)  that  the
    good people who regularly attend Christian worship  are  easy  targets.
    They passionately want others to share their  faith  and  when  someone
    like the Appellant comes along it is a simple matter for him to  behave
    in such a way that they are convinced.   I have borne that in mind as a
    possibility. I had the opportunity however to hear direct oral evidence
    from Father Johnson. He did not strike me as a fool. Father Johnson has
    been a Parish Priest for almost five decades and as  he  put  it,  over
    such a time you become a good  judge  of  character.    Father  Johnson
    confirmed in his evidence that he understands why the Respondent  might
    be cynical. He knows that people advance false claims and this  is  not
    something he has ignored in his assessment of the Appellant.  He firmly
    stated that had he any doubts at all about the Appellant's motivations,
    he would not have lent him the support  that  he  now  does,  and  more
    fundamentally he would not have baptised him.  Baptism in the  Catholic
    Church is no simply formality. It is a process of learning and devotion
    whereby the putative convert must satisfy, through word and  deed,  the
    congregation that he seeks to join that he genuine. The Priest must  be
    satisfied not just as to his intentions, but to his  knowledge  of  the
    catechism.  It is only then that permission will  be  sought  from  the
    Bishop to perform the  baptism.   I  am  quite  satisfied  that  Father
    Johnson embarked on that process with  open  eyes.    I  have  attached
    significant weight to the fact that Father Johnson and his congregation
    have leant their support to the Appellant.


20. I have taken all of those factors into account and  having  done  so  I
    find that the Appellant has discharged the burden of  proof.  The  fact
    that he might be lying and that he did did not  pass  the  Respondent's
    "exam" soon after his arrival in 2014 must be balanced against the fact
    that he has been consistent and that his actions have demonstrated over
    a period of two years that he is committed to  the  Catholic  faith.  I
    have not found  it  necessary  to  delve  into  the  question  of  what
    consequences might flow from discovery of his  tattoo  of  a  Christian
    cross. The Appellant has demonstrated to the lower  standard  of  proof
    that he has left Islam for Catholicism and in  those  circumstances  he
    has shown himself to face a real risk of serious harm should be  return
    to Iran today.

      Decisions

21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.


22. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:


              i) The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds

             ii) The Appellant is not entitled  to  humanitarian  protection
                 because he is a refugee

            iii) The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Articles 3 &
                 8)


23. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant  in  this  determination  identified  as  MRA.  This
    direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
    comply with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              24th June 2016


