
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04567/2014
     AA/04568/2014
     AA/04566/2014
     AA/04571/2014
     AA/04573/2014
     AA/04556/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 July 2016                          |On 19 July 2016                     |
|Delivered Orally                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                           [TP] (FIRST appellant)
                           [IP] (SECOND appellant)
                           [EP1](THIRD appellant)
                          [EP2] (FOURTH appellant)
                           [cp] (fifth appellant)
                            [mp] (six appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss J Lois, Counsel, instructed by Messrs Duncan
                    Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the first named Appellant, [TP] ("the  Appellant")
    a citizen of Indonesia  born  on  [  ]  1954  and  her  five  dependant
    daughters (also citizens of Indonesia) against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese who, following a hearing at  Taylor  House
    on 23 July  2015  and  subsequently  promulgated  on  24  August  2015,
    dismissed their appeal against the decisions of the Respondent dated 22
    June 2014 to refuse to grant them asylum under paragraph 336 of HC  395
    (as amended) and that of even date, to remove them as illegal  entrants
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs  8-10  of
    Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   As summarised by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph  2  of  his
    decision, the appeal of the Appellant was linked to her five daughters.
     They all claimed asylum based  upon  their  fear  that  if  they  were
    returned to  Indonesia  they  would  face  mistreatment  due  to  their
    religion  and  also  due  to  a  reason  not  covered  by  the  Refugee
    Convention.

3.   The brief immigration  history  of  the  Appellant  is  that  she  left
    Indonesia on 5 February 2010 arriving in the UK on the same  day  using
    her own national passport  endorsed with a visit visa  valid  until  14
    July 2010.  On 4 August 2010 she  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules on compassionate grounds that was  refused  on
    24 March 2011.

4.   The Appellant claimed asylum on 28 April  2011. It was claimed  by  the
    Appellant and within the separate asylum claims of her daughters,  that
    her husband and the father of her daughters, was a prominent figure  in
    the fishing industry in Pekalongan who was persecuted when  he  refused
    to convert to Islam and remain silent about corruption in  the  fishing
    department and that (as explained in the application for permission  to
    appeal) "by extension that the Appellant's claim  that  they  too  were
    persecuted because they were family members".  In summary, the  grounds
    take issue with the judge's adverse credibility  findings  and  in  his
    approach as regard the medical evidence as it related to the Appellant.



5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge R  A  Cox
    on 18 September 2015 in which he noted  that  the  grounds  in  essence
    contended that the judge gave inadequate  and  to  an  extent  mistaken
    reasons within his adverse credibility findings and misapplied the case
    of N in relation to the Appellant's medical  condition.   He  concluded
    the challenge to the adverse credibility findings  had  arguable  merit
    but without  further  explanation  he  also  said  that  the  challenge
    application as regards the case law guidance in N whilst "perhaps  more
    problematic" he would "not exclude at this stage".

6.   There is a history to the appeal track of this case since the grant  of
    permission that is more helpfully reflected in the directions notice of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton Taylor  promulgated  on  4  December
    2015 when he adjourned these appeals to be relisted for an error of law
    hearing. It was recorded that:

         "It was agreed by both representatives, correctly in my view,  that
         at this stage it would be inappropriate  to direct the  parties  to
         be ready for a remade decision at the next hearing given the nature
         of the issues involved, the  various  possibilities  regarding  any
         errors of law and the distinct possibility that errors of  law  are
         found in respect of the protection claim, and the appeals will need
         to be remitted back to a First-tier Tribunal".

7.   Further, that if the Appellant sought to rely on amended  grounds  they
    should make an appropriate written application to the Tribunal to  that
    extent, to be served upon  the  Respondent  and  "made  as  quickly  as
    possible  and any event no later than six weeks  after  this  Direction
    Notice is issued".  Further, that if the Appellant's solicitors  wished
    to see the Record of Proceedings of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  a
    written application in effect should be made as soon as was  reasonably
    practicable.

8.   I observe that since that notice, a Memorandum and Directions  dated  9
    June 2016 was issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, in which  it  was
    noted that there had been no compliance with the directions  issued  on
    25 April 2016 nor any formal request to amend the grounds of appeal and
    accordingly the Upper Tribunal considered that the Appellants no longer
    wished to amend their grounds and that the appeals could  be listed for
    hearing on the first available date on the basis of the grounds already
    issued. It was also to be assumed, given the  failure  to  comply  with
    directions, that  a  transcript  of  the  hearing  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was no longer required.

9.   I would pause there because, as is accepted  by  Miss  Lois  before  me
    today, there has been and is no challenge therefore to the findings  of
    the judge in terms of Article 8 of the ECHR.

10.  Thus the appeal came before me on 13 July 2016 when my first  task  was
    to decide whether the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

  11. I note that by letter dated 28 September 2015, the  Respondent  served
    her Rule 24 response submitting that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    directed himself appropriately but pointing out that the  copy  of  the
    determination available to her was missing paragraphs 46  to  52.   The
    Respondent, however, maintained the position that there was no material
    error of law in  dealing  with  the  case  of  N  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's medical condition and that the grounds were "no more than a
    disagreement with the adequately reasoned findings of fact of the First-
    tier Tribunal".

12.  At the outset of the hearing before me and having  taken  careful  note
    of the  most  helpful  skeleton  argument  prepared  by  Miss  Lois  in
    readiness for this  hearing,  I  was  able  to  draw  to  the  parties'
    attention the second page of the screening interview which  contains  a
    standard paragraph that would have applied in each and every  screening
    interview undertaken by each of these  Appellants  in  this  particular
    case.  The passage is in fact, as I  understand  it,  read  out  to  an
    interviewee at the outset of such a screening interview,  and  this  is
    what it has to say in unequivocal terms:-

         "The questions I am about to  ask  you  relate  to  your  identity,
         background and travel route to the United Kingdom.  The information
         you will be asked to provide will be used mainly for administrative
         purposes.  You will  not be asked at this stage to go  into  detail
         about  the  substantive  details  of  your  asylum  claim  as,   if
         appropriate, this will be done at a later interview.  However  some
         details you will be asked  to  provide  may  be  relevant  to  your
         claim."

     So nothing could be clearer.


13.  This takes me to passages within the determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that thus raise a clear concern and  which  indeed  were
    highlighted both in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  and  in
    greater detail by Miss Lois in her skeleton argument.  For example,  at
    paragraph 10(ii) she submitted as follows:

         "(ii)    The reason (the second Appellant) had not raised the issue
             of rape at the screening interview was that this was conducted
             in an open public the  space.   However  the  information  was
             fully divulged as soon as (she) was within the private setting
             of the substantive interview. Further (the  second  Appellant)
             provided a detailed account regarding  the   circumstances  of
             the rape (that Miss Lois then proceeded to identify)."

14. That of course raises an entirely different point but nonetheless  only
    serves to reinforce what I am satisfied was a clear material  error  of
    law by the Judge in terms of the reasons he gave for finding as he  put
    it, even to the lower standard of  proof,  that  the  Appellant's  core
    accounts were not credible.

15. Indeed, at paragraph 40 the Judge inter alia had this to say:

         "Furthermore, the Tribunal  does  not  find  the  kidnapping  issue
         either to be credible and notes that this issue in conjunction with
         the                                                            rape
         could have been mentioned earlier and one would have  thought  that
         the circumstances in  relation  to  when  the  Appellant  had  been
         interviewed were adequate for these matters to have been  mentioned
         at an initial stage.   The fact that they were  not  mentioned  and
         that they were only brought up at  a  subsequent  stage  does,  the
         Tribunal  finds,  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  Appellants'
         claims."

16.  I find that such a finding clearly  fails  to  take  into  account  and
    understand the nature of a screening interview and as Miss Lois rightly
    submitted, both before me and in her skeleton argument, fails  to  take
    account of the Appellants' claim in terms of kidnapping and rape,  that
    were clearly raised by them at the appropriate time at the  substantive
    asylum interviews and within their witness statements.

17.      It  is  right  to  say  that  most  helpfully,  Mr  Kotas  for  the
    Respondent, accepted that  the  above  clearly  placed  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in material error of law and he  further  accepted  that
    insofar as the findings of the Judge were concerned  in  terms  of  the
    Appellants' asylum and humanitarian protection claims, such an approach
    clearly tainted those findings overall and therefore could not stand.

18.  I had no difficulty for the reasons I have above canvassed,  in  wholly
    agreeing with him and I am grateful for his realistic approach to  that
    particular issue.

19.  This now takes me to the remaining challenge, namely as to the  Judge's
    approach to the medical evidence and his application to  that  evidence
    to the guidance in N [2005] UKHL 31.  Again and most realistically  and
    helpfully Miss Lois informed me that upon careful  reflection  she  was
    indeed satisfied that such a challenge simply was not  sustainable  and
    therefore I do not intend to deal with this matter any further.

20.  The parties asked that the appropriate course was to  remit  this  case
    to  be  reheard  solely  on  the  issues  of  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection before a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese to be heard at Taylor House.  Having considered
    as to how the decision should be remade I  found  myself  in  agreement
    with their proposal. Indeed such a course is in any event reflected  in
    such circumstances, in the record of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton
    in his Directions notice of 4 December 2015.

21. I am told that the Appellant's daughter's will each be giving  evidence
    in addition to their Sponsor [JP] for  which  no  interpreter  will  be
    required.  In such circumstances  it  would  be  appropriate  for  this
    matter to be given a time estimate of one day.

22. Thus there are highly compelling reasons falling within 7.2(b)  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement as to why the decision should not
    be remade by the Upper Tribunal. In  such  circumstances  none  of  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in relation to the  issue  of
    asylum and humanitarian protection are to be preserved.

23. The appeals shall be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese, with  none  of  his  asylum  and/or
    humanitarian protection findings preserved,  to  Taylor  House  Hearing
    Centre on the first available date, for which  purpose  no  interpreter
    will be required.


Notice of Decision

24.  The making of the previous  decision  insofar  as  it  related  to  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in terms of  the  Appellants'
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims did involve the making of  an
    error on a point of law and I order that they  shall  not  stand.   The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in terms  of  dismissing  the
    Article 3 ECHR claim based upon the evidence before him will stand.

No anonymity direction or request for such anonymity has been made  at  this
stage.

Signed                                  Date 18 July 2016

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
