
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/04844/2015
                                                               AA/04845/2015
                                                               AA/04843/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 30 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                       MR SEYED HASSAN SAJJADI MASOUEH
                            MRS NAHALBEMAMI NIKOU
                     MASTER SEYED SOAD SAJJADI MASOULEH
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr F Singarajah of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are nationals of Iran born on 31 August 1967,  31  March
    1974 and 5 November 1998 respectively. They are husband  and  wife  and
    son. They appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss dated 9 July 2015 refusing their appeals
    against the decision of the respondent  dated  9  March  2015  refusing
    their applications for asylum and humanitarian protection in the United
    Kingdom. As the appeals of the second and third  appellant's  dependent
    on that of the first appellant, I shall refer to the main appellant  as
    "the appellant".

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on
    30 July 2015 stating that it is arguable that  the  Judge's  conclusion
    that the appellant did not satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  339L
    of the immigration rules was in error, in that  his  evidence  was  not
    coherent and plausible.

    First-tier Tribunal's findings

 3. The Judge in his determination made  the  following  findings  which  I
    summarise. Careful consideration has been given to all the  documentary
    evidence and to the oral evidence.  "I  remind  myself  that  the  real
    question, as always in these cases, was, notwithstanding that which had
    happened for this appellant to return."

 4. First the appellant's claim that Mr Panaian  brought  a  lap  top  hard
    drive to the company where the appellant worked and asked for it to  be
    repaired as soon as possible. When he came to collect his  hard  drive,
    he  started  to  shout  and  argue  at  the  reception.  The  technical
    department told Mr Panaian to buy a new hard  drive  and  he  objected.
    When he found out that his data had  been  copied  onto  the  company's
    server, he wanted to speak to the chief executive of the  company.  The
    appellant explained to Mr Panaian that this was the only  solution  and
    after arguing for one hour, he accepted. After  an  hour,  he  returned
    with a new hard drive. The speed in which he returned with a  new  hard
    drive, made the appellant suspicious. Therefore the  appellant  made  a
    copy of the information and left work.

 5. Later he checked the information  and  found  that  it  was  top-secret
    information about high-ranking officials in Iran.  After  four  months,
    the appellant discovered further  information  of  a  highly  sensitive
    nature. The information was about political leaders orders to kill.

 6. The appellant give the information to a blogger friend of  his  by  the
    name of Majid who used this information in his blog. The appellant  did
    not have any problems as a result of being seized of  this  information
    while it Iran. It was not until he was in the  United  Kingdom  did  he
    realise that copying this information was problematic.  This  was  when
    his friend from Iran telephoned him to warn him not to  return  because
    government officials had raided the  company  and  obtained  access  to
    personal computers.

 7. The next day the Iranians security forces raided the appellant's  house
    and obtained access to his computer. However by his own account, and as
    is specifically  stated  by  Mr  Richardson's  skeleton  argument,  the
    appellant only acquired  this  information  out  of  curiosity  and  in
    innocence. He had no intention himself of using it and nor did  he  use
    it. No documents have been issued in relation to the appellant  by  the
    Iranian authorities. It is not accepted that the  reason  for  this  is
    that intelligence did not issue documents.

 8. Second the appellant's  computer  by  his  own  admission  is  password
    protected. The appellant has had no contact with his employers in Iran.
    The authorities have not been back to his  workplace  or  to  his  home
    since the raids.  Furthermore,  the  appellant  himself  has  not  been
    politically active  since  he  came  to  the  United  Kingdom.  In  the
    circumstances, all the appellant was doing was  carrying  out  his  job
    because he had the  appropriate  skills  and  there  is  no  reasonable
    possibility of him being apprehended or coming "under the  radar"  were
    he to return to Iran. Most of the documents, in any event are  over  25
    years old.

 9. Not only did the appellant experienced no problems in Iran, but he left
    together with his family on their own passports on 27  June  2013.  The
    appellant's claim is implausible given that he left the country  on  27
    June 2013 and the raids were taking place at his home  on  24th  or  25
    July 2013. In which case the Iranians authorities were embarking upon a
    futile task by raiding his workplace or is home  on  those  dates.  Had
    they intended to apprehend the appellant they would have stopped him at
    the airport or waited until he returned before  conducting  the  raids,
    which would have ensured that the appellant was  not  alerted,  as  one
    would expect  in  relation  to  such  a  high  profile  matter  as  the
    involvement of the highest ranking officials of the  State  in  murder.
    For all these reasons, the claim is simply not credible.

10. The  appellant  has  contrived  to  put  forward  an  asylum  claim  in
    circumstances where he has safely relocated with his  family  into  the
    United Kingdom. The claim is entirely lacking in credibility.  For  all
    these reasons I reject his asylum claim for the reasons given.

    The grounds of appeal.

11. The appellant grounds of appeals are as follows, which I summarise. The
    Judge found at paragraph  12  that  the  appellant's  evidence  is  not
    coherent and plausible as set out in paragraph 339L of the  Immigration
    Rules. Having said this, it is reasonable to expect a list  of  reasons
    for why  the  appellant's  account  was  found  to  be  incoherent  and
    implausible and there is no such list. At paragraph 13 the Judge states
    that no documents had been issues  in  relation  to  the  raid  by  the
    Iranian authorities. I do not accept that the reason for this  is  that
    intelligence do not issue such documents. This does not shed any  light
    on the Judges findings that the appellant's account was  incoherent  or
    implausible.

12. In so far as the Judge might be suggested that the  absence  of  arrest
    warrant or similar document in  some  way  undermines  the  appellant's
    case, which is far from clear he  is,  it  is  submitted  that  as  the
    appellant's case was that he came to the attention of  the  authorities
    sur plus, he could not have been realistically expected to know whether
    such documents existed, let alone to produce the same.

13. The Judge stated at paragraph 14 that the appellant was doing  his  job
    and there was no reasonable possibility of  him  being  apprehended  or
    coming under the radar (sic) were he to return to  Iran.  This  comment
    connected as it is  to  an  assessment  of  risk,  in  no  way  can  be
    categorised as an example of incoherent implausibility on the  part  of
    the appellant. The appellant was not just doing his job  as  stated  by
    the Judge but he stole sensitive information,  which  was  subsequently
    used  by  an  anti-government  blogger.  This  was  the  one  and  only
    plausibility reason for rejecting the appellant's claim.

14. The Judge states that the failure by the Iranians authorities  to  stop
    the appellant at the airport when he left Iran, and the fact that  they
    only raided his workplace and home after the he had left  the  country,
    suggest that his account is untrue. The authorities only learned of the
    appellant's involvement in the dissemination of the sensitive  material
    after he had left  Iran.  The  Judge's  findings  as  to  the  expected
    behaviour of the intelligence services in Iran is unsound.

15. Furthermore, rejection of an asylum  claim  on  the  grounds  that  the
    persecuting  authority  has  acted  in  an  implausible   manner   will
    frequently provide unsound bases for such rejection. HK  [2006]  EW  CA
    1037 and Awala v Secretary of State [2005] CSOH 73 refer in respect  of
    inherent  improbability.  The  rejection  of  the  story   grounds   of
    implausibility must be done,  unreasonably  drawn  inferences  and  not
    simply on conjecture or speculation". The entitlement of the factfinder
    to rely "on his own common sense and his ability, as  a  practical  and
    informed person,  to  identify  what  is  or  is  not  plausible".  The
    appellant's social and cultural background must be taken  into  account
    when determining plausibility.

16. For the reasons given, the determination is unsound and that the appeal
    should be remitted to the  first-tier  Tribunal  to  be  reheard  by  a
    different Judge.

    The hearing

17. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the determination.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

18. I have given anxious scrutiny to the determination of the First -  tier
    Tribunal Judge and have taken into account the grounds of  appeal.  The
    grounds appeal essentially state that the Judge did not  give  adequate
    reasons  for  finding  the  appellant's  evidence  not   coherent   and
    plausible.

19. The Judge fell into material  error  by  his  failure  to  give  cogent
    reasons for finding the appellant and his claim not credible.  Although
    the  Judge  stated  in  his  determination  that  he  found  that   the
    appellant's asylum claim has been contrived, it was required of him  to
    give full reasons for not accepting the appellant's evidence.

20. The Judge also made inconsistent findings on the facts. The Judge found
    that the appellant did not have had any problems prior to leaving  Iran
    on 27 June 2013 and he would have if his claim  of  stealing  sensitive
    government data was true. The appellant's evidence however was that the
    Iranian authorities did not know  about  the  stolen  data  until  they
    arrested Majid who  had  used  the  information  in  his  blog  on  the
    Internet. This is why the raids only took place on 24 or 25  July  2013
    which is after the appellant had left  the  country.  Furthermore,  the
    Judge found at paragraph 13 that the appellant acquired the information
    out of curiosity and innocence and "had no intention himself  of  using
    it nor did he use it". This is  not  accurate  because  the  appellants
    claim was that he did use the information by giving it to a blogger who
    used it in his website. This finding also brought the Judge into error.

21. The Judge stated that he does  not  find  credible  that  the  security
    forces in Iran would not have left some form of documentation when they
    raided the appellant's house. The  Judge  gave  no  basis  for  why  he
    believed that they must have left some document during the raid. I have
    been invited to accept that the Judge's view was based on the  how  the
    security forces in the United Kingdom operate in  that  they  would  be
    bound by law to issue some document to enter a person's house.

22. The Judge did not make specific  and  explicit  findings  as  to  which
    evidence he accepted and which he did not. Therefore in the absence  of
    such findings, it is difficult, in the circumstances, to understand the
    Judge's reasoning.

23. I find that the Judge has failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings and this amounts to a material error of law. It may be that  a
    differently constituted Tribunal may come to the same  conclusion,  but
    the appellant is entitled to know the reasons for  why  his  claim  was
    dismissed.

24. I find that a material  error  of  law  has  been  established  in  the
    determination. I direct that the appeal be remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a hearing de novo for findings of fact to be made  on  the
    appellant's credibility and to the credibility of his claim. The appeal
    be placed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Juss on
    the first available date.

DECISION

Appeal allowed to the extent that it is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal


      Dated this 30th day of October 2015
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................
Mrs S Chana

