
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04237/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     DB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. I make the order because the appellant is an  asylum
    seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on  refusing to grant  her  further  leave  to
    remain and to remove her to the Democratic Republic of Congo ("DRC").

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of the DRC born in 1948. She claims that she
    fears persecution by the authorities in the DRC because she was accused
    of preaching against the government. She was a member of UDPS. She  had
    been arrested three times and ill-treated and was sent a summons in her
    absence. The government went to her  home  address  in  July  2014  and
    required her to report.

 4. The appellant applied for a UK  visit  visa  in  March  2011  but  that
    application was refused. Her subsequent appeal was allowed  in  October
    2013 and she was issued with a 6 month family  visit  visa  valid  from
    February 2014 to August 2014. She arrived in the UK on 4 April 2014 and
    claimed asylum on 26 September 2014.

 5. The respondent accepted nationality and identity  but  did  not  accept
    that the appellant was a member of UDPS or that she had  been  arrested
    or that the authorities had any adverse interest  in  her.  Her  asylum
    claim was therefore rejected and the respondent decided that there were
    no human rights grounds that justified a grant of leave to remain.

The Appeal

 6. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  attended  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 7 August 2015.  The  judge  found  that  her
    account was  vague  and  inconsistent  and  placed  no  weight  on  the
    documents submitted in support. The documents said to be issued by  the
    authorities in Congo were found to have been fabricated  to  bolster  a
    fabricated claim.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7.  The  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  the   basis   that
    translations of the summons  and  arrest  warrant  were  faxed  to  the
    Tribunal on the morning of the hearing but the judge refused  to  admit
    the translations and would not countenance ant time being given to  the
    parties to consider the translations. Very limited  evidence  could  be
    adduced in relation to the documents as the appellant is illiterate nor
    was her legal representative able to make submissions. The judge failed
    to record the sequence of events  in  the  decision  despite  extensive
    submissions. The judge erred in law by excluding such central evidence.



 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on
    14 October 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed
    to properly engage with the application to introduce  the  translations
    into evidence. No reasons were recorded for rejecting the translations.

 9. In a rule 24 response dated 29 October 2015, the respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that it was not clear how  the
    translations could have aided the appellant given the weakness  of  the
    appellant's account.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

11. Mr Hodson submitted that the fax containing the translations  had  been
    sent to Taylor House at 9.22am, before the hearing  commenced  and  the
    parties were waiting for the fax to be brought into court. The decision
    to refuse  to  allow  further  time  was  made  without  sight  of  the
    translations. Little delay was required. There is no dispute  that  the
    translations should have been submitted  earlier.  It  was  not  really
    possible to have examination  in  chief  or  cross-examination  on  the
    documents. An important area of evidence was compromised. The documents
    were quite brief but the appellant appears to  have  been  wanted  with
    someone else and that matter remains  to  be  investigated.  The  judge
    cannot have applied Tanveer Ahmed principles  as  to  content.  It  was
    prejudicial for the documents not to be considered. Paragraph 34 of the
    decision addresses a single translation. On the fax  to  the  Tribunal,
    the translation was superimposed on a scanned  copy  of  the  original.
    There were no meaningful points about the credibility or reliability of
    the translations. The key issue was fairness; has  the  appellant  been
    denied a fully fair hearing? The answer must be yes. A de novo  hearing
    was required to correct the unfairness.

12. Ms Holmes conceded in reply that she was concerned by the events at the
    hearing. The reference to a second person in the documents was crucial.
    Ms Holmes conceded that she could not make gung ho submissions  against
    Mr Hodson. Ms Holmes did not oppose a de novo hearing.

13. The decision is silent regarding the application for the hearing to  be
    put back or the decision to refuse to admit the translations  that  had
    already been faxed to the court. The record of proceedings states that,
    "Mr Hodson waiting for fax with missing translations from the bundle  -
    say have been faxed today. Also says letter coming from UDPS party. CBS
    (the judge) will not accept the translations now -  not  before  me  at
    10.25 - issue was raised at the asylum interview in February and  index
    to bundle states that translations to follow - should have  been  filed
    before the start of the hearing". I find  that  the  judge  refused  to
    admit relevant evidence that had already been sent to the  Tribunal  at
    9.22am.

14. The hearing that followed was obviously unfair - key evidence could not
    be referred to and the judge fell into further error at paragraph 34 of
    the decision  in  criticising  the  English  translation  of  a  single
    document without appreciating the manner in which the  translation  was
    created. The appellant was  denied  a  reasonable  opportunity  to  put
    forward relevant evidence. Although the appellant had not complied with
    directions the application was merely to put the  appeal  back  in  the
    list. No great  inconvenience  would  have  been  caused.  Fairness  is
    paramount in those circumstances.

15. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

16. Both representatives invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements I  consider  that  an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

17. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.


Signed   [pic]    Date 18 February 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
