
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04816/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 3 June 2015                               |On 29 June 2015               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER


                                   Between

                                     OA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Howard, Solicitor, of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyakaran, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) we make an  order  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or
    publication of any matter likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
    identify the appellant. Breach of this  order  can  be  punished  as  a
    contempt of court. We make the order because the appellant is  a  young
    asylum seeker who might be at risk just by reason of being identified.

 2. The appellant appeals against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum and  human  rights  grounds
    against a decision taken on 20 June 2014 refusing to grant him  further
    leave to remain and to remove him to Afghanistan.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 30 March 1995.

 4. The appellant claims that he left Afghanistan in late August  or  early
    September 2009. He travelled to the United Kingdom by air, boat  and  a
    series of lorries. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 December  2009
    and claimed asylum on the same day. Following a screening interview  on
    4 December 2009  and  an  asylum  interview  on  11  January  2010  the
    respondent refused his asylum claim on 12  May  2010  but  granted  him
    discretionary leave on the grounds that he was an unaccompanied  minor.
    That leave expired on 30 September 2012 and the appellant submitted his
    application for further leave to remain on 28 September 2012.

 5. The appellant is of Tajik ethnicity and lived in a  village  in  Baglan
    province. He claims that he attended school for about  six  years.  His
    father was a teacher at the local school. His mother died a  few  years
    ago as a result of complications in pregnancy. His father was in charge
    of the school but was killed by the Taliban in August or September 2009
    because he refused to close down the school when the Taliban asked  him
    to do so. At the time of his father's death, the appellant was visiting
    his maternal uncle in Andarab. His uncle told him that prior to killing
    his father the Taliban had threatened  his  children.  The  appellant's
    younger brother stayed with the uncle but arrangements  were  made  for
    the appellant to leave Afghanistan with an agent about  a  week  later.
    The appellant fears that if he is returned to Afghanistan  he  will  be
    killed or recruited by the Taliban who control his home area.  He  also
    fears that people in Afghanistan will sell him or sexually abuse him.

 6. The respondent accepted that the appellant is an Afghan  national  from
    Baglan province but  did  not  accept  that  he  was  forced  to  leave
    Afghanistan for the reasons given. The appellant could return safely to
    Baglan province and there was an internal relocation option in Kabul.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. The  judge  did  not
    find the appellant to be credible witness and rejected his  account  of
    his father's death and  his  claim  to  have  been  threatened  by  the
    Taliban. The appellant could choose to go back to his home area  or  to
    relocate to Kabul. There was no credible evidence that the Taliban were
    searching for the appellant and that they would target him wherever  he
    goes in Afghanistan. The respondent  had  made  efforts  to  trace  the
    appellant's family by passing details to the British Embassy in  Kabul.
    The appellant was now 19 and lives independently in a flat provided  by
    social  services.  There  was  no  credible  evidence  that  he  was  a
    vulnerable person and that he would be at real risk of being subject to
    sexual abuse on return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on four grounds.  Ground  one
    asserts that the judge fell into a material error  of  law  in  finding
    that the  appellant  has  family  members  in  Afghanistan.  The  judge
    accepted that the appellant had attempted to contact his family through
    the Red Cross but gave no reasoning  and  cited  no  support  from  the
    objective evidence for the assertion  that,  "with  only  addresses  of
    villages in provinces in Afghanistan it can be difficult even for those
    on the ground to find and trace family members" which is the basis  for
    the  finding  that  the  appellant's  family  members  are   still   in
    Afghanistan. The reasoning is insufficient  to  support  that  finding,
    especially in the face of clear evidence from the  British  Red  Cross,
    whose  professional  duty  is  to  trace  family   members   in   these
    circumstances, that they have been  unable  to  trace  the  appellant's
    family. The judge also did not take account of the respondent's failure
    to endeavour to trace the appellant's family in a  timely  fashion;  no
    attempt was made to trace until February 2014 and no response had  been
    received as at the date of hearing.

 9. Ground two asserts that the judge erred in failing to give  a  reasoned
    decision as to the risk to the appellant of return to Afghanistan as  a
    young single male. The judge's  finding  that  there  was  no  credible
    evidence that the appellant is a vulnerable person or that he would  be
    at real risk of being subjected to sexual abuse upon  return  flies  in
    the face of JS (Former unaccompanied child - durable solution  problem)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 (IAC) and other case law  to  the  effect
    that sending young men who are barely out of childhood  to  Afghanistan
    as unaccompanied returnees places them at risk of exploitation and ill-
    treatment not limited to sexual abuse but including forced recruitment,
    sexual violence and kidnapping. The judge  also  failed  to  apply  the
    relevant guidance in her assessment of risk based upon  the  individual
    circumstances of the appellant.

10. Ground three asserts that the judge erred in making  broad  credibility
    findings between paragraphs 25 and 30 of the decision without correctly
    applying the relevant guidance in assessing the  credibility  of  young
    witnesses or relevant guidance on how to approach factual  evidence  in
    asylum cases. The judge has not applied the guidance in AA  (unattended
    children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 in which Owen J stated  that
    the standard of proof is low and this principle should be applied  more
    generously to children who should liberally be given the benefit of the
    doubt. This principle is established  by  the  UNCHR  Refugee  Children
    Guidelines on Protection and Care 1994 ("the UNHCR Guidelines") and  is
    consistent with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 ("the
    Presidential Guidance"). The judge has not taken into account that  the
    appellant gave  a  lucid  and  internally  consistent  account  of  his
    experiences in Afghanistan as well as giving credible responses to  the
    respondent's refusal letter in his witness statement of 5 August 2014.

11. Ground four asserts that the judge erred in her approach to  Article  8
    by failing to fully consider the claim under the Immigration Rules. The
    judge materially erred in failing to consider whether the appellant met
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) in that  he  would  face  very
    significant obstacles to integration into Afghanistan as  a  vulnerable
    young man who would be entirely alone and lacking the protection of  an
    extended family network.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker  on  8
    January 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge failed to
    consider the evidence before her in accordance  with  the  Presidential
    Guidance and that infected her findings. All grounds were arguable.

13. In a rule 24 response dated 20 January 2015, the respondent  sought  to
    uphold the judge's decision on the basis that the appellant  was  a  19
    year old young man as at the date of hearing and there is  no  evidence
    that the judge did not consider that fact.  The  judge  considered  the
    evidence, made well-reasoned findings and  applied  the  relevant  case
    law. There were no material errors in  the  judge's  findings  and  the
    lengthy grounds amounted to no more than disagreements with the judge's
    findings.

14. Thus, the appeal came before us.

15. In his oral submissions, Mr Howard relied  upon  the  356  page  bundle
    submitted by the appellant's representatives for the appeal hearing and
    noted that the appellant was 13-14 when he arrived in the UK. There  is
    a lack of explanation throughout the findings. How could a  13-14  year
    old explain why the school was not attacked?  The  appellant  does  not
    know where his family are and neither the British Red Cross or the Home
    Office can find them. The respondent has not  discharged  its  duty  to
    ensure that there are adequate reception arrangements upon return.  The
    judge made no finding in relation  the  risk  of  the  appellant  being
    recruited by the Taliban.

16. Mr Howard relied upon paragraphs 14, 15  and  18  of  the  Presidential
    Guidance. Vulnerability must be taken into account. What  has  happened
    to the appellant's family? The very fact that he came to the UK  as  an
    unaccompanied minor is telling. There is no bright line between a child
    and an adult. The appellant came to the UK as a young child.  Paragraph
    34 of the decision is not rational without  further  explanation  -  no
    reason is given for why the appellant is not vulnerable. In relation to
    ground four, this is a significant obstacles  case  and  that  was  not
    addressed by the judge.

17. Ms Vidyakaran submitted  that  the  Presidential  Guidance  applies  to
    children and vulnerable people. It was not incumbent on  the  judge  to
    refer to the  Presidential  Guidance  in  this  case.  The  judge  gave
    sufficient reasons throughout the decision. The judge reminded  herself
    of the  burden  of  proof  and  made  adequately  reasoned  credibility
    findings. The appellant was 13 at the time and it is not  available  to
    him to say that he knew nothing of the threats made to  his  father  by
    the Taliban, particularly as he said that  he  often  saw  the  Taliban
    coming to the school. The appellant claims to  have  had  uninterrupted
    education for six years.

18. The judge did not specifically refer to  paragraph  276ADE  but  it  is
    clear throughout the decision that there is no significant obstacle  to
    return. If the Upper Tribunal identifies a material error of  law  then
    the appeal should be remitted for a fresh hearing.

19. We asked Ms Vidyakaran how the judge  could  have  concluded  that  the
    appellant's family were still living in the same place in  Afghanistan?
    Ms Vidyakaran submitted that the judge found the appellant  not  to  be
    credible and therefore did not believe that his family had disappeared.
    He is now 19 and living independently. He  is  not  vulnerable  in  any
    event.

Discussion

20. We  have  considered  the  Presidential  Guidance.  We  find  that  the
    following paragraphs are relevant;

         "10.3     Assessing evidence

         Take account of potentially corroborating evidence

         Be aware:

             1. Children often do not provide as much detail  as  adults  in
                recalling experiences and may  often  manifest  their  fears
                differently from adults;

             2. Some forms of disability may result in impaired memory

             3. The order and manner in  which  evidence  is  given  may  be
                affected by mental, psychological  or  emotional  trauma  or
                disability.

             4. Comprehension of questioning may have been impaired.

         14.  Consider  the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible  degrees  of
         understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to those who  are
         not vulnerable, in the context of evidence from  others  associated
         with the appellant and the background evidence  before  you.  Where
         there were clear discrepancies in the oral evidence,  consider  the
         extent to which  the  age,  vulnerability  or  sensitivity  of  the
         witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.

         15. The decision should record whether the Tribunal  has  concluded
         the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable  or  sensitive,
         the  effect   that   the   Tribunal   considered   the   identified
         vulnerability had in assessing the  evidence  before  it  and  thus
         whether the  Tribunal  was  satisfied  whether  the  appellant  had
         established his or her case to the relevant standard of  proof.  In
         asylum appeals, weight should be given to objective indications  of
         risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind....

         18. Documents, process  and  procedure  which  fail  to  take  into
         account vulnerability may compromise the quality  of  the  evidence
         produced; a failure to take into  account  procedural  requirements
         may result in evidence being potentially inadmissible or unreliable
         (the UKBA have a number of protocols and guidance  documents  which
         set  out  standards  to  be   complied   with   when   interviewing
         children....)."

21. We have also considered the UNHCR Guidelines which state  at  page  101
    that;

         "(e) The problem of  "proof"  is  great  in  every  refugee  status
         determination. It is compounded in the case of children.  For  this
         reason, the decision on  a  child's  refugee  status  calls  for  a
         liberal application of the principle of the benefit of  the  doubt.
         This means that should  there  be  some  hesitation  regarding  the
         credibility of the child's story, the burden is not on the child to
         provide proof but the child should be  given  the  benefit  of  the
         doubt."

    Similar guidance appears  in  the  UNHCR  Guidelines  on  International
    Protection No 8: Child Asylum Claims under 1A(2) and 1(F) of  the  1951
    Convention; which provide that, due to their young age, dependency  and
    relative immaturity, children  should  enjoy  specific  procedural  and
    evidentiary safeguards to ensure that fair refugee status determination
    decisions are reached with respect to their claims.  For  unaccompanied
    and separated child applicants, efforts need to  be  made  as  soon  as
    possible to initiate tracing and family reunification with  parents  or
    other family members. If the facts of the case  cannot  be  ascertained
    the examiner needs to make  a  decision  on  the  basis  of  all  known
    circumstances which may call for a liberal application of  the  benefit
    of the doubt. Similarly, the child should be given the benefit  of  the
    doubt should there be some concern regarding the credibility  of  parts
    of his claim.

22. The UNHCR Guidelines and the respondent's Asylum  Policy  Guidance  are
    fully  set  out  at  paragraphs  39-42  of  AA  (unattended   children)
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 and  plainly  represent  the  starting
    point for consideration of evidence given by child asylum  seekers.  It
    is common ground in this appeal that the  appellant  was  around  13-14
    when he arrived in the UK and was interviewed. The  judge  made  strong
    adverse credibility findings at paragraphs 24-30 of  the  decision.  In
    particular, the appellant was criticised for  being  unaware  that  the
    Taliban had made threats to his father, not  enquiring  of  his  father
    what the Taliban had come to the school to speak about,  being  unaware
    that the Taliban were against education and schools, failing to provide
    any credible explanation as to why his father's school was not attacked
    or forcibly closed down when other schools in the area were attacked or
    forcibly closed down and failing to refer to the UNICEF  tents  in  the
    asylum interview.

23. There is no reference to  any  of  the  guidance  cited  above  in  the
    decision and there is no indication that the judge has  considered  the
    age or vulnerability of the appellant  when  considering  the  evidence
    given during his interviews and at the oral hearing. There is certainly
    nothing to indicate that the judge has given any benefit of  the  doubt
    to the appellant. We recognise that the  judge  was  required  to  make
    findings regarding the credibility of the appellant. However,  we  find
    in all of the circumstances of this appeal  that  the  failure  of  the
    judge to refer to relevant guidance or to demonstrate that the guidance
    was applied to the assessment of  credibility  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.

24. The respondent's bundle for the First-tier hearing includes at M1-M5  a
    number of letters from the British Red Cross. It is evident from  those
    letters that the appellant sought the assistance  of  the  British  Red
    Cross to trace his family and that the British Red Cross have failed to
    locate any members of the  family,  despite  their  best  efforts.  The
    respondent  has  also  been  unable  to  locate  any  members  of   the
    appellant's family. We consider this to be a significant feature of the
    evidence in terms of assessing the level of family support available to
    the appellant upon return to Afghanistan and the risks  that  he  faces
    upon return. Our view is consistent with  the  approach  taken  by  the
    Upper Tribunal at paragraph 35 of  JS  (Former  unaccompanied  child  -
    durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 (IAC);

         "In making that assessment we must take into account  all  relevant
         factors including his age, his background, his family  and  general
         circumstances  including  any  particular  vulnerability.  We  must
         consider whether an appellant  will  have  family  or  other  adult
         support  upon  return  to  his  home  country  appropriate  to  his
         particular needs, and in the context of Afghanistan  to  take  into
         account the  guidance  in  AA  (Afghanistan)  about  the  risks  to
         unattached  children  in  the  light  of   the   reminder   in   KA
         (Afghanistan) in the judgment of Maurice Kay LJ at [18] that  there
         is no bright line across which  the  risks  to  and  the  needs  of
         children suddenly disappear."

25. The judge found at paragraph 32 of the decision that she did not accept
    that the  appellant's  father  was  killed  by  the  Taliban  and  then
    confirmed at paragraph 33 that she took into account the correspondence
    with the Red Cross in the bundle. The judge then stated that; "However,
    I find that with only addresses of villages in Afghanistan  it  can  be
    difficult even for those  on  the  ground  to  find  and  trace  family
    members. I find that it does not follow that the  appellant's  paternal
    and maternal uncles and their families are not  living  where  he  last
    left them in Afghanistan". There is no further analysis in the decision
    of the implications of the failure to trace family members.

26. We find that the substantive issue for the judge in  relation  to  this
    issue was whether it is reasonably likely that the  appellant  will  be
    able to contact his family members and obtain support  from  them.  The
    judge did not cite  any  objective  evidence  to  support  her  finding
    regarding the difficulty of finding and tracing family members. We find
    that the judge failed to give  any  weight  to  the  inability  of  the
    British Red Cross and the respondent  to  locate  any  members  of  the
    appellant's family and failed to make a clear finding of fact regarding
    the level of family or other adult support available to  the  appellant
    if he is returned to Afghanistan. That is a further material  error  of
    law.

27. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of errors of law  and  its  decision  cannot
    stand.

Decision

28. Both representatives invited us to order a rehearing in the  First-tier
    Tribunal if  we  set  aside  the  judge's  decision.  Bearing  in  mind
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements we consider
    that an appropriate course of action. We find that the  errors  of  law
    infect the decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be  de
    novo with all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

29. Consequently, we set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  We
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.

Signed   David Archer      Date 27 June 2015


Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
