
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04185/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Date Sent                    |
|On 23 August 2013                             |On 11 November 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                     MMA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Mason, Legal Representative, South Manchester
Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

 1. This appeal arises out of a challenge to the  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gladstone who dismissed the appeal of MMA, his wife
    (Ms E) and three children on asylum, humanitarian protection and  human
    rights grounds against the decisions of 18 March 2013 to remove them as
    illegal entrants.  They are nationals of Libya where the appellant  was
    born on 20 December 1962. After  hearing  submissions  on  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  law,  we  reserved  our  decision.
    Thereafter we invited written submissions from the parties on an  issue
    relating to the construction of an immigration rule that had  not  been
    dealt at the hearing. None had been received by the deadline set.

KEY DATES

 2. The family unit  comprises  the  appellant's  wife  (Ms  E)  and  three
    children.  The eldest (D1) was born in 1999 in Libya.  Another daughter
    (D2) was born in the UK in December 2000.  A son (S) was also  born  in
    this country in December 2006.  Sadly the appellant's first  wife  died
    during S's birth.

 3. The key chronology is as follows:

    28 August 1999    Appellant comes to the United Kingdom on a government
                       scholarship with a student visa with his  first  wife
                       and E1.

    20 December 2000  D2 is born

    January 2003  D1 attends primary school.

    August-Sept. 2006 The family travel to Libya for a holiday.

    19 December 2006  S is born and the appellant's first wife  dies.   The
                       family travels to Libya for  her  burial  where  they
                       remain  until  April  2007.   During  that  time  the
                       appellant marries, Mrs E his late wife's sister.

    April 2007    The family unit returns to the United Kingdom.

    September 2008    The family returns to  Libya  for  the  appellant  to
                       undertake research.

    28 March 2009 The appellant returns alone to the United Kingdom as  his
                       UK visa was to expire  on  31  March  2009.   He  had
                       planned to return to Libya to resume  his  unfinished
                       research.

    2 July 2009   The appellant's application is refused.

    14 September 2009 The appellant applies for indefinite leave  based  on
                       long residence.

    30 July 2010   That  application  is  refused  and  reconsideration  is
                       sought.  The appellant  remains  without  leave.   He
                       makes two further applications for  leave  to  remain
                       which were refused, the last being 30 July 2010.

    4 October 2012    Ms E and the three  children  arrive  in  the  United
                       Kingdom on a visit visa.

    27 February 2013  The appellant makes application for asylum  with  his
                       family as dependants.




PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had before her copies of the applications
    made by Ms E and the children on 23 August 2012 for  the  visit  visas.
    These reveal that the stated purpose of the visit by Ms E  was  to  see
    her sister for two to three weeks.  According to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's notes, her husband was to remain in Libya.  He  was  employed
    and a letter (to this effect) had been seen as was a  letter  from  him
    consenting to the visit.  At the hearing, evidence was given  that  the
    application had been made through an agency.

 5. The appellant was interviewed about his asylum claim and the respondent
    set out her reasons for rejecting it in a letter dated 13  March  2013.
    The key reasons for rejecting the application were as follows:

    (i)  His claim that the whole family were wanted in Libya due to  their
         connections to Gaddafi was not considered to be  supported  by  the
         appellant's own evidence.

    (ii) Whilst it was acknowledged that there is evidence of people  being
         attacked in Bin Waleed (where the  appellant  had  been  born)  the
         account that Ms E and  the  children  were  able  to  remain  there
         unharmed was inconsistent with what had been reported regarding the
         treatment of suspected Gaddafi supporters.

    (iii)    The fact that Ms E and the children were able to  leave  Libya
         with  ease  did  not  support  the  claim  that  the  family   were
         identifiable as pro-Gaddafi.

    (iv) It was not in dispute that the appellant  had  always  claimed  to
         have lived in Bin Waleed and country information stated  that  this
         is home to the Warfalla tribe.  The claim that the appellant  would
         be targeted due to that ethnicity was not consistent with the  rest
         of the claim with reference to the absence of problems  experienced
         by Ms E and the children other than the one attack  on  the  family
         home which took place at the height of the uprising in August 2012.

    (v)  There are people of Warfalla ethnicity  involved  in  anti-Gaddafi
         activities demonstrating that not all Warfalla are considered to be
         [pro] Gaddafi.  It was not accepted the appellant would be targeted
         on return to Libya due to his ethnicity.

    (vi) In the alternative there is a part of Libya where the family could
         return to and live safely with reference to the ability of Ms E and
         the children to live in Benghazi during the uprising from  the  end
         of 2011.  Accordingly, internal relocation remained a viable option
         and was not unduly harsh.

    (vii)    The delay in the claim to asylum undermined the  claimed  fear
         and the appellant's credibility was damaged by the failure  by  the
         appellant to make any further attempt to regularise his stay  after
         the last request made for the Secretary of State to reconsider  her
         decision in May 2011.

    (viii)   It  was  acknowledged  there  continued  to  be  outbursts  of
         internal armed conflict in parts of Libya but the nature and  scope
         of the conflict  did  not  indicate  that  there  were  substantial
         grounds for believing the appellant would, solely on account of his
         presence, face a real  risk  of  being  subject  to  indiscriminate
         violence (Article 15(c) of Council Directive 2004/E3/EC of 29 April
         2004) (the Qualification Directive).

    (ix) It was not considered that removal to Libya would be a  breach  of
         either Articles 2 or 3 of the Human Rights Convention.

    (x)  Consideration had been given to the claim under Article 8 and  the
         application had been determined in accordance with Appendix  FM  of
         the Immigration Rules.  With reference to EX1(a) the  children  had
         been in the United Kingdom since 4 October 2012 and had  not  spent
         seven years in the United Kingdom nor  had  they  demonstrated  any
         exceptional circumstances  why  they  could  not  return  with  the
         appellant to their country of origin.

    (xi) The appellant also failed to fulfil the requirements of  s.D-LTRPT
         1.2 of Appendix FM and  it  was  considered  it  would  be  in  the
         children's best interests to return  with  the  appellant  and  the
         application was therefore refused under s.D-LTRPT.1.3.

    (xii)    With regard to the appellant's relationship to Ms E regard had
         been had to EX1(b), however the appellant failed to qualify under R-
         LTRP.1.1(d).

    (xiii)   The application to remain had been determined under  paragraph
         276ADE by virtue of 326B.  The appellant had failed to  demonstrate
         he had twenty years' previous residence in the United  Kingdom  and
         failed to fulfil the requirements of 276BE.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge reached these conclusions:

    (i)  Neither the appellant nor Mrs E was credible.

    (ii) He could not be satisfied that the family (house  in  Bin  Waleed)
         was attacked by militia seeking the appellant as claimed, either in
         2011 or 2012.

    (iii)    There was no evidence that the militia showed any interest  in
         the appellant's brothers who had not (at the relevant time) fled to
         Tunisia at the end of  2011  with  one  living  next  door  to  the
         appellant's house.  There was  no  interest  until  the  house  was
         apparently raised to the ground in either August or September 2012.
          If such an event happened it did  not  indicate  interest  in  the
         appellant and was merely a random attack.

    (iv) Ms E and the children lived in Benghazi with her family after  the
         appellant returned to the UK in March 2009.

    (v)  If Ms E had genuine fears because of the claimed incidents it  was
         not understood why she did not travel to Egypt with her mother  and
         brother if  not  to  Tunisia  with  the  appellant's  brothers  and
         families.

    (vi) The account had been fabricated to establish an asylum  claim  and
         it was not accepted that the appellant had been, is now,  or  would
         on return be of any interest for  political  reasons.   That  claim
         related in part to the appellant's ethnicity and that  he  is  from
         Bin Waleed but in the light of the findings otherwise  reached,  it
         was not considered he would be of adverse interest  for  any  other
         reason on return.

    (vii)    The conclusion in the refusal letter regarding  Article  15(c)
         was endorsed by the judge and she considered that no claim was made
         out  for  humanitarian  protection  or  under  the   Human   Rights
         Convention under Article 3.

    (viii)   As to Article 8, paragraph 276ADE must be read in  conjunction
         with Appendix FMEX1 and it is implicit in the wording of 276ADE(iv)
         that the applicant had to have lived  continuously  in  the  United
         Kingdom for at least seven years immediately preceding the  raising
         of the issue.  D1 had left the UK in December  2006,  aged  7,  she
         returned again between 7 April 2007 and September 2008 then aged 9.
          Thereafter she was enrolled in a  school  in  Libya  and  did  not
         return  here  until  October  2012,  some  four  years  later.   D1
         therefore did not meet the requirements under the "new Rules".

    (ix) Proceeding with a discrete analysis of the of the appellant's case
         under Article 8 the judge considered that the appellant, Mrs E  and
         the children could reasonably be expected to return  to  Libya  and
         that the interference with their right to respect for private  life
         would not have consequences  of  such  gravity  as  potentially  to
         engage the operation of Article 8.

PERMISSION TO APPEAL

 7. Three grounds are advanced in the application for permission to appeal:

    (i)  The judge had failed to consider the best interests of  the  three
         children, in particular failed to take  into  account  any  of  the
         evidence relating to the conditions and risks  the  children  would
         face on return to Libya, failed to make clear findings on where the
         family will be returned to or where they will live  and  failed  to
         take account of the views expressed by D1 in her witness  statement
         as to her concerns.

    (ii) The judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on  a
         material issue.  In particular  the  respondent  had  accepted  the
         appellant's ethnicity and place of origin which the respondent  had
         sought unsuccessfully to withdraw at the hearing.   Notwithstanding
         findings regarding the credibility of the appellant's account,  the
         judge had failed to make findings on whether the appellant and  his
         family would be at risk on  return  to  Bin  Waleed  based  on  his
         undisputed profile.

    (iii)    The judge had misdirected herself on law on a material  matter
         on the basis that D1 met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)
         and it failed to give any reason why  paragraph  276ADE  should  be
         read in conjunction with Appendix FMEX.1  There was no reference to
         the extensive Home Office guidance  on  long  residence  having  to
         directly precede consideration of the issue.

 8.  These  grounds  were  considered  arguable  by  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Taylor.

SUBMISSIONS

 9. We heard extensive submissions from the parties at the  hearing  on  23
    August.

10. As to the first ground, in summary, Miss Mason accepted that  the  best
    interests of D1 (and the other children) were for them to be within the
    family unit but the judge had failed to take  account  of  the  country
    information which indicated deterioration in the  situation  in  Libya.
    There was no challenge to the findings by the judge (as to the basis on
    which the claim had been made for protection)  but  Miss  Mason  argued
    that  the  judge  had  failed  to  specifically  address  the   country
    information indicating the deterioration between October 2012 when  the
    family left and the hearing in May 2013.  We  were  taken  through  the
    documents on which she relied.

11. Mr Jarvis argued that the judge had  made  reference  to  the  relevant
    evidence and relied on the findings reached in support of  the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant   would  not  be  at  risk.   By  way  of
    response Miss Mason accepted that the Article 15(c) threshold  had  not
    been reached but nevertheless the  evidence  indicated  risks  for  the
    children.

12. As to  the  third  ground  relating  to  paragraph  276ADE,  Mr  Jarvis
    accepted, based on a policy in force at  the  time  when  the  decision
    under appeal was made, that no specific application needed to have been
    made by D1 under this provision.  He referred to a subsequent change in
    the Rule reflecting this; paragraph 276A0 and to EM (Zimbabwe) and  the
    Administrative Court decision in SSHD v Rahman [2011] EWCA Civ 814 over
    the historical policy  of  DP5/96.   He  maintained  that  the  correct
    approach was the  calculation  of  seven  years  immediately  preceding
    consideration of the application.

13. Turning to the second ground Mr  Jarvis  reminded  us  of  the  adverse
    credibility findings that had been made and  argued  that  the  country
    information did not mention that the Warfalla were being targeted as  a
    tribe as such.


14. At the conclusion of those submissions we announced our  decision  that
    we were not persuaded the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made  an  error
    on a point of law on the first and second grounds  of  application  but
    needed to give further consideration to  the  arguments  on  the  third
    relating to paragraph 276ADE and in particular its application  to  D1.
    Miss Mason and Mr Jarvis agreed that in the event we decided the  judge
    erred such that the decision required to be set aside (insofar  as  her
    treatment of 276ADE),  we would not need to hear  further  evidence  or
    further submissions in the light of the detailed argument we had heard.

OUR CONCLUSIONS

15. The thread running through grounds 1 and 2 is an alleged failure by the
    judge to have regard to country information  when  assessing  the  best
    interests of the children and the risk faced by the appellant  and  his
    family by implication as a consequence of his ethnicity  and  place  of
    origin alone.

16. The judge set out at [8] of her decision the documentation  before  her
    including a country evidence bundle.  In [90] she  explained  that  she
    had carefully considered all the documents in evidence in  the  matter.
    We need no  persuasion  that  this  was  indeed  the  judge's  approach
    reflected in a particularly detailed  thorough  determination.   It  is
    correct that the judge  made  no  specific  reference  to  any  of  the
    individual documents contained in the country information bundle in the
    course of her  conclusions  but  it  is  evident  from  the  way  those
    conclusions are framed it is against the evidence of the  conflict  and
    ensuing unsettled conditions in Libya.

17. In essence, the judge concluded that Ms E  and  the  children  did  not
    suffer the difficulties as claimed.

18. In the course our discussion, we encouraged Miss Mason to point  us  to
    the evidence that she relied on to  support  her  contention  that  the
    judge should have come to a different conclusion on the best  interests
    of the children and the risks faced by the appellant.

19. As to that evidence, we accept that the FCO advice was against all  but
    essential travel to certain locations and against all travel  to  other
    parts of Libya including Benghazi.  The advice identifies a high threat
    from terrorism  including  kidnapping.   That  advice  is  however  for
    British citizens.

20. The other material Miss  Mason  directed  us  to  indicates  continuing
    instability in Libya.  However, we  consider  that  in  regard  to  the
    judge's conclusions on the absences of specific harm encountered by  Ms
    E and the children whilst living in Benghazi and her rejection  of  the
    account of troubles in Bin Waleed, it was open to  the  judge  to  find
    that the appellant and his family would not be  at  risk.   As  to  the
    complaint that the judge had failed to  take  into  account  the  views
    expressed  by  D1,  those  views  were  considered  at  [100]  of   the
    determination and the judge gave reasons open to her why she considered
    that evidence did not alter her view on the other evidence she had seen
    and heard.  In respect of risk  faced  by  virtue  of  the  appellant's
    ethnicity and place of origin we consider that again in  the  light  of
    the findings reached on what Ms E and the children had experienced,  it
    was open to the judge to conclude in the particular circumstances  this
    aspect  of  the  appellant's  claim  did  not   warrant   international
    protection.

21. It is correct that the judge did not dwell at any length  on  the  best
    interests of the children but, having regard to the findings reached on
    the circumstances the family might face if returned to Libya, it is not
    arguable that more was required than her succinct analysis in [120] and
    [122] of the determination. This is particularly so  in  the  light  of
    Miss Mason's acceptance that the starting point for  the  consideration
    of those best interests were for the family unit to stay together.

22. Our conclusion therefore in respect of the challenges  in  grounds  (1)
    and  (2)  of  the  application  is  that  these  are  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with factual findings rationally open to the judge on  the
    evidence before her.

23. We now turn to the third ground of challenge specifically  relating  to
    D1 and whether or not she was entitled to leave  to  remain  under  the
    Immigration Rules by virtue of the seven years' continuous presence she
    previously had enjoyed in the United Kingdom.

24. Paragraph 276ADE (relevant to D1)  is as follows:

         "Private life

         Requirements to be met by an applicant on the  grounds  of  private
         life:

         276ADE. The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  leave  to
         remain on the grounds of private lives in the UK are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i)  does not fall for refusal on any grounds in section S-LTR  1.2
             to S-LTR [2.3 and S-LTR 3.1] in Appendix FM; and

         ...

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK for  at  least  seven  years  (discounting  any  period  of
             imprisonment); and it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK ...

         ...".

25. Paragraph 276BE provides that limited  leave to remain on  the  grounds
    of private life in the UK may be granted for a period not exceeding  30
    months provided that the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
    requirements in paragraph 276ADE are met.

26. Paragraph 276DE sets out the requirements to be met for  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain including one that the applicant has been in
    the United Kingdom with continuous leave on the grounds of private life
    for a period of at least 120 months.



27. The issue we are required to determine is whether a minor applicant who
    had lived continuously here for at least seven years is able to rely on
    that previous continuous residence  to  support  an  application  under
    paragraph 276ADE (iii) on return to the United Kingdom if still a minor
    after that period of absence.

28. Paragraph 276A defines, for the purposes of paragraphs relating to long
    residence in  the  United  Kingdom  and  paragraph  276ADE,  continuous
    residence as:

         "(a) 'continuous residence' means residence in the  United  Kingdom
             for an unbroken period, and for these purposes a period  shall
             not be considered to have been broken where  an  applicant  is
             absent from the United Kingdom for a period of six  months  or
             less at any one time, provided that the applicant in  question
             has existing  limited  leave  to  enter  or  remain  upon  the
             departure and return but shall  be  considered  to  have  been
             broken if the applicant:

             (i)  [been removed or deported];

             (ii) has left the United Kingdom and on doing so  evidenced  a
                  clear intention not to return;

             (iii)    left the United Kingdom in circumstances in which  he
                  could have had no reasonable expectation at  the  time  of
                  leaving that he would lawfully be able to return; or

             (iv) [relates to convictions];

             (v)  has spent a total of more than 18 months absent from  the
                  United Kingdom during the period in question.

         (b)   'lawful  residence'  means  residence  which  is   continuous
             residence pursuant to:

             (i)  existing leave to enter or remain; or

             (ii) temporary admission within section 11  of  the  1971  Act
                  play leave to enter or remain subsequently granted; or

             (iii)    [exemption from immigration control];

         (c)   'lived  continuously'  and   'living   continuously'   means'
             continuous residence', except that 276A  (a)  (iv)  shall  not
             apply."

29. Sections S-LTR (relevant to paragraph 276ADE) provides for the  refusal
    of limited leave to remain on the grounds  of  suitability  if  any  of
    certain  paragraphs  apply.  These  range  from  situations  where   an
    applicant at the date of application is the subject  of  a  deportation
    order, has convictions resulting in prison sentences  of  a  particular
    length, where the applicant's presence is not conducive to  the  public
    good, has failed to co-operate with the  Home  Office,  provided  false
    documentation or misrepresented matters, or has outstanding charges  to
    the NHS.

30. Miss Mason compared the  provisions  in  276ADE  with  the  'exception'
    provisions in s.EX of Appendix FM which sets out  the  basis  on  which
    exceptions to the general provisions described in GEN 1.1  relating  to
    those seeking to enter or remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  of
    their family life with a person who is a British citizen, is settled in
    the United Kingdom or is in  this  country  with  limited  leave  as  a
    refugee or someone granted humanitarian protection.  Specifically EX.1.
    provides:

    "This paragraph applies if:

         "(a)(i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
             relationship with a child who-

             (aa) is under the age of 18 years;

             (bb) is in the UK;

             (cc) is a British citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously
                  for at least seven years immediately preceding the date of
                  application [emphasis added]; and

         (ii) [etc.,]"

    Her argument is that there is a reason why the draughtsman did not  add
    the above clause which we have emphasised.

31.  Mr  Jarvis  accepted  that  276ADE  applied  even  where  no  specific
    application had been made under that category. Subsequent amendments to
    the Rules clarify that  this  is  the  correct  approach  (276A0).  The
    appellant's daughter is of course under 18 and there is no dispute that
    prior to leaving the United Kingdom in 2006 she had lived  continuously
    here for at least seven years.

32. The judge considered that paragraph 276ADE must be read in  conjunction
    with Appendix FMEX.1.  There is nothing  however  in  276ADE  which  is
    concerned with family life.  Appendix FM is concerned not with  private
    life but family life and the exception EX provides certain rights for a
    parent applicant who has a child under 18 who has lived in this country
    continuously for at least seven years.  In contrast paragraph 276ADE is
    a stand alone opportunity under the Rules for someone inter alia, under
    the age of 18 to obtain leave to remain on the basis of  presence  here
    alone irrespective of the circumstances of the parent or parents.   The
    judge also expressed the view that it was implicit in  the  wording  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) that the period of seven years should  immediately
    precede the raising of the issue.

33. The Supreme Court in Mahad (previously referred to as AM) (Ethiopia)  v
    Entry Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16, Lord Brown  made  the  position
    clear  regarding  the  proper  approach  to  the  construction  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  At [10] of his judgment he stated:
         "10. There is really no dispute about the proper  approach  to  the
         construction of the Rules. As  Lord  Hoffmann  said  in  Odelola  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1 WLR 1230,  1233
         (paragraph 4):
         "Like any other question of  construction,  this  [whether  a  rule
         change  applies  to  all  undetermined  applications  or  only   to
         subsequent applications] depends upon the  language  of  the  rule,
         construed  against  the  relevant  background.  That   involves   a
         consideration of the immigration rules as a whole and the  function
         which they serve in the administration of immigration policy."
         That  is  entirely  consistent  with  what  Buxton  LJ  (collecting
         together a number of dicta from past cases concerning the status of
         the rules) had said in Odelola in the Court of Appeal ([2009] 1 WLR
         126) and, indeed, with what Laws LJ said (before the House of Lords
         decision in Odelola) in the present case. Essentially it  comes  to
         this. The Rules are not to be construed  with  all  the  strictness
         applicable  to  the  construction  of  a  statute  or  a  statutory
         instrument but, instead, sensibly  according  to  the  natural  and
         ordinary meaning of the  words  used,  recognising  that  they  are
         statements of the Secretary of State's administrative  policy.  The
         respondent's counsel readily accepted that what she  meant  in  her
         written case by the proposition "the question of interpretation  is
         . . . what the Secretary of State intended his policy  to  be"  was
         that the court's task is to discover from the  words  used  in  the
         Rules what the Secretary of State must be taken to  have  intended.
         After all, under section 3(2) of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the
         Secretary of State has to lay the  Rules  before  Parliament  which
         then has the opportunity to disapprove them. True, as I observed in
         Odelola (para 33): "the question is what  the  Secretary  of  State
         intended. The rules are her rules." But that  intention  is  to  be
         discerned objectively  from  the  language  used,  not  divined  by
         reference to supposed policy  considerations.  Still  less  is  the
         Secretary  of  State's  intention  to  be   discovered   from   the
         Immigration Directorates' Instructions (IDIs) issued intermittently
         to guide immigration officers in their application  of  the  rules.
         IDIs are given pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971
         Act which provides that:
         "In the exercise of their  functions  under  this  Act  immigration
         officers shall  act  in  accordance  with  such  instructions  (not
         inconsistent with the immigration rules) as may be  given  them  by
         the Secretary of State . . ." (emphasis added).

34. It is correct that the draughtsman of the rule  has  used  a  tense  to
    describe something that has happened in the past however this needs  to
    be  read  in  conjunction  with  the  introduction   to   276ADE   "The
    requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  .....  are
    that at the date of application". This frame of reference to a point in
    time extends  to  the  present  (i.e.  the  date  of  application)  and
    indicates by use  of  the  present  perfect  tense  to  something  that
    occurred in the  past  (i.e.  completion  of  a  period  of  continuous
    presence as defined) which is  continuing.  If  the  intention  of  the
    draughtsman had been to enable  a  previously  crystallised  period  of
    continuous residence to be relied on irrespective  of  any  intervening
    event, the simple past would have been used ( ...the applicant lived  )
    or more probably, ( ...had lived).

35. The additional phrase in EX.1 ("...immediately preceding  the  date  of
    application") is readily explained by  the  absence  of  any  frame  of
    reference. Without this there would be a potential for  confusion  over
    the point in time that the qualifying period referred to.

36. It follows therefore that if someone who is under the age of  18  years
    and has previously spent seven years' continuous living in  the  United
    Kingdom such a person would be unable to meet the requirements  of  the
    rule if that residence had been broken for any of the reason apart from
    the exceptions in paragraph 276A .  In the  light  of  D1's  length  of
    absence she is unable to succeed.

37.  This  is  not  the  only  hurdle  D1  faces.   There  is  a  test   of
    reasonableness to consider which was not in the version  of  the  Rules
    which we were directed to by the parties.  Neither  party  has  offered
    any further submissions on this aspect  although  as  indicated  above,
    they were invited to  so  after  we  reserved  our  determination.  Our
    conclusion is that the test of reasonableness is one which requires  an
    evaluation of all the relevant factors comparable  to  a  human  rights
    proportionality analysis, including a consideration of where  the  best
    interests of the child lay. The question to be answered is  whether  it
    is reasonable for D1 to leave  the  United  Kingdom.  This  is  a  fact
    sensitive assessment.

38. The judge found at [123]  of  her  determination  that  the  appellant,
    witness and children can reasonably be expected to return to Libya  and
    gave adequate reasons for doing so.  We consider that  the  test  which
    the judge applied under article 8 mirrors the exercise required by  the
    rule; we do not find that D1 is able to make  out  a  claim  to  remain
    based on 276ADE.  The combined effect of the lack of risk found by  the
    judge taken with the lengthy period of time D1 spent  in  Libya  before
    her last return to the  UK,  provides  the  answer.  It  would  not  be
    unreasonable for D1 to accompany her family and as a  result  she  does
    not meet the requirements of the rule.

39. We are therefore satisfied that the Tribunal did not make an error on a
    point of law that requires the decision to be set  aside  and  re-made.
    We dismiss the appeal in the Upper Tribunal. The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal stands.








Signed

     [pic]                          Date 7 November 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


