
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04862/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 December 2013                           |On 13 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                                   mrs bs
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by K Ravi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  in  1977.   She
    appeals, with leave, against a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Easterman, promulgated on or around 27 August 2013,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 19 August 2013.

 2. Before me, on behalf of the respondent, Mr Jack stated as follows:

         "It  is  the  appellant's   application,   but   looking   at   the
         determination, one of the issues is whether there has been adequate
         reasoning and actual findings made in relation to  the  appellant's
         husband's LTTE profile, and this has to be  extended  to  the  LTTE
         profile of the other members of family as well.

         From within the determination, it can be seen  that  two  witnesses
         gave evidence on behalf of the appellant; the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge accepted their evidence in relation to the claimed profile of
         the appellant, but made no findings with regard to  their  evidence
         with regard to the appellant's husband or family members.

         There was neither a negative nor  a  positive  finding;  simply  no
         finding.

         Within the determination at paragraphs 82 through to 85  there  are
         credibility issues raised with regard to  the  appellant's  account
         regarding her husband's position.  This seems to focus  on  whether
         or not her husband is in India or not in India,  but  there  is  no
         actual finding as to what his level of LTTE activity was.

         When we look at the country guidance case law, starting with TK, at
         paragraph 150, it highlighted that family members in the LTTE would
         be a relevant risk factor, but there would need to  be  established
         and credible evidence.  This would indicate that it  was  important
         for the judge to  make  findings  as  to  the  evidence  of  family
         members' LTTE activities.

         The impact this would then have in light of GJ  is  not  clear-cut.
         The difficulty is that we cannot say what impact GJ would  have  in
         the absence of proper findings on this point.

         The first appellant in GJ had very strong family links, but he  was
         also involved in pro-LTTE activities in the UK.  His  asylum  claim
         was granted.  The second appellant, whose claim was dismissed,  had
         some family members in the  LTTE,  but  had  not  carried  out  any
         activity in the UK.

         Although there had not been any evidence that  this  appellant  has
         carried out any activity in the UK, it is open  for  argument  what
         the impact of her family members' LTTE  activities  would  be,  but
         these were not considered by the judge.

         I  cannot  say  that  this  error  was  not  material  and  because
         credibility findings have to be made in the round, I  would  accept
         that there needs to be a de novo hearing, even  though  it  is  not
         accepted that the other grounds raise any arguable error of law."

 3. For the reasons  set  out  fairly  by  Mr  Jack,  I  agree  that  Judge
    Easterman's determination contained a material error of law  such  that
    his decision must be set aside and re-made.

 4.  Having  had  regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  President's   Practice
    Statements, in my judgment the effect of the  errors  contained  within
    the determination as identified above was such that the  appellant  was
    effectively deprived of a fair hearing.  I so find because as a  result
    of the judge's failure to make findings of fact on the relevant matters
    identified above, he did not properly  consider  the  evidence  in  the
    round.  Because there will now have to be a de novo hearing, the nature
    and extent of the judicial fact-finding which will now be necessary  in
    order for this decision to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to
    the overriding objective, it is appropriate to remit this case  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, and I shall so order.   I  accordingly  make  this
    decision below, and shall also give directions for trial.

Decision

I  set  aside  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal   Easterman   as
containing a material error of law, and direct that this appeal be  remitted
for a re-hearing by the First-tier Tribunal, sitting at Hatton Cross, to  be
put before any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman.





Signed:                                 Date:   4 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


