
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04121/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision  & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 XHEFRI KETA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert (counsel) instructed by Montague
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowes,  promulgated  on  18  September
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal to a limited  extent.  She  found
that the appellant's application remains outstanding before the  respondent.


Background

3.    The Appellant was born  on  21  August  1996  and  is  a  national  of
Albania.

4.    On 26 January 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for further leave to remain in the UK.  The  appellant's  asylum
claim had been refused on 15 November 2013, but, because  of  his  age,  the
appellant had been granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK until  18
February 2014.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Bowes  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision "....to the limited extent  that  the  respondent  had
not  given  full  reasons  for  her  decision.   The   application   remains
outstanding before her".

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 8th October 2015 Judge  Robertson
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia:

    "Whilst  the  grounds  are  framed  on  the  basis  of  perversity  and
    irrationality, and this lacks arguable merit, it is arguable  that  the
    Judge had all the relevant evidence before him on which  to  find  that
    the appellant had in fact burgled the flat  in  question,  which  would
    include an assessment of why, if he had in fact burgled the  flat,  the
    police would attack him and threaten him as alleged by  the  Appellant,
    rather than simply prosecute him. It is arguable that the Judge  failed
    to make adequate findings on material matters. Permission is  therefore
    granted."

The Hearing

7.    Mr Duffy for the respondent told me that there  had  been  discussions
between parties' agents before the hearing commenced, and  the  parties  now
agreed that the decision is tainted by material errors of law.  He  told  me
that the Secretary of State's decision is not defective and that  the  Judge
should have determined all matters before him and come to  a  conclusion  on
whether or not the appellant was credible and whether or not  the  appellant
would be at risk on return to Albania. He  urged  me  to  set  the  decision
aside and to remit the case First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

8.    Mr Gilbert, for the appellant, agreed  entirely  with  what  had  been
said by Mr Duffy. He told me that the Judge's  approach  was  "strange"  and
betrayed a failure to make adequate findings on material  matters.  He  told
me that although article 8 ECHR is clearly at large in this case, the  Judge
had failed  to  make  any  findings  and  has  elided  that  aspect  of  the
appellant's claim. He told me that "the Judge simply stopped too early".  Mr
Gilbert also said that the appellant had not  been  represented  before  the
First-tier Tribunal & had not appeared at the hearing, because  neither  the
appellant nor his solicitors knew that the hearing was taking place. It  was
only on 11 August 2015 (when  those  instructing  Mr  Gilbert  made  enquiry
about the date this case was likely  to  be  listed  before  the  First-tier
tribunal) the appellant and his solicitors discovered  that  a  hearing  had
taken place on  30  July  2015  and  the  Judge's  decision  would  soon  be
promulgated.

9.    I asked parties representatives if this was a  matter  that  could  be
determined by me if I set aside the decision. Without  hesitation,  parties'
agents chorused their reply in the negative. Mr Duffy went on  to  say  that
as the appellant has been deprived of the opportunity to  give  evidence  it
would be unfair not to remit this case to the  First-tier  to  be  heard  of
new.

Analysis

10.   It is clear from the decision  that  neither  the  appellant  nor  his
representatives attended the hearing on 30 July 2015.  It  is  not  disputed
that  neither  the  appellant  nor  his  representatives   received   proper
intimation of the time, date and place of the hearing. It  is  now  conceded
that the appellant was deprived of the opportunity to give evidence.

11.   The Judge  considered  the  case  on  the  basis  of  the  documentary
evidence, supplemented by submissions  made  by  a  Home  Office  presenting
officer. At [3] to [5] the Judge summarises the appellant's  claim.  Between
[6] and [12] the Judge summarises the reasons given by  the  respondent  for
refusal of the appellant's applications. Between [21]  and  [26]  the  Judge
sets out her reasons for finding that central  aspects  of  the  appellant's
claim are not credible, then at [27]  &  [28]  the  Judge  shies  away  from
making a decision. Instead of continuing an analysis of the evidence  placed
before the Judge, the Judge says that she  does  not  have  enough  material
before her to reach a decision. There is merit Mr Duffy's admission that  at
that stage the Judge was seized of this case and it  was  incumbent  on  the
Judge to make a decision. There is equally merit in Mr Gilbert's  submission
that "the Judge simply stopped too early".

12.   Although  the  Judge  analysed  some  of  the  core  elements  of  the
appellant's claim the Judge failed  to  engage  with  every  aspect  of  the
appellant's claim, and did not make findings in fact on material aspects  of
the appellant's claim which were clearly the subject matter of  dispute.  At
[12] and [16] the Judge records that the  respondent  considered  article  8
ECHR and that submissions were made on article 8 ECHR, but the  decision  is
bereft of findings of fact in relation to article 8  ECHR  and  contains  no
analysis of the impact of the facts and circumstances of this  case  on  any
ECHR rights that the appellant may have. No balancing  exercise  is  carried
out; there is no assessment of proportionality;  no  conclusion  is  reached
about whether or not ECHR rights are engaged.

13.   I find that the decision is tainted by material  errors  of  law.  The
failure of the First-tier Tribunal to  address  and  determine  the  central
issues in this case, and the appellant's article 8 ECHR  claim,  constitutes
a clear error of law. This error I consider to be  material  since  had  the
Tribunal conducted this exercise the  outcome  could  have  been  different.
That in my view is the correct test to apply.

14.   The Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set  aside  in  its
entirety. All matters must be determined of new.

REMITTAL TO FT

15.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a)    the effect of the error has been to deprive a party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b)    the nature or extent of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16.   In this case I have  determined  that  the  case  should  be  remitted
because parties agree that the Appellant did not have  a  fair  hearing  and
was deprived of the opportunity to give evidence. In this case none  of  the
findings of fact are to stand.

17.   I consequently remit  the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
sitting at Hatton Cross, before any First-tier Immigration Judge other  than
Judge Bowes.

CONCLUSION

Decision

18.   The decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by material  errors
of law.

19.   I set aside the decision. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed      Date 17th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
