
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 December 2016                       |On 17 January 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     V S
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
                    Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka.   He  appeals  against  the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  13  June  2014  to  make  removal
    directions under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, his
    human rights and asylum-based claims having been rejected.  His  appeal
    to a First-tier Judge was dismissed,  and  an  argument  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the First-tier Judge's decision  contained  an  error  or
    errors of law was also dismissed.  Subsequently the appellant  appealed
    to the Court of Appeal, and by consent it was ordered that  the  appeal
    was allowed and the matter was remitted back to the Upper Tribunal  for
    reconsideration.

2.   Mr O'Callaghan observed at the outset that  the  judge  had  found  the
    appellant to be credible except that the judge  had  doubts  about  the
    credibility of letters sent by the appellant's mother  to  him  in  the
    United Kingdom on the  basis  that  they  might  he  self-serving,  but
    considered that in any event taken at their highest they showed that he
    was of some interest to the  authorities  and  might  be  monitored  on
    return and did not suggest he was on a stop list.  Otherwise the  judge
    had accepted the appellant's claim  to  have  been  detained  and  ill-
    treated and to have made a confession.  In that regard  Mr  O'Callaghan
    drew attention particularly to the answer to question 154 at  interview
    which concerned the confession signed by the appellant.  From  that  it
    was said that he was a member of the LTTE and that he and Appan, who is
    said to have been a senior LTTE intelligence official, and who died  in
    2014, had joined forces  to  re-establish  the  LTTE.   Mr  O'Callaghan
    argued that in light of the country guidance in GJ  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC) there was a clear relevance in showing that he fell within a risk
    factor as set out in that decision.  Subsequently there were  questions
    after the appellant had signed the confession about money from the bank
    and gold and jewellery and as to  where  these  were  hidden,  and  the
    appellant had denied knowing anything about these things.

3.   The judge had asked himself the right  question  at  question  29  with
    regard to the perception there would be of the appellant, but  had  not
    factored that into the evaluation at paragraph 30.  The  appellant  was
    therefore on record as helping a very high level LTTE operative in  re-
    establishing the LTTE and also was suspected  of  being  aware  of  the
    whereabouts of money which would assist the LTTE.

4.   As to whether this level of interest was inconsistent with the  judge's
    comments that the authorities had no doubt  satisfied  themselves  that
    the appellant was not himself a risk, reference was made  to  paragraph
    170, 262 and 275 in GJ and also it  had  been  accepted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal that it is possible for detainees or  their  families  to  use
    bribery as a method of release from detention or to leave  the  country
    and that that had no  bearing  on  whether  or  not  they  remained  of
    interest to the authorities.  It was reasonably likely on the facts  of
    the case that in this instance it would be recorded as  an  escape  and
    with the appellant's accepted history of being in  London  for  several
    years and returning with that record he  would  face  a  real  risk  on
    return in line with the guidance in GJ.  It was important therefore  as
    to what the confession had been for.   The  judge  had  not  taken  the
    perception into account as he should and this was an  error  and  on  a
    proper consideration of the facts the appeal should be allowed.

5.   In his submissions Mr Avery  argued  that  the  judge's  reasoning  was
    sound and  there  had  never  been  any  significant  interest  in  the
    appellant in his own right.  There had been  no  confession  about  the
    money and jewellery and gold.  The findings of the judge  at  paragraph
    30 were sound and should be followed with regard to the lack of ongoing
    interest in the appellant.  He would be unlikely to be seen as posing a
    threat.  It was clear from GJ that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  had  a
    sophisticated intelligence system and there was no evidence of attempts
    to undermine  the  State.   The  authorities  would  be  aware  of  the
    circumstances in  which  confessions  were  signed  and  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant knew anything about the money.

6.   By way of reply Mr O'Callaghan argued that the terms of the  confession
    were important and that was the confession the authorities would  have.
    It was clear from GJ at paragraph 89 that there was climate of impunity
    and it was the case that if a confession had been made it would have to
    be made again if it was wished to use it before the courts.   The  case
    fell firmly within the country guidance.  The judge's failure  to  deal
    with the point of how the appellant would be perceived was significant.
     It was not enough to say that  the  appellant  had  not  confessed  to
    knowing the whereabouts of the money and  jewellery  and  gold.   Those
    were questions after the confession had  been  made.   The  authorities
    remained interested in that point.  The interest would continue.

7.   I reserved my determination.

8.   This is the remaking of the decision in this appeal  in  light  of  the
    order of the Court of Appeal.  It is proper to take the findings of the
    First-tier Judge as undisturbed, and as a consequence to bear  in  mind
    that he accepted that the appellant had been detained  and  ill-treated
    and signed a confession on the terms set out above.  In addition he was
    questioned about money, gold  and  jewellery  at  the  bank  which  the
    authorities suspected was being used  to  finance  the  LTTE.   In  the
    country guidance case of GJ it was noted  inter  alia  with  regard  to
    persons at real risk of persecution or serious harm on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka that this includes individuals who are, or who are  perceived  to
    be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because
    they are, or are perceived to have a significant role  in  relation  to
    post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal  of
    hostilities within Sri Lanka.  It was noted for  example  at  paragraph
    275 when considering evidence  of  a  Sri  Lankan  practitioner,  whose
    evidence was considered to be useful and reliable, that the seriousness
    of any charges against an  individual  will  not  be  determinative  of
    whether a bribe could be paid and that it was possible to leave through
    the airport even when a person is being  actively  sought.   There  was
    also expert evidence from Dr Smith whose view was that a person who had
    previously been released from custody through bribery might be included
    on the stop list.

9.   It was noted by the Court of Appeal in MP and NT [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829
    at paragraph 50, commenting on the country guidance in GJ, that it  was
    clear that the Tribunal believed that "diaspora  activism",  actual  or
    perceived, was the principal basis on which the government of Sri Lanka
    was likely to treat returning Tamils as  posing  a  current  or  future
    threat and that that  was  a  conclusion  to  which  the  Tribunal  was
    entitled to come.
10.  In this regard the wording of the confession  that  I  have  set  about
    above was clearly, as Mr O'Callaghan has argued, of  significance.   It
    is, as Mr O'Callaghan argued, a matter of perception.  The terms of the
    signed confession are such as to indicate that there  is  a  real  risk
    that the appellant would be perceived as a diaspora activist bearing in
    mind the association he said he had in Sri  Lanka  with  a  significant
    LTTE activist, albeit one who had been shot.  The ongoing  interest  in
    the money and the gold and jewellery were not without relevance to that
    also, although it is right of course to note that Mr Avery pointed  out
    that no confession was signed in relation to that.  But bearing in mind
    the guidance in GJ, the acceptance by the judge of the  credibility  of
    the appellant's claim to have been  detained  and  ill-treated  in  the
    manner in which he was and the terms of the confession which he signed,
    and the fact that his release on payment of a bribe is not inconsistent
    with an ongoing  interest  in  him,  I  consider  that  his  claim  for
    international protection is made out and accordingly his  appeal  under
    the Refugee Convention is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

