
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04893/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 March 2016                      |On 12 April 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                               PB (SRI LANKA)
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. B. Jones, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born on [ ]  1954,  is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   He
    appealed on asylum and human rights grounds  against  the  respondent's
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom  by  way  of  directions
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. His appeal was heard on 25 August 2015 and in a decision promulgated on
    24 September 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monson dismissed the
    appeal on all grounds raised.  In so doing an anonymity order was  made
    which I now remake for the purpose of  the  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom  on  a  visit  visa  which
    expired on 22 April 2013.  Shortly after its expiry on 30 April 2013 he
    claimed asylum on the basis of his fear of the Sri Lankan  authorities.
    That application was refused on 25 June 2013 and  he  appealed  against
    the decision.  That  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Beg.  The appellant sought to have the hearing adjourned as he
    was unrepresented.  The application was refused and the  appellant  did
    not attend the hearing and the judge went on to  hear  the  appeal  and
    dismiss it.  She did so in a decision promulgated on  14  August  2013.
    The appellant applied out of time for permission to  appeal  which  was
    refused on 16 September 2013.  A like application was made to the Upper
    Tribunal but also subsequently refused.

 4. Prior to the appellant's consequent removal he was detained.  On 7 July
    2013 a Rule 35 report was issued by a doctor at  the  detention  centre
    who had concerns that  the  appellant  may  have  been  the  victim  of
    torture.   This  report  was  relied  upon  by  the  appellant's  legal
    representatives as a trigger to a fresh right  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal of asylum.  In the grounds of appeal challenging  the  decision
    of 3 July 2014 to remove the appellant to Sri Lanka it  was  submitted,
    on the appellant's behalf, that there was fresh and  reliable  evidence
    to corroborate his account and that he was  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities resulting in his claimed ill-treatment.  It was argued that
    this new evidence constituted independent evidence of  torture  and  in
    light of it and other evidence it was submitted that the appellant fell
    within the risk categories identified in GJ and Others (post-civil war:
    returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  (i.e.  that  the
    appellant would be perceived as  someone  seeking  to  destabilise  the
    single Sri Lankan state).

 5. That led to a CMR hearing taking place on 19 August 2014 at  which  the
    appellant's appeal was listed for substantive hearing on 25 February of
    the following  year.   Shortly  before  that  hearing  the  appellant's
    representative wrote to the Tribunal to say that he was  in  possession
    of a DVD/disc which he believed  contained  material  relevant  to  his
    appeal.  He wished the DVD to be played  at  the  hearing  and  it  was
    requested that the Tribunal provide appropriate machinery to enable  it
    to be considered.  At the hearing the appellant was represented  by  Ms
    Asanovic of Counsel and Mr  Harvey,  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,
    appeared on behalf of the respondent.  In  her  skeleton  argument,  Ms
    Asanovic said at paragraph 4 that the appellant's sur place  activities
    included taking part in a drama which carried an antiregime and/or pro-
    Tamil message  which  was  recorded  and  was  on  the  Tamil  National
    Remembrance  Foundation  UK  website,  the   address   of   which   was
    http://tnrf.org.uk/2014-videos.  This was the DVD referred  to  in  the
    letter from those instructing her.  Consequently at the outset  of  the
    hearing she applied for an adjournment which was  not  opposed  by  the
    respondent.  There was no machinery available  to  consider  this  DVD.
    Judge Ross gave directions for the ongoing  processing  of  the  appeal
    before the Tribunal.   Unfortunately,  as  Judge  Monson  says  in  his
    decision at paragraph 34, there was a complete and unexplained  failure
    to comply with them.  The consolidated appellant's bundle did not reach
    the Tribunal until the day prior to  hearing.   While  it  included  an
    additional witness statement from the appellant it did  not  deal  with
    the DVD,  including  the  circumstances  in  which  it  had  come  into
    existence and the extent to which the filmed footage of the play  shown
    on it had been published on the internet.  There was though an  English
    language translation of the play shown on the DVD at pages 32 to 43  of
    the consolidated bundle.

 6. Unfortunately the directions made by Judge Ross had not included any in
    relation to the provision of machinery for facilitating the playing  of
    the DVD.  This was acknowledged by the appellant's representatives in a
    letter forwarded to the hearing centre  in  which  they  requested  the
    provision of a DVD player so that the  appellant's  evidence  could  be
    played in open court at the substantive hearing.

 7. At the outset of the hearing  before  Judge  Monson,  Ms  Francis,  the
    appellant's then Counsel, applied for an adjournment  on  two  grounds.
    Firstly that the respondent's bundle was incomplete in that it did  not
    for instance contain the respondent's response to the Rule  35  medical
    report and also that no DVD player had been provided by the Tribunal.

 8. Judge Monson refused the adjournment application on the basis  that  no
    complaint about alleged omissions from the respondent's bundle had been
    ventilated at the hearing on 25 February 2015 and that in any event  he
    was satisfied that any  further  documents  from  the  respondent  were
    unnecessary to ensure the appellant received a fair hearing.  As to the
    second ground the judge directed the Tribunal  staff  provide  for  the
    hearing a DVD player.  However, it was incompatible with the age of the
    DVD provided.  The judge was given evidence  about  the  DVD  from  the
    appellant's representative.  He said it was a recording of a play  that
    had been performed the London ExCeL Centre in  November  2014  and  the
    same recording appeared on YouTube and on the website referred to by Ms
    Asanovic in her skeleton argument.  The YouTube recording was  accessed
    on the representative's iPhone and an extract shown to the  judge.   It
    was agreed that the information on YouTube showed  that  the  recording
    had been uploaded to it on 8 January 2015 and that there had  been  229
    "hits" since that date.   It  was  also  agreed  that  the  appellant's
    representative (as opposed to his Counsel) would go through the  entire
    recording making notes as to when the appellant appeared  in  the  play
    and steps were taken for the Home Office Presenting Officer to view the
    recording during the lunchtime break.

 9. Following an adjournment during which Judge Monson dealt  with  another
    appeal this appellant's  hearing  resumed  at  15.15  hours.   At  that
    juncture the judge was provided with a schedule in  manuscript  showing
    when the appellant made appearances  in  the  play.   The  Home  Office
    Presenting  Officer  had  viewed  the  entire  recording  as  had   the
    appellant's Counsel and the Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  accepted
    that the drama depicted in the recording carried an  antiregime  and/or
    pro-Tamil message.  The only thing  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer did not accept was that the appellant was an actor in the  play
    and/or that he was recognisable as an actor in the play.  Judge  Monson
    felt that he was in a position to exercise his own  judgment  regarding
    recognition particularly in light of the fact that  the  appellant  was
    able to give oral evidence in relation to his involvement.  He felt  it
    unnecessary and disproportionate to adjourn the hearing rather than  to
    receive the appellant's oral evidence on the one issue  about  the  DVD
    which remained in controversy (namely whether he appeared in  the  play
    recorded on the DVD).

10. The appellant gave evidence as to his involvement  in  the  production.
    Additionally he gave evidence in relation  to  another  aspect  of  his
    claim by producing three colour photographs of which two  depicted  him
    taking part in demonstrations in the United Kingdom.

11. Judge Monson went on to consider the evidence  before  him  recognising
    that he was "Devaseelan bound" by the earlier decision  of  Judge  Beg.
    In her submissions the appellant's Counsel accepted that the principles
    of Devaseelan (Second Appeals - ECHR -  Extra-Territorial  Effect)  Sri
    Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702 applied with  respect  to  the  decision  of
    Judge Beg but that there had been since then two  years  of  sur  place
    activity, that the appellant had joined a proscribed  organisation  and
    that he was highly visible in the play shown on the DVD.

12. The conclusions of Judge Monson's  analysis  of  the  evidence  can  be
    gleaned from paragraphs 59, 60 and 61 of his decision which state:-

         "59. Turning to the appellant's refugee sur place activities, there
             is more evidence now probative of  such  activities  than  was
             made available to Judge Beg.   Nonetheless,  there  are  still
             some remarkable gaps in the evidence.  The appellant has never
             provided  any  documentary  evidence  to  support   the   G-TV
             television broadcast of an alleged interview conducted by him,
             and he has not brought forward any evidence from a third party
             or third parties confirming his alleged role  in  the  British
             Tamil Forum or any other organisation.  The  appellant's  name
             also does not appear on the internet, or in  any  print  media
             (including in a programme of events  for  the  celebration  of
             Heroes' Day at ExCel Exhibition Centre) in connection with his
             asserted sur place activities.

         60.  I am persuaded  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  that  the
             appellant has participated in at least two public performances
             of plays, most notably the play which is shown on the  CD.   I
             accept that a recording of this  play  has  been  uploaded  to
             YouTube and, although not shown proof of this, I  am  prepared
             to accept it has also been uploaded to the website referred to
             by Ms Asanovic in her skeleton argument.  Despite  an  absence
             of satisfactory supporting documentary  evidence,  I  am  also
             prepared to accept that the play was performed  at  the  ExCel
             Exhibition Centre on Heroes' Day on 27 November 2014 in  front
             of a large audience.  I am not prepared  to  accept  that  the
             audience was as large as  30,000  people  as  alleged  by  the
             appellant.  The actual size of the audience is easily  capable
             of  objective  verification  from  reliable  and   independent
             sources  of  evidence  within  this  jurisdiction,   and   the
             appellant has not brought forward any evidence of this nature.
              I consider his estimate is a gross exaggeration.  However, as
             was conceded by Ms Ibe, and as is apparent  from  the  English
             language transcript of the play, the play carries a  pro-Tamil
             and antigovernment message.  It constitutes a protest  against
             the Sri Lankan government's denial  of  Tamil  nationhood  and
             self-determination, and it accuses the Sri  Lankan  government
             of genocide.  I accept the appellant acted the role  which  he
             described in his oral evidence, that he spoke the lines  which
             he says he did, and that if the Sri Lankan authorities  wished
             to identify the actors who took part in the  drama,  including
             the appellant, they would probably be able to do so, deploying
             visual recognition technology if necessary.  The appellant was
             not wearing  a  mask,  and  so  depending  on  the  degree  of
             magnification of  the  footage  and/or  the  location  of  the
             observer in the auditorium, the appellant was and  is  capable
             of being recognised as one of the actors.

         61.   Nonetheless,  I  do  not  consider  that  the  appellant  has
             discharged the burden of proving, even to the  lower  standard
             of proof, that he plays, or would be perceived as  playing,  a
             significant role in post-conflict Tamil separatist  activities
             in London such as to excite the adverse interest  of  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities.  As previously  noted,  the  appellant  is
             essentially operating under conditions of anonymity:  he  acts
             anonymously and he protests anonymously.  He  has  only  shown
             participation as an attendee,  not  an  organiser,  in  a  few
             demonstrations and in two plays (and the content of  the  2013
             play is unknown, save that the appellant does  not  appear  to
             have been acting a member of the government or  army,  judging
             by his attire).  Moreover,  it  is  fanciful  to  characterise
             plays such as the one the appellant performed in last year  at
             the ExCel as being on a par  with  a  piece  of  investigative
             journalism  or  a  war  crimes  deposition.   There  are   not
             substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities would  be  angered  by  such  a  play  (which  has
             attracted little interest on  the  internet,  judging  by  the
             number of hits on YouTube since a recording of it was uploaded
             in January 2015) because it reveals 'the  truth'  about  their
             culpability in genocide, still less that  they  would  thereby
             acquire an adverse interest in the actors."

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Monson's decision which
    was initially refused by Designated Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    McCarthy in a decision dated 6 November 2015.  However, permission  was
    subsequently granted by Judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Perkins  on  22
    January 2016.  The reasons for his decision are:-

         "1.  Although Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy appears
             to have given very full consideration to the grounds that were
             before  him  it  seems  likely  that   he  was  not  aware  of
             Additional Grounds settled by Counsel in the case  and  served
             in time.

         2.   All grounds may be argued but, with respect to the appellant's
             representatives,  this  is  a  case  where  the  grounds  have
             generated more heat than light.  For  example  the  suggestion
             that the Judge erred by giving weight to the unsworn  evidence
             of the Appellant's solicitor might be thought  ill  considered
             and rude but meritless.  Similarly it may be that there was no
             material error in the admission of  a  hastily  prepared  oral
             statement concerning the number of appearances  the  Appellant
             made in a dramatic performance.  It will assist  the  Tribunal
             if both parties could make conspicuous efforts to  concentrate
             on the relevant of the alleged deficiencies of the  First-tier
             Tribunal.

         3.   I have given permission  because  I  think  it  is  reasonably
             arguable that the Judge should have found that  the  Appellant
             was at risk  in  the  event  of  his  return  because  of  his
             involvement in Tamil separatist groups in the United  Kingdom.
             The Judge may well have considered this the main point in  the
             appeal and may well have reached sustainable  conclusions  but
             the contrary argument merits consideration.

         4.   I am concerned that  the  Appellant  is  so  agitated  by  the
             arguable failure of the Tribunal to make express  findings  on
             the article from the OSU newspaper.  I do not  understand  why
             it is thought to be so important.   I  particularly  draw  the
             Appellant's attention to my difficulties on  this  point.   It
             may be that he considers the point so obvious that he does not
             need to spell it out.  If that is the case then he is wrong.

         5.   I see no need to refer the file  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge  for  his  comments.   He  is  not  accused  of   acting
             improperly but of misdirecting himself.  If either party  sees
             a need for the Judge's comments then that party should make an
             application."

14. Thus the appeal came before me today.

15. In the renewed grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  there  is  a
    complaint that the grounds settled by Counsel were not  linked  to  the
    permission application and consequently Designated Judge  McCarthy  did
    not address those grounds but only the initial grounds of appeal  which
    had been put before him.  The renewed grounds of appeal emphasised that
    the appellant relies on both the "initial and additional grounds".  The
    renewed grounds conclude by urging the Tribunal to take account of  the
    additional grounds  "which assert a  significant  level  of  procedural
    unfairness in relation to the judge's conduct of the proceedings in the
    First-tier Tribunal".

16. So that there is no further misunderstanding  I  confirm  that  I  have
    considered both the "initial" and "additional" grounds which  Ms  Jones
    relied on in her submissions to me today.

17. Ms Jones sought to highlight that the judge had misdirected himself  as
    to the risk the appellant would face upon return to Sri Lanka in  light
    of the  evidence  in  relation  to  his  2012  detention  and  diaspora
    activities in the United Kingdom.  In particular the judge  has  failed
    to make a finding as to whether he  accepts  the  Rule  35  report  and
    whether or not it constitutes evidence of torture  in  detention.   The
    judge cannot simply dismiss it by reason of it not being  corroborated.
    By not having sight of the respondent's response to that Rule 35 report
    the judge  has  erred  in  not  enabling  himself  to  have  the  "full
    evidential picture" before him.  Ms Jones accepted that  Judge  Beg  in
    the first decision had rejected the  2012  detention  but  argued  that
    Judge Monson should have made findings and did not do so in relation to
    it.  He simply  "implicitly"  rejected  it  in  an  unsatisfactory  way
    without properly surveying the evidence.

18. She then referred me to the issue relating to the ORU newspaper article
    and urged me to accept that the judge had erred in not recognising  the
    importance of it within the context of the  background  material  which
    shows that the appellant was associating with proscribed organisations.
     She complains that there is no mention of this  article  within  Judge
    Monson's decision.  I was urged to find that Judge Monson  had  further
    erred by accepting that the government of Sri Lanka  relies  on  facial
    recognition techniques yet  concluding  that  the  appellant  could  be
    "anonymous" if returned to Sri Lanka and that the finding that it would
    be "fanciful to characterise  plays  such  as  the  one  the  appellant
    performed in last year at the ExCel as being on a par with a  piece  of
    investigative journalism or a war crimes deposition"  was  contrary  to
    the guidance and identified risk categories within GJ.   She  submitted
    the appellant's found diaspora  activities  placed  him  at  risk  upon
    return.

19. She then argued that there was a procedural unfairness in refusing  the
    adjournment application at the hearing and  in  not  watching  the  DVD
    itself.  Beyond that the judge had restricted the appellant's evidence.
     However, she accepted that the position was not  as  asserted  in  the
    grounds and that there was only a "bit of restriction".

20. In response to Mr Melvin's submissions and questions from me  Ms  Jones
    accepted there was no finding within GJ  that  the  government  of  Sri
    Lanka actually had available facial recognition technology albeit  that
    it is funding research into it and "may" be using it.

21. Mr Melvin relied on his own skeleton argument and  the  Rule  24  reply
    dated 22 February 2016.  He argued that the  grant  of  permission  had
    been a generous one and in particular focused on the issue of  risk  on
    return.  However, Judge Monson has considered this in the round  having
    correctly  directed  himself  to  appropriate  country   guidance   and
    background material alongside the subjective evidence of the appellant.
     The conclusions that he came to  were  open  to  be  reached  and  the
    judge's  decision  contains  no  material  error  of  law.   Mr  Melvin
    emphasised that the Rule 35 report was dealt with in  the  respondent's
    decision and a reply to it was served upon the appellant whilst he  was
    in detention.  Judge Monson has properly dealt with the issue and there
    was no reason for him to adjourn the hearing for further disclosure  of
    it.  The ORU letter  takes  the  appellant's  appeal  no  further,  the
    evidence was in the bundle and has been taken  into  account.   In  any
    event there is background material to suggest that such articles easily
    appear in Sri Lankan newspapers  and  there  is  nothing  to  tie  this
    particular  appellant   with   the   organisation.    The   appellant's
    performance in the play is accepted.  However, it is  mere  speculation
    that the  judge  would  have  come  to  any  other  conclusion  had  he
    personally watched the DVD.  He received evidence in  relation  to  the
    performance and the play and in particular that it was  poking  fun  at
    the ex-president of Sri Lanka.  Moreover, it had not been served by the
    appellant's representatives.  The judge has  dealt  with  all  relevant
    issues.

22. On my own analysis the judge has promulgated  a  careful  and  detailed
    decision and has given cogent and sustainable reasons which were  fully
    open to him on the evidence for concluding that this appellant did  not
    leave Sri Lanka because of persecution and that  he  can  return  there
    without facing a risk of serious harm.  This is  dealt  with  by  Judge
    Monson at paragraph 56 of his decision.  He was obliged to find himself
    "Devaseelan bound" and in light of his  consideration  of  Judge  Beg's
    earlier decision and the further material that he had to  consider  and
    which is detailed at paragraph 47 of his decision, the Rule 35  medical
    report, the lawyers'  letter  and  additional  evidence  and  documents
    relating to  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities,  the  judge  was
    entitled not only to make the adverse credibility findings that he did,
    but also that in light of the advanced sur place activities to find the
    appellant did not fall into one of the risk  categories  identified  in
    GJ.  It was always open to the appellant's  representatives  to  submit
    independent medical evidence.  None was provided to Judge  Monson.   He
    had before him the Rule 35 report which he found  was  insufficient  to
    establish the claimed medical condition.  There is nothing unreasonable
    or irrational in that finding and on a plain reading  of  the  decision
    and  the  judge's  findings  I  do  not  accept  that  he  was  seeking
    corroboration of the appellant's medical position as is asserted.   The
    judge has dealt with  the  Rule  35  report  in  the  context  of  "new
    evidence" arising since the hearing before Judge Beg and  was  entitled
    to come to the conclusions and findings that he did which are  detailed
    at paragraph 48 of his decision.  The burden of proving his case always
    rests with the appellant and it was  always  open  to  him  to  provide
    additional medical evidence if so advised.  He chose not to.  The judge
    has carefully analysed the Rule 35 report and the conclusions  that  he
    came to in relation to it were open to be made.

23. Similarly the judge properly  analysed  the  other  evidence  that  was
    before him.  He does not have to deal with each and every  item  within
    the appellant's bundle and there is no  error  in  not  making  express
    findings on  the  article  from  the  ORU  newspaper.   The  judge  has
    considered the totality of the evidence in the round before  coming  to
    his conclusions.

24. This is an appellant who has had a fair hearing.  The judge  gave  time
    for an analysis of the appellant's part in the play on the  DVD  to  be
    prepared and took evidence in relation to it.  I  am  not  prepared  to
    accept that the appellant's evidence has in any way  been  fettered  by
    Judge Monson.  The judge was not bound  to  agree  to  the  adjournment
    application given the procedural history of this appeal and the role in
    it of the appellant's own representatives.  He was doing no  more  than
    pursuing the overriding objective  in  not  only  giving  time  to  the
    appellant's  representatives  to  ensure  a  fair  hearing   but   also
    proceeding with the appeal on the day that it was  listed  before  him.
    Judge Monson found at paragraph 60 of his decision that  to  the  lower
    standard of proof the appellant had participated in at least two public
    performances of plays and "most notably the play which is shown on  the
    CD".  He also accepted that it had been uploaded  to  YouTube  and  was
    entitled to conclude that  albeit  the  play  had  been  performed  the
    audience was not as large as 30,000 people as claimed by the appellant.
     He also found that the play carried  a  pro-Tamil  and  antigovernment
    message and constituted "a protest against the Sri Lankan  government's
    denial of Tamil nationhood and self-determination, and it  accuses  the
    Sri Lankan government of genocide".  He  also  accepted  the  appellant
    acted the role which he described in his oral evidence to Judge  Monson
    and that the appellant was and is capable of being recognised as one of
    the actors within the play.

25. Judge Monson has then gone on to  apply  the  factual  matrix  of  this
    appeal to GJ and the findings at  paragraph  61  of  his  decision  are
    sustainable ones in light of his analysis.  It was open to him  on  the
    evidence to find that this particular appellant's  diaspora  activities
    would not place him at risk upon return to Sri Lanka when  setting  his
    own findings into the context of the risk categories identified in GJ.

Conclusions

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

27. I do not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed                              Date  31 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

