
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04389/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 10 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     SME
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms O E Duru, Jemek Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary

    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellants  because  of  the  nature  of  the  case.   I  consider   it
    appropriate to make  a  similar  order  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
    Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    To give effect to this order the appellant is to be referred to by  the
    initials above.

 1. In her decision and reasons statement  promulgated  on  29  June  2015,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phull found that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    refugee.

 2. The appellant challenges that decision on three grounds:

      a. the judge erred in her approach to credibility and plausibility,

      b. the judge failed to give adequate reasons, and

      c. the judge failed to take account of the fact that  the  appellant's
         brother had been recognised as a refugee in the UK because  of  his
         conversion to the Baha'i religion and the fact this relationship of
         itself might put the appellant at risk on return to Iran.

 3. Permission to appeal has been granted only in  relation  to  the  third
    ground.  There has been no renewal of the other two grounds  direct  to
    the Upper Tribunal and, in my opinion, any such application would  have
    been bound to fail.

 4. At the start of the hearing I reminded  the  representatives  that  the
    penultimate sentence of paragraph 17 confirms that the appellant's case
    was put on the footing  stated  in  the  third  ground.   Paragraph  17
    contains the submissions relating  to  the  appellant's  case  and  the
    sentence in question reads, "If  [the  appellant]  tells  [the  Iranian
    authorities] about her brother and father's conversion  to  the  Baha'i
    faith this will also put her at risk on return."

 5. Ms  Pettersen  confirmed  that  Judge  Phull  failed  to  address  this
    submission in her decision and reasons statement  and  the  failure  to
    make findings on a relevant issue amounted to an error on  a  point  of
    law.  Ms Pettersen suggested that the appeal be remitted to Judge Phull
    to complete her findings.  I  indicated  that  I  would  consider  that
    possibility but first I wanted to examine the available evidence to see
    whether remittal was necessary.

 6. After discussion the case with Ms Duru and Ms Pettersen,  I  identified
    the following.

      a. Judge Phull accepted the appellant's brother had been recognised as
         a refugee because of his conversion to the Baha'i religion.

      b. When he applied for asylum in the UK, the appellant's  brother  had
         claimed that he was of adverse interest to the Iranian  authorities
         because of his activities for the Baha'i religion  before  he  fled
         Iran.  Ms Pettersen  acknowledged  that  his  credibility  was  not
         disputed as was evident from the fact he had been recognised  as  a
         refugee.

      c. Although not provided to  Judge  Phull,  the  Home  Office  Country
         Information and Guidance  report,  Iran:  Baha'is  (November  2014)
         confirmed the members of this religion have a well-founded fear  of
         persecution merely because of their religion.  This is, of  course,
         in addition to the fact that those who abandon Islam  are  seen  as
         apostates and face persecution on that basis as well.

      d. Extracts from the Home Office Iran: Country of  Origin  Information
         Report 26 September 2013 were provided to Judge Phull  and  I  have
         had regard to that report in full.  Section 23  reveals  how  women
         are treated and it is evident that Iran is  a  patriarchal  society
         where women are associated with the beliefs  of  their  close  male
         relatives.

      e. Judge Phull accepted  that  the  appellant  had  left  her  husband
         because of his affairs and that she had come to the UK to  be  with
         her  father  and  brother  (see  paragraph  30  of  Judge   Phull's
         decision).

      f. SB (risk  on  return-illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053
         confirms that those who left Iran illegally, such as the appellant,
         will be questioned on return.  It is  reasonably  likely  that  the
         appellant would be asked what she had been doing in the UK  and  it
         is also reasonably likely that the appellant  would  disclose  that
         she had been with her father and brother and that she would provide
         their details.

 7. I suggested to both representatives that with this matrix  of  facts  I
    could only conclude that the Iranian authorities  would  identify  that
    the appellant had been visiting her brother  who  they  knew  had  been
    involved in spreading the Baha'i religion and who had converted to that
    religion.  Given the patriarchal nature of Iranian  society  and  given
    that the appellant's father and  brother  would  be  her  closest  male
    relatives following her separation from her husband, it  is  reasonably
    likely that the Iranian authorities would infer that the appellant  was
    in  some  way  also  linked  to  the  Baha'i  religion.   Taking   into
    consideration that treatment of Baha'is in Iran, such association would
    amount  to  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  based  on  "imputed
    religion".

 8. Ms Pettersen and Ms Duru accepted that based on Judge Phull's  findings
    and the background country information this  was  the  only  reasonable
    interpretation.

 9. In such circumstances, I find there is no need for this  matter  to  be
    returned to Judge Phull.  Having found an error on a point  of  law,  I
    set aside her decision and remake it in line  with  what  I  have  said
    above.

Decision

The decision and  reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Phull
contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

I  remake  the  decision  and  allow  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
immigration decision of 14 January 2015 because I find the  appellant  is  a
refugee.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
