
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04925/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2015                           |On 3 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     Nms
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya who was born on 26 March 1976.  She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 26 June  2008  with  a  valid  student
    visa.  That leave was extended first to 31 October 2009 and then  until
    27 November 2014.

 3. The appellant's husband and their two children also live in the UK.  On
    22 August 2011, the appellant's husband claimed asylum.  The  Secretary
    of State refused that claim  on  21  November  2011  and,  following  a
    hearing on 25 March 2013, in a determination dated 11  April  2013  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissed the appeal of  the  appellant's  husband.
    Subsequently, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused by
    the First-tier Tribunal on 24 May 2013 and by the Upper Tribunal  on  3
    July 2013.

 4. On 25 November 2013, the appellant claimed asylum in her own right with
    her husband and children as dependants upon that claim.  The  basis  of
    her claim was that having graduated from university in Libya  in  1998,
    she had  taught  in  a  school  and  had  then  become  a  lecturer  in
    university.  Whilst there,  she  was  a  member  of  the  Revolutionary
    Committee.

 5. In June 2008, she came to study for a PhD in the UK and the  fees  were
    paid by the Libyan government.  However, following the change of regime
    in 2011, those fees were not paid because she was  associated,  through
    her membership of the Revolutionary Committee, with the former  Gaddafi
    regime.  She claims that if returned to Libya she would be perceived as
    an opponent of the current regime and would  likely  be  imprisoned  or
    killed.

 6. On 1 July 2014, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on the basis that  her  removal
    would  breach  Art  8  of  the  ECHR.   The  Secretary  of  State,   in
    consequence, on 1 July 2014 refused to vary  the  appellant's  existing
    leave and made a decision under s.47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 to remove the appellant to Libya.

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   That  appeal  was
    against the removal decision under s.47 of the 2006 Act  by  virtue  of
    s.82(ha) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appeal was heard by Judge A Cresswell on  21  August  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 26 August 2014, Judge Cresswell  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.   He  rejected  the  appellant's
    account that the appellant had been a lecturer  and  a  member  of  the
    Revolutionary Committee at her university and that her tuition fee  for
    study in the UK had been stopped by the Libyan government as  a  result
    of her perceived association with the former Gaddafi regime.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 30
    September 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Frankish)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

10. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

11. Mr Neale, who represented the appellant, relied upon the single  ground
    of appeal upon which permission to appeal had been granted.

12. Mr Neale submitted that the judge's adverse credibility  finding  could
    not stand, in particular his reasoning at para 21(viii) and (xix).   Mr
    Neale submitted that prior to the judge's promulgation of his  decision
    on 26 August 2014, the  appellant's  representative  had  sent  to  the
    Tribunal a number of documents which supported the appellant's evidence
    that the Libyan government had failed to pay her tuition fees since the
    change of regime in 2011.  He submitted  that,  in  the  light  of  the
    background evidence, the fact that this had occurred not  just  in  the
    immediate aftermath of the change of regime and the crisis that existed
    in Libya, but up until 2014 supported the appellant's  claim  that  her
    fees were stopped because she was perceived to be an  opponent  of  the
    current regime and a supporter of  the  previous  Gaddafi  regime.   He
    relied on a letter dated 21 August 2014 from a Senior Research  Finance
    Officer at the University of the West of England ("UWE")  and  attached
    invoices which show outstanding fees of  �27,500  covering  the  period
    2011 to 2014.  He referred me to para 2.2.13 of the Country Information
    and Guidance,

         "Libya: Actual or  Perceived  Gaddafi  Clan  Members  -  Loyalists"
         issued by the Home Office on 19 August 2014  which  referred  to  a
         "decree" passed to  punish  Libyan  students  and  state  employees
         abroad who engaged in  "activities  hostile  to  the  '17  February
         Revolution'  by  withdrawing  their  scholarships,   salaries   and
         bonuses".

13. Mr Neal relied upon the decision of the AIT in SD (Treatment  of  Post-
    Hearing Evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 00037.  There, the  President  of
    the AIT (Hodge J) recognised that post-hearing evidence was  admissible
    applying Ladd v  Marshall  principles  namely:  (1)  the  evidence  was
    obtained with due diligence;  (2)  would  probably  have  an  important
    influence on the result; and (3) was apparently credible.

14. Mr Neale submitted that the evidence concerning the non-payment of fees
    arose in the course of the appellant's evidence when  she  referred  to
    documents that she might have.  He relied upon the witness statement of
    the appellant's (then) Counsel (Mr Hoshi) dated 15 January  2015  which
    established that the appellant showed to Mr Hoshi immediately after the
    hearing on her telephone emails concerning the issue of  fees  and  she
    was advised to forward them immediately to her  solicitors.   Mr  Hoshi
    advised the solicitors to submit the emails as post-hearing evidence of
    the Tribunal as soon as reasonably  practicable.   Mr  Neale  submitted
    that those emails together with the supporting letter from UWE and  the
    invoices were submitted promptly on 26 August after  the  bank  holiday
    weekend following the hearing on Thursday 21 August.  He submitted that
    was promptly; the evidence was significant to the judge's reasoning  in
    reaching his adverse credibility finding; and the evidence was  from  a
    reliable source, namely the appellant's university, and  was  therefore
    credible.

15. Mr Neale submitted that had the judge seen this evidence prior  to  his
    determination being promulgated, on the basis of the principles set out
    in SD, it was  likely  that  he  would  have  admitted  that  evidence.
    Further, despite the judge's other reasons, it cannot be said that  his
    adverse credibility finding would necessarily have been the  same  such
    that there was no material error of law.

16. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Richards first  submitted  that
    there was no error of law.  He submitted that the judge  did  not  have
    the evidence and he was not accountable for not taking it into account.



17. Secondly, in any event, any error was  not  material  given  his  other
    findings in para 21 leading to the  adverse  credibility  finding.   Mr
    Richards made no objection to the admission of the new evidence but  he
    submitted that there was nothing in the new  evidence  which  indicated
    why the appellant's fees had been stopped.  That was precisely what the
    judge had said in para 21(xviii) in relation  to  the  evidence  before
    him.  He submitted that it was inconceivable that the judge would  have
    come to a different conclusion even if he  had  received  the  evidence
    prior to the hearing.

Discussion

18. There is no doubt that the failure of a Tribunal to  consider  evidence
    submitted after a hearing can amount to an error of law.  In E  &  R  v
    SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49, the Court  of  Appeal  recognised  at  [92(i)]
    that:

         "The Tribunal remains seized of the appeal, and therefore  able  to
         take account of new evidence, up until the time when  the  decision
         was formally notified to the parties."

19. That was said in the context of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal but  is
    no less applicable to the First-tier Tribunal  or,  indeed,  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

20. In SD, the AIT was concerned with a case in which an Immigration  Judge
    refused to consider evidence submitted after the hearing but before his
    determination was promulgated.  The AIT concluded that that amounted to
    an error of law.  At [15] - [17], Hodge J (President) said this:

         "15. In his  second  reason  for  refusing  to  consider  the  late
             submissions, the  immigration  judge  said  he  did  not  have
             jurisdiction to consider them.  He was wrong.  E and  R  makes
             it plain that he was "at liberty to admit  further  evidence".
             The late submission contained evidence  which  suggested  that
             the Tribunal had been wrongly told that the appellant had  not
             had "any form of leave after his  temporary  admission".   The
             Court of Appeal in E and R left it  open  as  to  whether  the
             Tribunal in such  circumstances  is  under  a  duty  to  admit
             further evidence.  But it did  give  guidance  as  to  how  to
             proceed.

         16.  As is well known, in E and R the Court of Appeal accepted that
             a mistake of fact giving rise to  unfairness  was  a  separate
             head of challenge on an appeal  on  a  point  of  law  in  the
             context of asylum and immigration appeals "where  the  parties
             shared an interest  in  cooperating  to  achieve  the  correct
             result".  In relation to the then Immigration Appeal Tribunal,
             the Court  concluded  at  para  92  that,  in  exercising  the
             discretion to direct a rehearing in relation to  new  evidence
             received before the decision had been formally notified to the
             parties, 'the principle of finality would be important" and:

                  "To justify reopening the case the IAT would normally need
                  to  be  satisfied  that  there  was  a  risk  of   serious
                  injustice, because of something which had  gone  wrong  at
                  the hearing, or some important  evidence  which  had  been
                  overlooked;  and  in  considering  whether  to  admit  new
                  evidence  it  should  be  guided  by   Ladd   v   Marshall
                  principles, subject to any exceptional factors."

         17.  Hence, in the rare case where an immigration judge,  prior  to
             the promulgation of a determination, receives a submission  of
             late evidence, then consideration must first be given  to  the
             principles in Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489.  Under those,
             a tribunal should not normally admit fresh evidence unless  it
             could not have been previously obtained with due diligence for
             use at  the  trial,  would  probably  have  had  an  important
             influence on the result  and  was  apparently  credible.   If,
             applying that test, the judge was satisfied there was  a  risk
             of serious injustice because of something which had gone wrong
             at the hearing or this was evidence that had been  overlooked,
             then it was likely to be material.  In those circumstances, it
             will be necessary either to reconvene the hearing or to obtain
             the written submissions of the other side in relation  to  the
             matters included in the late submission."

21. The AIT went on to consider whether the particular error in  that  case
    was material and concluded that it was not.

22. The circumstances in this appeal are not precisely on  all  fours  with
    SD.  It is clear that the appellant's representatives did  forward  the
    documents  concerning  the  non-payment  of  her  fees  by  the  Libyan
    government to the  Tribunal  which  were  received,  according  to  the
    facsimile report, at 09:52 a.m.  Mr Richards did not suggest  that  the
    documents  were  received  after  the  promulgation  of   the   judge's
    determination on that day.  I proceed, therefore, on the basis that the
    relevant documents were in the possession of the Tribunal prior to  the
    judge's determination being promulgated.  It is, however, obvious  that
    the judge did not receive the document prior to the  promulgation  and,
    indeed, it is not clear that he  has  ever  seen  the  documents.   His
    failure to consider them cannot, therefore, reflect any failing on  his
    behalf.  Indeed, it is difficult to fault the Tribunal staff given that
    the documents arrived on the very morning that  the  determination  was
    promulgated.  Nevertheless, the documents were in the possession of the
    Tribunal.

23. On the face of it, the issue in this appeal is whether that  procedural
    irregularity (not providing the judge with the  relevant  documents  in
    time  to  consider  them  before  his  determination  was  promulgated)
    resulted in a procedural  irregularity  and  unfairness  and  therefore
    amounted to an error of law.

24. In SD, however, the AIT did not analyse  the  situation  in  that  way.
    Rather, it considered whether, applying Ladd v Marshall principles, the
    evidence would be admissible as  "new  evidence".   That  reflects  the
    approach of the Court of Appeal in E & R to which I have referred above
    and which is cited in the AIT's determination.  I propose to adopt  the
    same approach.  It may well be that when a judge expressly (as  in  SD)
    or through no personal fault (as in this appeal) fails to consider post-
    hearing evidence submitted prior  to  promulgation,  that  evidence  is
    properly seen as "fresh evidence" and unless  admissible  as  such  any
    failure to consider  it  cannot  be  unfair.   However,  a  failure  to
    consider it may, at least prima facie, be unlawful on the  basis  of  a
    procedural irregularity.

25. In applying the Ladd v Marshall principles in a public law case, I bear
    in mind the view expressed by Carnwath LJ (as he then was) in E & R  at
    [82] that in a public law case:

         "they remain the starting point,  but  there  is  a  discretion  to
         depart from them in exceptional circumstances".

26. Applying the Ladd v Marshall principles, I accept Mr Neale's submission
    that the substance of them is met.

27. First, it is clear from Mr Hoshi's witness statement that the issue  of
    documents concerned with the non-payment of fee arose during the course
    of the appellant's evidence at the hearing.  I accept that some of  the
    invoices were, at least, in the possession of the  appellant  prior  to
    the hearing.  One is, for example, dated 9 August 2011 and  another  is
    dated 4 June 2014 shortly before the hearing.   It  is  not  clear  why
    these documents were not produced earlier.  It may well be  that  their
    significance only became clear as a  result  of  the  appellant's  oral
    evidence.  The letter from UWE is dated 21 August 2014 - which  is  the
    date of the hearing - and so could not possibly have been available  at
    the hearing.  In the circumstances, even though some  were  technically
    available, I am satisfied that these  documents  could  not  have  been
    obtained with reasonable diligence for use at the date of the  hearing.



28. In any event, it seems to me that  the  rigid  application  of  Ladd  v
    Marshall, relevant to the admission of evidence at a subsequent  appeal
    hearing following a trial, has less potency  when  the  issue  concerns
    submission of documents post-hearing of the original trial.  I bear  in
    mind Carnwath LJ's cautionary comment in E & R.  I also  bear  in  mind
    that, following the hearing, the documents were submitted  without  any
    significant delay.  Tuesday, 26 August 2014 was the first  working  day
    after the August Bank Holiday following the  hearing  on  Thursday,  21
    August 2014.

29. Secondly, there is no doubt in my mind that the documents were relevant
    and potentially had a significant bearing upon the central issue in the
    appellant's appeal, namely whether  she  was  perceived  as  a  Gaddafi
    supporter.  I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that the  documents
    do no more than show that the Libyan government has failed to  pay  the
    appellant's fees between 2011 and 2014.  It  is  clear  from  the  Home
    Office's own document, to which I have already made reference,  that  a
    decree of the new Libyan government seeks to punish  students  who  are
    perceived as  Gaddafi  supporters  by  withdrawing  support  for  their
    studies abroad.  Even if non-payment in the immediate aftermath of  the
    change in regime in 2011 could be explained by that very crisis, it was
    certainly open to the judge to take the view that the most recent  non-
    payment  reflected,  consistently  with  the  background  evidence,  an
    adverse political view taken of the appellant  by  the  current  Libyan
    government.

30. The judge's reasoning at paras 21(xviii) - (xix) is as follows:

         "(xviii) The Appellant told me that the Libyan  government  stopped
                  paying her university fees in  the  year  2011/12.   "This
                  happened after the new government and the Embassy  stopped
                  payments for most of the students."  She  said  that  this
                  applied to  all  students  who  had  connection  with  the
                  previous regime.  It then turned out that the information,
                  such as she had had  come  from  the  University  of  West
                  England, as she had not contacted the Embassy, and related
                  to  the  non-payment  of  her  fees.   She   provided   no
                  documentary evidence to show that this was the  case,  but
                  reported that  the  university  appeared  unconcerned  and
                  believed that payment would be forthcoming.  She said that
                  she had emails about it, but none were produced by her.  I
                  am mindful that government in Libya was in crisis  at  the
                  time of and in the interregnum beyond the uprising against
                  Colonel Gaddafi and find it not  at  all  surprising  that
                  fees would not be paid for students abroad.  It  was  also
                  significant that as well a seeking  to  suggest  that  her
                  fees were not paid because  she  was  perceived  to  be  a
                  Gaddafi supporter, she related how  others  in  a  similar
                  position had returned home to  Libya,  presumably  without
                  reason to fear for their safety.   She  then  went  on  to
                  alter her version of what happened by now saying that fees
                  were paid for that  majority  of  students  apart  from  a
                  minority whose fees had not been paid, i.e. a change  from
                  most  to  minority.    Such   inconsistency   damage   her
                  credibility.

         (xix)    I could see no grounds for associating the non-payment  of
                  fees following a period of crisis with  the  reference  in
                  the Respondent's Country Information and Guidance paper of
                  19 August 2014 to a decree passed more recently to  punish
                  those  students  opposing  the  uprising  by   withdrawing
                  scholarships, salaries and bonuses when  I  consider  this
                  issue in the round with all of my other findings."

31. Undoubtedly relevant to that reasoning  was  the  appellant's  case  in
    respect of the non-payment of fees  by  the  government.   It  is  also
    noteworthy that the repeated request to the Libyan Embassy in  relation
    to the appellant's fees (set out in the email  exchanges  in  2011  and
    2013) may well be relevant to an assessment of their  attitude  towards
    the appellant.

32. Thirdly, as regards the credibility of this evidence I accept Mr Neal's
    submission that the evidence is credible given its source,  namely  the
    appellant's university administration.  Mr Richards sought to put  some
    weight upon the judge's finding in para 21(xiv) that he  did  not  find
    the documents "individually and together" to be ones to which he  could
    attach any weight.  That is reasoning which could not, in my  judgment,
    rationally be applied to the documents submitted after the hearing.

33. In my judgment, had Judge Cresswell seen this  evidence  prior  to  his
    determination being promulgated, he would have been bound  to  take  it
    into account.  It was relevant and credible  evidence.   He  might,  of
    course, have invited submissions  from  the  respondent  on  it  before
    reaching his decision but, subject  to  that,  he  would  have  had  to
    consider it.  Although through no fault of the judge,  his  failure  to
    consider this relevant and credible evidence amounted to  a  procedural
    irregularity and, in my judgment, an error of law.

34. Whilst it is true that the judge gave a number of reasons  in  para  21
    for his adverse credibility finding, I am unable to conclude  that  the
    error which tainted  his  reasons  in  para  21(xviii)  and  (xix)  was
    necessarily immaterial to his  adverse  credibility  finding.   If  the
    judge had seen the evidence and he might have inferred  that  the  non-
    payment, at least in the most recent period, of the fees by the  Libyan
    government was consistent with the Secretary of State's own  background
    information that the appellant was being targeted by the current Libyan
    government for her perceived association with the Gaddafi regime,  that
    would have  undoubtedly  supported  the  appellant's  account  and  her
    overall credibility.  I do not say that the Judge  was  bound  to  make
    that inference or, if he did, that he was bound to find  in  favour  of
    the appellant.  But, so far as materiality is concerned,  I  cannot  be
    confident that he was bound, as Mr Richards  submitted,  to  reach  the
    same adverse conclusion.

35. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of law.  Its
    decision cannot stand and it set aside.

Disposal

36. Both representatives indicated to me that if that was my conclusion, it
    would be proper to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

37. Consequently, I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's adverse credibility
    finding and its decision.  Having regard to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statements, given the nature  and  extent  of  the
    fact-finding, it is appropriate that the  appeal  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing de novo before  a  judge  other
    than Judge A Cresswell.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
