
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04871/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 November 2015                        |On 29 March 2016               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YA
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Katani & Co,
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal Kempton allowing an appeal by YA  (hereinafter
   referred to as "the claimant") on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The claimant was born in 1989.  His nationality is disputed.   He  claims
   to be from Eritrea but the  Secretary  of  State  considers  that  he  is
   Ethiopian.  It is not disputed that he is  a  Pentecostal  Christian  and
   that were he to be removed to Eritrea as an Eritrean he would face a real
   risk of persecution in that country by reason of religion.

3) The evidence before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  the  claimant  was
   born in Eritrea.  He went with his parents to Ethiopia but the family was
   subsequently returned to Eritrea.  On return to  Eritrea  they  lived  in
   Campo Sudan.  His difficulties in Eritrea began when he and  his  friends
   were praying for his sick mother and were overheard by  the  authorities.
   The claimant was arrested but was released after his uncle paid a  bribe.
   He then fled Eritrea and, according to his account, lived in Sudan for  8
   years before travelling to the UK as he feared being sent back to Eritrea
   by the Sudanese authorities.

4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal appears to have  accepted  that  the
   claimant had lived both in Eritrea and in Ethiopia.  There was no dispute
   that the claimant could not be returned to Eritrea.   However,  according
   to the judge, there was no  indication  that  the  Ethiopian  authorities
   would accept him there.  The claimant  had  not  been  to  the  Ethiopian
   Embassy to make inquiries into this matter.

5) The judge observed that when the claimant was interviewed  on  behalf  of
   the Secretary of State he was not  questioned  appropriately  as  to  his
   nationality.  In particular, he was not asked if there was any reason why
   he could not be returned to Ethiopia.   Nevertheless,  Ethiopia  was  the
   country to which the Secretary of State proposed to remove the  claimant.
   The judge seems to have concluded that if the claimant were to be removed
   to Ethiopia it would be unlikely that the Ethiopians  would  accept  him.
   There was a real risk that the Ethiopians would remove  the  claimant  to
   Eritrea, which the claimant had left illegally and  where  he  could  not
   practise his religion without  persecution.   On  this  basis  the  judge
   allowed the appeal.

6) The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the
   judge had failed to make a finding on the claimant's nationality and  the
   risk on return to Ethiopia.  The Secretary of State's reasons for refusal
   letter gave reasons for not accepting that the claimant was a national of
   Eritrea and the judge had identified inconsistencies  in  the  claimant's
   account and had said that certain evidence he gave did not make sense.

7) According to the Secretary of State's grounds  the  judge  accepted  that
   the claimant had not been to the Ethiopian Embassy.  In relation to  this
   the judge did not follow the precedent of MA (Ethiopia) [2009]  EWCA  Civ
   289.  In this case it was said there was no reason why the  appellant  in
   question should not have visited the  Embassy  of  Ethiopia  to  seek  to
   obtain requisite documents to enable her to return there.  It was  stated
   that before an applicant  for  asylum  can  claim  the  protection  of  a
   surrogate state, he or she must first take all steps to secure protection
   from the home state.  It was incumbent upon the asylum seeker to take all
   reasonable steps to obtain authorisation to return.

8) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge  had  failed
   to make finding on the claimant's nationality  and  had  failed  to  have
   regard to MA (Ethiopia).

Submissions

9) In her submission on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  Mrs  O'Brien
   referred to the lack of a finding on  nationality.   The  judge  accepted
   that the claimant had not been  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy.   The  judge
   failed to engage not only with MA (Ethiopia)  but  also  with  the  Upper
   Tribunal decision in ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia
   CG [2011] UKUT 00252, notwithstanding that this decision was before  her.
   According to this case the judge must consider whether someone  does  not
   qualify for refugee status by reason of being able to go to another  safe
   country.  If the judge had  followed  this  decision  there  was  a  real
   possibility of a different outcome to the appeal.  The claimant had  made
   no application to the Ethiopian authorities.  The claimant had failed  to
   discharge the burden of proof.  There was no positive credibility finding
   in favour of the claimant.  The  judge  should  have  found  against  the
   claimant.

10) For the claimant,  Mr  Winter  raised  two  questions.   The  first  was
   whether the findings made by the judge were sufficient to show  that  the
   claimant was accepted as an Eritrean.  The second was whether  any  error
   made by the judge was material.

11) Mr Winter referred to the judge's finding  that  the  claimant  had  not
   been asked appropriate questions at interview about the risk of return to
   Ethiopia.  In 2000  the  claimant  had  been  removed  from  Ethiopia  to
   Eritrea.  This showed that the claimant was not  accepted  as  Ethiopian.
   There was evidence about the claimant's nationality in the  form  of  his
   mother's identity document and the claimant's own birth certificate.  The
   judge, however, had not made a finding in relation to these.

12) Mr Winter further submitted that any omission by  the  claimant  in  not
   approaching the Ethiopian Embassy was not  raised  in  the  Secretary  of
   State's refusal letter and was not relied upon as a factor in the refusal
   of the asylum claim.  Mr Winter referred to the case of ST  Ethiopia,  at
   paragraph 108 onwards, as showing that Ethiopian nationality could not be
   reacquired from abroad without a period of residence in the country.  The
   claimant could not obtain Ethiopian nationality from abroad and would not
   be admitted to Ethiopia,  a  country  from  which  he  had  already  been
   deported.  It appeared to have  been  accepted  by  the  judge  that  the
   claimant had been deported in 2000.  The position  of  the  claimant  was
   such that the Ethiopian authorities would refuse to recognise  him  as  a
   citizen.  Because of this, even if the judge had made an  error,  on  the
   basis of ST Ethiopia it would not be material.

13) In response Mrs O'Brien reiterated that the judge  should  have  made  a
   finding on nationality.  Such a finding was required  before  the  appeal
   could be allowed.  There was no  reference  to  the  claimant's  mother's
   identity document and the claimant's birth certificate in the decision of
   the First-tier Tribunal.

14) In relation to this matter Mr Winter  submitted  that  where  the  judge
   failed to take account of evidence it could be inferred that the evidence
   was not material, in terms of MA (Somalia) [2011] Imm AR 292,  which  was
   the decision of the Supreme Court.

15) Mrs O'Brien continued that the entire  challenge  by  the  Secretary  of
   State was based on a failure  to  make  clear  findings.   The  issue  of
   nationality was central to the appeal.

Discussion

16) I agree with the submission by Mrs O'Brien  as  to  the  lack  of  clear
   findings by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  Although the judge put
   in her decision a  heading  "Credibility  findings  and  reasons"  it  is
   difficult to identify any credibility findings under this  heading.   The
   judge summarises the claimant's evidence; points out that  the  Secretary
   of State accepted that the claimant was a Pentecostal Christian;  records
   that the claimant has not been to Ethiopian  Embassy  to  make  inquiries
   about whether he would be accepted as a national; and then finds there is
   a real risk of the claimant being sent from Ethiopia to Eritrea  were  he
   removed to Ethiopia.  I am not satisfied that  the  judge  made  adequate
   findings to support this final and supposedly conclusive finding.

17) For example,  the  judge  raised  certain  questions  arising  from  the
   claimant's evidence about the time he allegedly spent in  Sudan  but  did
   not make any finding as to whether this part of  the  claimant's  account
   was accepted.  The judge raised questions about the supposed move of  the
   family to Ethiopia and then their return to Eritrea  but  again  made  no
   findings in relation to the credibility of this part of the account.  The
   judge even commented, at paragraph 26, that the claimant's account of not
   being able to contact his mother while he was in  Sudan  "does  not  make
   sense ..." but no credibility finding  was  made  in  relation  to  this,
   either negative or positive.

18) It is accepted by the parties  that  there  were  documents  before  the
   judge relating to nationality, in the form  of  the  claimant's  mother's
   identity document and the  claimant's  birth  certificate.   No  findings
   were, however, made by the judge in respect of these documents and indeed
   there is no reference to them in the decision.  Mr  Winter  asked  me  to
   find that by implication if the judge did not refer  to  these  documents
   they were not material.  There may be occasions when it  is  possible  to
   draw such an inference.  This would be on the basis that  the  judge  had
   made a thorough assessment of all the evidence considered to be  material
   and had made  clear  findings.   This  is  not  the  position  with  this
   decision.  In effect Mr Winter is asking me to second guess the  findings
   that the judge might have made had she taken account of these  documents.
   That does not seem appropriate in the circumstances of  this  appeal  and
   goes beyond the proper scope of a hearing before the Upper Tribunal.

19) Mrs O'Brien referred also to the apparent failure by the judge  to  have
   regard to MA (Ethiopia) and the country guideline case  of  ST  Ethiopia.
   The main issue in the Secretary of State's application for permission  to
   appeal was a failure to have regard to MA (Ethiopia).

20) Mr Winter submitted that this omission was not material.   He  submitted
   that on the basis of ST the claimant  would  not  qualify  for  Ethiopian
   nationality.  The basis on which Mr Winter was able to make this argument
   was the assumption that everything the claimant had said about his family
   background  and  his  family's  removal  from  Ethiopia  to  Eritrea  was
   credible.  There are, however,  no  clear  credibility  findings  in  the
   judge's decision.

21) Furthermore, as the  judge  herself  pointed  out,  there  had  been  no
   approach made by the claimant to the Ethiopian Embassy, as required by MA
   (Ethiopia).   The  judge  indicated  that  in  her  view  the  issue   of
   nationality was not properly addressed at the asylum interview.  Be  that
   as it may, this does not preclude an obligation on the claimant  to  make
   an application for a travel document at the Ethiopian Embassy.

22) Mr Winter submitted that the point about making an  application  to  the
   Ethiopian Embassy was not raised in the reasons for refusal  letter.   On
   my reading the thrust of the reasons for refusal  letter  appears  to  be
   that the claimant's assertion that he was of Eritrean nationality was not
   credible.  Once this decision had been made, it was then  incumbent  upon
   the claimant to approach the Ethiopian Embassy if he wished to pursue his
   contention that he was Eritrean.  The claimant was represented and  those
   who represented him should have been aware of the relevant authorities in
   terms of MA (Ethiopia) and ST.

23) It is fundamental  to  making  a  determination  of  refugee  status  to
   ascertain the nationality of the person claiming to be a  refugee.   This
   is because a person qualifies as a refugee only where he  or  she  has  a
   well founded fear  of  persecution  either  in  his  or  her  country  of
   nationality or, if he or she has no nationality, in his or her country of
   formal habitual residence.  As was pointed out in MA (Ethiopia), a person
   is entitled to the protection of a surrogate state only after he  or  she
   has taken all steps to secure protection from their home state.  Thus the
   question of nationality was material and was crucial to the  question  of
   whether or not the appeal should have been allowed on asylum grounds.

24) As I indicated to the parties at the hearing, if I found  in  favour  of
   the Secretary of State the appropriate  course  would  be  to  remit  the
   appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before a judge  other  than
   Judge Kempton.  This is because the  judge  made  no  clear  findings  on
   credibility and on  the  extent  to  which  the  claimant's  account  was
   accepted or rejected.

Conclusions

25) The making of a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

26) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  before  a
   different judge.  No findings are preserved except where those have  been
   the basis of a concession between the parties.

Anonymity

27) The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  for  anonymity.   Given
   that the appeal proceedings are continuing, however, I consider that such
   an order should be made at least for the  duration  of  the  proceedings.
   Accordingly, pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
   Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269), I make an  anonymity  order.   Unless
   the Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
   or any form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify
   the original claimant.  This order applies to amongst others all parties.
    Any failure to comply with this order could give  rise  to  contempt  of
   court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
