


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: AA/04140/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |            Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                            |
|On 7 March 2018                        |            On 1 May 2018              |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     VP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.


   1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers to
      his asylum claim and medical evidence regarding his mental health  and
      claimed experiences of torture.




Summary of asylum and human rights claims

   2. The appellant, a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka,  claims  that  he  has  been
      detained and tortured in Sri Lanka for reasons relating  to  his  LTTE
      activities. He claims a well-founded fear of persecution  for  reasons
      relating to his imputed political opinion.   He also  claims  that  he
      faces treatment in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR if returned to  Sri
      Lanka, given his mental health difficulties.

Appeal proceedings

   3. The appellant arrived in the UK in December 2013 and claimed asylum on
      arrival.  He appealed against a decision to refuse him leave to  enter
      to the First-tier Tribunal, and in a decision dated 31 July 2015 First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Nicol dismissed his appeal.  This decision was set
      aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce in a decision dated 25  May  2016,
      because the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  make  any  clear  findings
      supported by reasons,  and  failed  to  properly  assess  the  medical
      evidence before it.


   4. The appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and a hearing  took
      place before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gladstone on 2 June  2007,  who
      comprehensively rejected the credibility of  the  appellant's  account
      and dismissed his appeal.


   5. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission to appeal,  noting  that
      the grounds raised issues of procedural fairness.

Appellant's vulnerability

   6. I begin this decision by considering a report prepared by Dr Dhumad, a
      Consultant Psychiatrist, dated 4 May 2017.  The report is based upon a
      2-hour interview with the appellant.  Reference is made to an  earlier
      report dated 22 June 2015 by Dr Persaud, a Psychiatrist, who concluded
      that  the  appellant  suffered  from  a  serious  psychotic  disorder,
      including major depression and PTSD.    It is clear however  that  the
      conclusions in Dr Dhumad's report are based upon his own mental  state
      examination of the appellant, during which he noticed evidence of self-
      neglect, severe depression, and anxiety.   Dr  Dhumad  considered  the
      appellant's 'clinical presentation' to be consistent with a  diagnosis
      of severe depressive episode and  PTSD.   He  described  the  risk  of
      suicide as moderate.

   7. At the beginning of the hearing before me,  Mr  Harrison  agreed  that
      unless there was any cogent updated  evidence  to  the  contrary,  the
      appellant should be treated as a vulnerable  appellant  in  accordance
      with  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  of  2010  ('the
      Guidance').


   8. Mr Paramjorthy explained that since Dr Dhumad's  report  was  prepared
      and after the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Gladstone,  the
      appellant's mental health has deteriorated.  He has attempted  suicide
      and received treatment in a mental health unit.

   9. Given  this,  and  the  medical  evidence  already  available  to  the
      Tribunal,  Mr  Harrison  accepted  without  hesitation  that  it   was
      appropriate to regard the appellant as a vulnerable appellant,  and  I
      do so.

SSHD's concession

  10. I heard from Mr Paramjorthy briefly.  He clarified that his  strongest
      ground is set out at paragraph 8 of his grounds  of  appeal  i.e.  the
      First-tier Tribunal failed to adequately engage with  the  psychiatric
      evidence and failed to  approach  the  appellant  as  vulnerable.   He
      acknowledged that the grounds of appeal alleging procedural unfairness
      vis a vis a failure to grant an adjournment and the  encouragement  of
      inappropriate questioning, were  less  strong  because  he  failed  to
      particularise these by reference to any evidence  in  the  form  of  a
      witness statement.


  11. Mr Harrison conceded that there was cogent medical evidence before the
      First-tier Tribunal, sufficient to support  the  contention  that  the
      appellant should have been treated as vulnerable. The failure to do so
      meant that the First-tier Tribunal failed to apply the  Guidance  when
      conducting the hearing or when assessing the evidence, and  failed  to
      make credibility findings with the Guidance in mind.


  12. Mr Harrison  acknowledged  the  SSHD's  rule  24  notice  opposed  the
      appellant's appeal but he did not consider it was appropriate to  rely
      upon the notice in all the circumstances.  Mr Harrison  conceded  that
      the First-tier Tribunal  committed  material  errors  of  law  in  its
      approach to the appellant's evidence and in the circumstances, it  was
      appropriate to set aside the decision and  remit  the  appeal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal irrespective of the other grounds of  appeal.   Mr
      Paramjorthy agreed with this approach.

Legal framework

  13. In AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, [2017] Imm AR 6,  Sir
      Ernest Ryder, the Senior President of Tribunals, considered an  appeal
      involving a young  man  from  Afghanistan  with  a  claimed  traumatic
      history.   In AM's case the psychologist offered advice as to  how  AM
      could obtain effective  access  to  justice  given  his  psychological
      difficulties.   It  was  agreed  before  the  Court  of  Appeal   that
      insufficient steps had been taken to ensure that the proceedings  were
      fair.  In the instant case Dr Dhumad considered the appellant  fit  to
      give evidence but highlighted his severe depression, hopelessness  and
      poor concentration and recommended the use of extra time and breaks to
      help him to participate meaningfully.


  14. Ryder LJ said this in AM (my emphasis):


                 "30. To assist parties and tribunals a  Practice  Direction
                 'First-tier and Upper Tribunal Child, Vulnerable Adult  and
                 Sensitive Witnesses', was issued by the  Senior  President,
                 Sir  Robert  Carnwath,  with  the  agreement  of  the  Lord
                 Chancellor  on  30  October  2008.   In   addition,   joint
                 Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 was issued  by  the
                 then President of UTIAC, Blake J and the  acting  President
                 of the FtT (IAC), Judge  Arfon-Jones.  The  directions  and
                 guidance contained in them are to be followed and  for  the
                 convenience of practitioners,  they  are  annexed  to  this
                 judgment. Failure to follow them  will  most  likely  be  a
                 material error of law. They are to be found in the Annex to
                 this judgment.


                 31.  The  PD  and  the  Guidance  Note  [Guidance]  provide
                 detailed guidance on the approach  to  be  adopted  by  the
                 tribunal to an incapacitated or vulnerable person. I  agree
                 with the Lord Chancellor's submission that there  are  five
                 key features:
                       a.   the   early   identification   of   issues    of
                       vulnerability is  encouraged,  if  at  all  possible,
                       before any substantive hearing through the use  of  a
                       CMRH or pre-hearing review (Guidance [4] and [5]);
                       b. a person who is incapacitated or  vulnerable  will
                       only need  to  attend  as  a  witness  to  give  oral
                       evidence where  the  tribunal  determines  that  "the
                       evidence is necessary to enable the fair  hearing  of
                       the case and their welfare would not be prejudiced by
                       doing so" (PD [2] and Guidance [8] and [9]);
                       c. where an incapacitated or vulnerable  person  does
                       give oral evidence, detailed provision is to be  made
                       to ensure  their  welfare  is  protected  before  and
                       during the hearing  (PD  [6]  and  [7]  and  Guidance
                       [10]);
                       d. it is necessary to give special  consideration  to
                       all of the personal circumstances of an incapacitated
                       or vulnerable  person  in  assessing  their  evidence
                       (Guidance [10.2] to [15]); and
                       e.  relevant  additional  sources  of  guidance   are
                       identified   in   the   Guidance    including    from
                       international bodies (Guidance Annex A [22] to [27]).


  15. At [33] Ryder LJ observed that the emphasis on  the  determination  of
      credibility in an asylum appeal is such that there is particular force
      in the Guidance at [13] to [15], which states as follows:


                 "13.The weight to be placed upon factors  of  vulnerability
                 may differ depending on the matter under appeal, the burden
                 and standard of proof  and  whether  the  individual  is  a
                 witness or an appellant.
                 14.Consider the evidence, allowing for  possible  different
                 degrees  of  understanding  by  witnesses   and   appellant
                 compared to those are not vulnerable,  in  the  context  of
                 evidence from others associated with the appellant and  the
                 background evidence before  you.  Where  there  were  clear
                 discrepancies in the oral evidence, consider the extent  to
                 which by  mental,  psychological  or  emotional  trauma  or
                 disability; the age, vulnerability or  sensitivity  of  the
                 witness was an element  of  that  discrepancy  or  lack  of
                 clarity.
                 15.The decision should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
                 concluded  the  appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a   child,
                 vulnerable or sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered
                 the identified vulnerability had in assessing the  evidence
                 before it and  thus  whether  the  Tribunal  was  satisfied
                 whether the appellant had established his or  her  case  to
                 the relevant standard of proof. In asylum  appeals,  weight
                 should be given to objective  indications  of  risk  rather
                 than necessarily to a state of mind."




Error of law discussion


  16. Ms Harrison was correct to make the concessions he  did.   Given  that
      the respondent agrees that the decision must be set aside and remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal, I can set out my reasoning briefly.  In so
      doing, I recognise the First-tier Tribunal's decision is  lengthy  and
      detailed.  It runs to 30 pages and  contains  177  paragraphs,  making
      wide ranging adverse credibility findings.


  17. It is not necessary for me to address each of the  grounds  of  appeal
      regarding the credibility findings or indeed the other  findings  made
      by the First-tier Tribunal. This is because  there  has  been  such  a
      fundamental error of approach toward the psychiatric evidence.   There
      has been a failure  to  directly  address  whether  the  appellant  is
      vulnerable, and if so the consequences of this upon  decision  making,
      such that the entire decision must be set aside.   In particular:

   i) All the medical evidence  pointed  in  one  direction:  the  appellant
      should have been treated as vulnerable.  He was diagnosed with  severe
      depression and PTSD, and at a  moderate  risk  of  suicide  (with  the
      hopelessness, anxiety, low concentration  attendant  upon  this)  very
      shortly before the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.   This  diagnosis  is
      consistent with the opinion of Dr Persaud in June 2015.


  ii) The failure to do so meant that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
      apply the Guidance when assessing the evidence, and  therefore  failed
      to take account of the importance of the matters set out at  10.3,  14
      and 15 of the Guidance.  Failure to follow the Guidance in a case such
      as this constitutes an error of law.

 iii) The First-tier Tribunal was clearly aware of Dr  Dhumad's  report  and
      took it into account - see by way of example [25], [89],  [94],  [119]
      and [122] of the decision.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was  therefore
      aware that Dr Dhumad recommended extra time and breaks,  and  "bearing
      the above in mind, [I] outlined the format of the hearing" at [90] and
      indicated that she carefully considered the medical evidence at [119].
       However, there was a failure to make any clear findings as to whether
      the assessment  and  conclusions  in  the  psychiatric  evidence  were
      accepted.  It is difficult to see what the First-tier Tribunal made of
      Dr Dhumad's report, when the decision is read as a whole, although the
      First-tier Tribunal appears  to  doubt  the  cogency  of  the  medical
      reports at least partly on the basis that there has been a failure  to
      explain how the appellant's ability to travel  between  Liverpool  and
      London, has been taken into account at [122].  The First-tier Tribunal
      has rehearsed some of the contents of the medical evidence at [124] to
      [129] without making any clear findings as to whether the  conclusions
      supporting the appellant's poor mental health are accepted at not.


  iv) Although the First-tier Tribunal goes  on  to  make  factual  findings
      "taking into account the  experts'  opinions"  at  [130],  it  remains
      unclear whether she accepts those opinions to be well-founded  and  to
      what extent they support a finding that the  appellant  is  vulnerable
      and ought to be treated as such.

   v) The First-tier Tribunal appears to adopt a compartmentalised  approach
      to the evidence from [134] to [160], that  is  not  warranted  by  the
      psychiatric evidence available.  The First-tier Tribunal reasons  that
      as the appellant's memory is  "now  poor",  it  was  open  to  her  to
      consider "clear contradictions" between "his earlier accounts" in  the
      screening interview (December 2013) and the asylum interview  (January
      2015).   This approach fails to take into account: Dr  Persaud's  June
      2015 diagnosis of major depression and PTSD  came  shortly  after  the
      asylum interview; Dr Persaud noted that the appellant's  psychological
      distress and PTSD symptoms started after his torture in Sri Lanka  and
      therefore before he came  to  the  UK  in  December  2013;  there  was
      detailed  (but  incomplete  in  some  respects)  evidence   that   the
      appellant's PTSD symptoms, including but not limited to  poor  memory,
      have been apparent for an extended period of time.


  vi) The compartmentalised approach was not a  fair  way  to  approach  the
      appellant's  evidence  in  all  the  circumstances.   The   First-tier
      Tribunal appears to have left the appellant's  oral  evidence  out  of
      account, and instead focused  upon  the  "earlier  evidence",  without
      considering  all  the  evidence   holistically   together   with   the
      psychiatric evidence explaining inconsistencies,  and  without  giving
      this vulnerable appellant the benefit of the doubt.

Disposal

  18. I have had regard to para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's
      Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the  factual  findings
      required in remaking the decision, and I have decided that this is  an
      appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.  This is because
      completely fresh findings of fact are necessary.   It  is  regrettable
      that this shall be the third occasion  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      considers the appeal.  However, as both representatives agreed, it  is
      important that the appellant is afforded a  fair  hearing  before  the
      First-tier  Tribunal,  which  takes  proper  account  of  the  medical
      evidence in light of the parties agreed position: the appellant  is  a
      vulnerable appellant, to whom the Guidance applies.


  19.  This  decision  was  prepared  on  8  March  2018  but  due   to   an
      administrative error was not served on the parties at  that  time.   I
      have therefore amended the directions outlined at the hearing to  take
      this into account, hence the decision is now dated 1 May 2018.



Decision

  20. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      21. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

   1) The appellant  shall  file  and  serve  a  comprehensive  indexed  and
      paginated bundle of all the medical evidence  relied  upon,  including
      updated medical evidence before 4pm on 21 May 2018.

   2) The matter shall be listed for a case management  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal on the first date after 28 May 2018.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
1 May 2018

