
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04098/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 2nd December 2014              |On 18th December 2014             |


                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                        MRS ROBINAH NAMANDE LUGOLOBI
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Harison
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda who was born on the 30th June 1970.
   She appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Manuel to dismiss her  appeal  against  the  respondent's
   refusal to grant her application for asylum and to remove her  from  the
   United Kingdom.

2. As the First-tier Tribunal did not direct anonymity, I cannot  see  that
   any useful purpose would be served by ordering it now.

The appellant's case

3. The basis of the appellant's claim for asylum may be briefly  summarised
   as follows. The appellant was  a  founding  member  and  director  of  a
   charitable organisation in Uganda called 'Centre of Grace'. The Chairman
   was a man called 'Steven Karguaba' and the appellant's  co-director  was
   'Fred Mugisha'. One of the main donors of the charity was a  man  called
   'Drani Bakule'. Although the appellant was unaware of it  at  the  time,
   Drani Bakule was a rebel commander in the Allied Democratic Force (ADF).
   On the 10th April 2010, Steven Karugaba  went  to  deliver  supplies  to
   children  in  western  Uganda.  However,  he  was  photographed  by  the
   authorities delivering supplies on  the  other  side  of  the  Congolese
   border which was an area that was well-known for its  rebel  activities.
   Upon his return to Uganda, Steven Karugaba was arrested.  The  appellant
   was also arrested, on the same day, and driven to Kololo CMI, where  she
   was raped and  interrogated  about  her  alleged  association  with  ADF
   rebels. After a period of about 4 months, she was taken to Makindye Army
   Barracks, where she was detained, beaten and interrogated for a  further
   two months. She signed a confession, under duress, and was then  charged
   with treason. On the 18th October 2010, a court remanded her in  custody
   to Luzir prison. Whilst she was in prison, she was visited by a  lawyer,
   and by her mother and her brother-in-law. Her lawyer  advised  her  that
   she would not be eligible for bail until she had been in custody  for  a
   year. Her husband  therefore  raised  the  sum  of  40  million  Ugandan
   schillings in order to pay for her  escape.  She  escaped  on  the  28th
   September 2011, with the collusion of a senior prison officer. After two
   days spent in a hotel, the appellant travelled to the United Kingdom  on
   a false passport, arriving on  the  30th  September  2011.  She  claimed
   asylum on the 3rd November 2011. Her husband has since informed her that
   he has been arrested, and that he was thereafter detained for  two  days
   and questioned about her whereabouts.

The issues before the First-tier Tribunal

4. The principle if not the only issue in the appeal was the credibility of
   the  appellant's  account  (above).  In  support  of  her  account,  the
   appellant relied, amongst other things, upon  a  medical  report  by  Dr
   Sarah Gorman (dated 12th August 2012) and what purported to be a Ugandan
   charge sheet.

5. Dr Gorman summarised her conclusions at paragraphs 87, 88, 96 and 98  of
   her report:

       The nature of the psychological symptoms described by Mrs Lugolbi are
       in keeping with psychological sequalae that can be expected following
       the  duration  of  detention  she  reports,   the   nature   of   the
       circumstances of this detention and the severity of the  maltreatment
       reported. Her symptoms as described above meet WHO ICD 10  diagnostic
       criteria for Post Trumatic Stress Disorder (as explained at  Appendix
       E).

                                  .........

       Mrs Lugolobi acknowledged being affected by her experience of  having
       to leave her homes country and be separated from her family. However,
       her most distressing and disabling symptoms are a part  of  the  Post
       Traumatic Stress Disorder which she is suffering as a consequence  of
       the torture she experienced in Uganda.

                                 ..........

       ... with regards to the findings on examination, the number, type and
       distribution of scars/marks and the nature of the injuries  found  on
       examination are in keeping with the  account  given  of  the  timing,
       extent and nature of the  maltreatment  she  experienced.  There  are
       marks on her body attributed to the effects of being hit with batons,
       kicked, scraped and burnt with a  hot  metal  rod.  Injuries  to  her
       shoulders, spine and rib cage found on  examination  are  in  keeping
       with the given account of torture.

                                 ...........

       Mrs  Lugolobi,  it  can  be   seen,   clearly   distinguished   those
       scars/lesions she attributed to the effects of torture from those she
       attributed to other causes, such as  being  due  to  immunisation  or
       childhood injuries. With reference to paragraph 105 of  the  Istanbul
       protocol, the possibility of a false allegation of torture  has  been
       considered but there were no findings on examination which were found
       to be "not consistent" with the account given.

6. The Ugandan charge sheet reads: "Between July 2009 and  April  2010,  A1
   Robinah Namande Lugolobi,  A2  Steven  Karugaba  and  others  under  the
   umbrella  of  Centre  of  Grace  Association  met  with  ADF  operations
   commander Mr Drani  Bakule  and  plotted  ways  of  mobilising  support,
   distributing logistics and recruiting for the rebel group".

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

7. Judge Manuel's conclusions in respect of the report  of  Dr  Gorman  are
   contained in paragraphs 42, 46 and 47 of her determination:

       The appellant was examined whilst in detention on  06  December  2011
       and that report titled 'description of injuries on body' only records
       one single scar on the right forearm. The report reads: "states  that
       she was burnt with hot metal whilst in detention resulting in a  scar
       to the right forearm". In comparison, 8  months  later  in  a  report
       dated 10 august 2012,  Dr  Gorman  refers  to  43  scars.  The  first
       appointment with Dr Gorman was in March 2012, three months after  the
       Appellant had been examined in detention.

                                ............

       Dr Gorman's report  is  solely  based  on  the  Appellant's  account.
       Furthermore, I note the absence of detail as to the age of the  scars
       and time frame in relation to healing. I take  account  of  the  fact
       that the medical examination in detention only refers  to  one  scare
       whereas Dr  Gorman  refers  to  43  scars  on  the  Appellant's  body
       "consistent with torture".

                                ............

       Given these factors, the medical report does not assist me and is not
       sufficiently independent and balanced and therefore  does  not  offer
       significant separate support in respect of the Appellant's account.

8. Judge Manuel dealt with the Ugandan charge sheet at paragraph 67 of  her
   determination:

       This evidence is not consistent with the fact that only the  chairman
       and one of the directors was arrested. Furthermore, as I have already
       noted there is no evidence from independent  bodies  to  confirm  the
       charitable work this organisation claims to have  undertaken.  If  as
       the Appellant claims, the charity genuinely  existed  and  that  they
       helped children, the authorities would not  have  any  difficulty  in
       establishing these facts and nor would the Appellant's lawyer.

The basis of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal

9. Four grounds were originally raised in the application for permission to
   appeal. The first ground raised general concerns  about  the  Tribunal's
   approach to the documentary evidence and, in one case, its  approach  to
   the absence thereof. The second ground asserted that  the  Tribunal  had
   approached the issue of the appellant's credibility in a manner that was
   unfair. Judge Lambert considered that there was no merit  in  either  of
   these grounds. She did however grant permission to appeal in respect  of
   the other two grounds:

       The  medical  evidence  and  diagnosis  of  PTSD  are  considered  at
       paragraphs 45-50. There is however an arguable lack of sufficient and
       cogent reasoning for the conclusion at paragraph 47 that  the  report
       of Dr Gorman confirming 43 scars on the Appellant's  body  consistent
       with torture was of 'no assistance'.

                                .............

       The ground relating to the finding of inconsistency as to the  charge
       sheet produced by the Appellant is also arguable,  having  regard  to
       the content of paragraphs  66  and  67  of  the  determination  which
       disclose no obvious inconsistency between the charge  sheet  and  the
       Appellant's evidence.

Analysis

10. The examination of the appellant on the 6th December 2011 was  conducted
   whilst the she was in immigration detention and was undertaken  for  the
   purpose of assessing whether she was medically fit to  exercise  in  the
   gymnasium. In the event, she was assessed as being  "medically  fit  for
   light exercise" [page 61 of the appellant's bundle]. The report includes
   a section in which the  appellant's  account  of  having  been  tortured
   whilst in Uganda is recorded. The  report  does  not  however  make  any
   findings as to whether that which was revealed upon clinical examination
   was consistent with that account. That was not of  course  its  purpose.
   The report also includes a 'body chart', which refers to  an  injury  on
   the front of the appellant's right arm  that  the  appellant  apparently
   attributed to having been burnt "with hot metal in prison  (detention)".
   It is unclear whether the appellant was stating that this was the result
   of torture in Uganda or due to an accident whilst she was in immigration
   detention in the UK. It is also  unclear  whether  the  examination  was
   undertaken whilst the appellant was  clothed  or  naked.   Finally,  the
   qualifications of the examining doctor (Dr A Hayes) are not  stated.  Ms
   Cleghorn submitted that these circumstances meant that the  findings  of
   the First-tier Tribunal were unsustainable insofar as they purported  to
   be based upon a comparison between the report of limited scarring in the
   'Gym Induction Report' and the report of  extensive  scarring  that  was
   noted during a clinical  examination  that  had  been  undertaken  by  a
   suitably qualified expert from the Medical Foundation  (Dr  Gorman)  for
   the specific purpose of assessing the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
   account of having been tortured in Uganda.

11. Whilst not conceding the force of the  above  arguments,  Mrs  Pettersen
   confined her argument to the fact that Judge Manuel's reasoning had  not
   been limited to a comparison of the scarring noted in the  two  reports,
   but had additionally considered the lack of evidence concerning the  age
   of the scars in question (paragraph 46)  and the  possibility  that  the
   acknowledged fact of  the  appellant's  depression,  anxiety  and  post-
   traumatic stress disorder was due  to  causes  other  than  her  claimed
   experiences in Uganda (paragraphs 49 and 50).

12. I  prefer  the  arguments  of  Ms  Cleghorn.  For  the  reasons  that  I
   summarised at paragraph 9, I am satisfied that the limited findings that
   were reported by Dr Hayes in the 'Gym Induction Report'  were  incapable
   of supporting the implied finding in  paragraph  42  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision that there was a real possibility that the scars noted
   by Dr Gorman were the result of subsequent  'self-infliction  by  proxy'
   (SIBP). Furthermore, it was incorrect for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
   state that, "Dr Gorman's report  is  solely  based  on  the  Appellant's
   account". The true  position  was  that  Dr  Gorman  had  expressed  her
   professional  opinion  about  the  degree  of  consistency  between  the
   appellant's account and the likely mechanism of injury that  had  caused
   the scars which she had observed upon clinical  examination.  Dr  Gorman
   had measured  the  degree  of  consistency  (which  was  admittedly  not
   considered to be of the highest level)  by  reference  to  the  Istanbul
   Protocol.  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal
   misdirected itself in law and reached conclusions  in  relation  to  the
   medical evidence that were not reasonably open to it on the evidence.

13. I am also satisfied that it was not reasonably open  to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal to  conclude  that  there  was  an  inconsistency  between  the
   appellant's account and the charge sheet upon which she  had  relied  as
   support for it. It is by no means unknown for a charge of conspiracy  to
   be drawn by reference  to  named  individuals,  together  with  'persons
   unknown'. By definition, it would not have been possible to  arrest  and
   thus to charge those whose identity is unknown. However, it was  neither
   implausible nor inconsistent with the appellant's account  for  them  to
   have been referred  to  in  a  charge  sheet  that  included  two  named
   individuals, one of whom was the appellant. The finding  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal to  the  contrary  was  not  therefore  supported  by  the
   evidence.

Conclusion

14. I have concluded that the errors of law which I have identified  are  so
   fundamental that none of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal can  be
   preserved. I have also concluded  that  because  this  will  necessitate
   further extensive fact-finding, the appropriate course is to  remit  the
   appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in  order  for  it  to  be  considered
   afresh.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
   appeal against refusal of her claim for asylum and her removal from  the
   United Kingdom is set aside, and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal for it to be decided afresh.

Anonymity is not ordered




Signed        Date 18th December 2014

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

