


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04390/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 4 May 2016                              |On : 13 May 2016              |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [m j]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hussain, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig
Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing [MJ]'s appeal  against  the
respondent's decision to remove him from the UK  following  the  refusal  of
his asylum claim.

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and [MJ] as the appellant, reflecting their  positions  as
they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 20 April 1985.  He  entered  the
United Kingdom clandestinely on 26 August 2014 and was served  with  illegal
entry papers on 29 August 2014 when found by the police. He  claimed  asylum
on 3 September 2014. His application was refused on 13 February 2015  and  a
decision was made the same day to remove him  from  the  UK.  The  appellant
appealed against that decision. His  appeal  was  heard  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 4 November 2015 and allowed in  a  decision  promulgated  on  13
November 2015. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to  appeal
that decision.

The Appellant's Claim

The appellant claims to be at risk on return to Iran as an Arab from  Ahvaz.
He claims to have met a man, [Q], through his friend [H], who spoke  to  him
about the rights of the people in Ahvaz and he told him that  he  wanted  to
help. [Q] gave him envelopes to distribute. A month later he went  out  with
[H] to distribute the material and he did this  five  times.  On  the  fifth
occasion [H] was arrested and taken away in a vehicle.  The  appellant  then
ran away and went to his uncle's house. His uncle arranged for a  person  to
take him out of Iran. He told him that he could not return to Ahvaz  because
the Ettela'at had raided his house. He feared returning to Iran.

The respondent noted that some of the  appellant's  account  was  consistent
with the background country information about  the  Ahvazi  Arab  community,
whereas his claim that his mother and sister worked  as  teachers  was  not.
The respondent did not accept the  appellant's  claim  to  have  distributed
leaflets and CDs due to discrepancies in his account and considered that  he
had given inconsistent evidence about whether  or  not  he  was  politically
active. It was not accepted that the authorities had  raided  his  house  or
that he was wanted by the authorities. It was not considered that  he  would
be at risk on return on the basis of having exited Iran illegally,  pursuant
to SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00053.  In  the
light of such adverse credibility findings the  respondent  did  not  accept
that the appellant was  an  Arab  from  Ahvaz  or  that  he  had  left  Iran
illegally.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foudy.  Judge
Foudy heard oral evidence from the appellant and considered a report from  a
Mr Samim Rashti. She accepted that the appellant was of Arab  ethnicity  and
from Ahvaz and she accepted his account  of  his  involvement  in  promoting
Arab human rights. She found that he would be at risk on return to  Iran  as
a result of his activities and  his  Ahvazi  profile,  in  addition  to  his
illegal exit from Iran. She accordingly allowed the  appellant's  appeal  on
asylum and human rights grounds.



The Secretary of State's appeal

The respondent sought permission to appeal Judge  Foudy's  decision  on  the
grounds that she had failed to provide adequate reasons  for  accepting  the
appellant's Ahvazi Arab ethnicity and  for  accepting  his  account  of  his
political activities. With  regard  to  the  first  ground,  the  respondent
considered that the judge had not engaged  with  the  respondent's  concerns
about the inconsistency between the appellant's background and  the  country
information about the Ahvazi Arabs,  that  she  had  erroneously  considered
that the respondent had conceded that the appellant  was  from  Ahvaz,  that
she had erroneously  considered  that  the  respondent  had  relied  on  the
appellant's use of Farsi to undermine his claim to be an  Ahvavi  Arab,  and
that she had erroneously placed weight upon a report which she had  accepted
was not an expert report. With regard to the second ground,  the  respondent
asserted that the judge had failed to engage with the respondent's  position
as  to  the  appellant's  inconsistent  evidence  about  his  own  political
motivations.

Permission was granted on 27 November  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
Andrew.

At the hearing before me I raised the matter of the  respondent's  reliance,
at [18] of the refusal letter, on the appellant's  apparent  statement  that
he was a member of Party Ahvaz  Group,  a  matter  that  the  appellant  had
repeatedly denied. Neither party  was  able  to  assist  as  to  where  that
statement was recorded and Mr Harrison had no  knowledge  of  any  interview
prior to the screening interview containing such a statement.


By way of submissions, Mr Harrison simply relied on the grounds of appeal.


Mr Hussain  submitted  that  the  judge's  error  in  considering  that  the
respondent had accepted that the appellant was from Ahvaz was  not  material
since she gave various other reasons for concluding that he  was  an  Ahvazi
Arab. She gave good reasons for accepting that he would  speak  Farsi  as  a
first language even though he was an Arab. She was  entitled  to  place  the
weight that she did upon the report from Mr Rashti. Further, the judge  gave
adequate  reasons  for  accepting  that  the  appellant  believed  that  the
leaflets he delivered were of a political nature  even  though  he  was  not
aware of their contents. There was no material error of law in  the  judge's
decision.


I advised the parties that, in my view, there was no error  of  law  in  the
judge's decision  requiring  that  it  be  set  aside.  My  reasons  for  so
concluding are as follows.


Consideration and findings.

It is accepted that  the  judge  erred  in  relying  upon  the  respondent's
concession that the appellant was from Ahvaz, when no  such  concession  had
in fact been made. However it is argued on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that
that error was not  material,  given  the  judge's  various  other  positive
findings. I agree with that. The judge gave  several  reasons,  at  [18]  to
[20] of her decision, for finding the appellant's account of  his  ethnicity
and origins to be credible. She accepted that  he  had  given  a  consistent
account of his background. She considered  his  use  of  Farsi  rather  than
Arabic as his first language and gave full and proper reasons, at [18],  for
concluding that that was not  inconsistent  with  his  ethnicity.  She  also
relied upon the report of Mr Rashti.

The respondent argued in her grounds that the judge  had  erred  by  relying
upon that report when she had otherwise found that Mr Rashti  could  not  be
described as an expert in linguistics and ethnicity. However I  would  agree
with Mr Hussain's submission in that respect,  namely  that  the  judge  was
fully aware of the failings in the report and was therefore cautious in  her
approach to the evidence given by Mr Rashti, but that she  was  entitled  to
rely on parts of the report which were not infected by those failings.  Very
specific questions were put to the appellant  about  the  geography  of  the
area from which he claimed to originate, namely  Ahvaz,  and  likewise  very
specific questions were put to him about the Arab ethnicity,  all  of  which
he was able to answer correctly. The respondent has not  sought  to  suggest
that the questions were  not  answered  correctly.  Accordingly,  I  see  no
reason why the judge was not entitled to rely on that aspect of  the  report
in supporting the appellant's claim to be an Ahvazi Arab.


I  would  also  agree  with  Mr  Hossain's  submission  in  regard  to   the
respondent's concern about  the  appellant's  evidence  of  his  mother  and
sister's  roles  as  teachers  being  inconsistent   with   the   background
information about the Ahvazi Arabs. Mr Hossain submitted  that  the  country
information did not say that no Ahvai Arab women had professional jobs,  but
rather that in general Ahvazi women  were  severely  discriminated  against,
and accordingly there was no inconsistency.  Mr  Harrison  did  not  dispute
this in  his  submissions.  Although  that  was  not  a  point  specifically
addressed by Judge Foudy, I agree with Mr Hossain that there were more  than
sufficient reasons given by her for otherwise finding the  appellant  to  be
an Ahvazi Arab. I therefore find that the first ground  has  not  been  made
out.


As regards the second ground, the respondent asserts that the  judge  failed
to engage with the concerns in the refusal letter as  to  the  inconsistency
in the appellant's evidence about his political  involvement.  However  that
was a matter to which the judge gave consideration in the latter three  sub-
paragraphs of [18]. It seems  to  me  that,  contrary  to  the  respondent's
assertion in the grounds,  the  judge  gave  full  and  proper  reasons  for
concluding that the appellant's evidence as regards his level  of  political
involvement and knowledge  was  credible.  She  found,  at  [21],  that  the
appellant had genuinely been involved in  promoting  Arab  human  rights  in
Ahvaz, despite his lack of knowledge of the contents of the leaflets he  was
delivering and his limited political involvement. That was  a  finding  that
she was entitled to make on the evidence before  her  and  for  the  reasons
properly given. I therefore also find no  merit  in  the  second  ground  of
appeal.


The respondent's grounds challenge only the  judge's  credibility  findings.
There is no challenge to her findings on risk on return. At  [22]  and  [23]
the judge gave full and proper reasons, based upon  the  background  country
information, for concluding that the appellant would be at  risk  on  return
on the basis of the profile she had accepted. That was clearly a  conclusion
which was fully and properly open to her on the evidence.

Accordingly, and for all of these reasons, I find no errors of law in  Judge
Foudy's decision such as to require  that  it  be  set  aside.  I  therefore
uphold her decision.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision. The  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to
allow the appellant's appeal stands.






















                                Signed
                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
