
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04888/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5th January 2015                          |On 7th January 2015            |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COATES

                                   Between

                           dulanj brian wijemanne
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 16th  June  1992.   The
    Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision  dated  30th  June
    2014 to remove him from the United Kingdom  following  refusal  of  his
    claim for asylum.

 2. His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler  in
    a determination promulgated on 29th August 2014.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by a  Designated
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 15th September 2014.

 4. The Appellant's immigration history shows that he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 13th July 2008 with a visa which allowed him  to  visit  his
    mother who was then studying in the UK.  The Appellant's father claimed
    asylum  on  17th  October  2008  and  the  Appellant  was  one  of  his
    dependants.  The father's application was refused and an appeal against
    that refusal was dismissed by Judge Pooler in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 28th February 2010.   Permission  to  appeal  was  refused  and  the
    father's appeal rights were subsequently exhausted.

 5. Thereafter the Appellant made his own claim for asylum.  His claim  was
    essentially based on the same facts as the claim by  his  father  which
    had been refused as mentioned above.

 6. The Designated Judge who gave permission to appeal  on  15th  September
    2014 considered that the issue was one of perception.  There was a real
    risk that Judge Pooler could be seen to be defending  his  own  earlier
    findings.  The issue was not whether the  judge  would  be  biased  but
    whether the reasonable bystander would perceive a risk.   Although  the
    First Tier judge appeared to have directed himself appropriately it was
    considered  arguable  that  he  reached  the  wrong  decision  on   the
    application (to recuse himself and adjourn the appeal) amounting to  an
    error of law.

 7. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper  Tribunal  on  5th  January
    2015.  The Appellant was present at the hearing.  Representation was as
    mentioned above.

 8. In submissions, Mr Mahmood relied upon the written grounds which he had
    submitted in support of the application for permission to  appeal.   In
    summary, he argued that the First-tier Judge  should  have  granted  an
    adjournment  because  he  had  previously  heard  the  appeal  of   the
    Appellant's father and dismissed that appeal.   Both  appeals  had  the
    same factual basis, the central reason being that the  Appellant  could
    not return to Sri Lanka on account of his  perceived  support  for  the
    LTTE.  The grounds also submitted that the reasons given by the  First-
    tier Judge in respect of his findings under Article 8  were  inadequate
    and insufficient.  A proper balancing exercise  had  not  been  carried
    out.

 9. Mr Mahmood confirmed that the main ground was not that  the  First-tier
    Judge was actually biased but there was  a  risk  of  a  perception  of
    unfairness arising from the fact that he had previously  dismissed  the
    appeal by the Appellant's father.

10. This issue  was  carefully  addressed  by  Judge  Pooler  beginning  at
    paragraph 10 of his determination.  He states -

         "Mr Mahmood applied for an adjournment because I was the judge  who
         had heard and dismissed the appeal by  the  appellant's  father  in
         February 2011.  The father's claim had the same  factual  basis  as
         that made more recently by the  appellant.   Mr  Mahmood  submitted
         that an adjournment was required in the interests of justice;  that
         findings which I had made in respect of  the  father's  credibility
         might 'have some impact' in the present appeal; and that there  was
         'a question of impartiality'.  Mr  Mahmood  did  not  submit  'that
         impartiality would not  exist'  but  submitted  that  it  would  be
         beneficial if the matter was heard by another  judge  who  had  not
         made findings on the father's claim'".

11. At this point I remind myself  that  following  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's father's appeal an application for permission to appeal was
    refused  and  his  appeal  rights  became  exhausted.   Therefore,  the
    findings made by Judge Pooler in  his  determination  of  the  father's
    appeal remain undisturbed.  They  should  be  the  starting  point  for
    further consideration of the same or similar issues in accordance  with
    the Devaseelan principles.

12. At paragraph 12 of the determination Judge Pooler has explained why  he
    decided to refuse Mr Mahmood's application for an adjournment  so  that
    the appeal could be heard by a different judge:

         "I declined to adjourn because I had  not  heard  in  Mr  Mahmood's
         application any basis on which I could find that a fair-minded  and
         informed observer could conclude that there was a real  possibility
         of bias.  In my judgment it was not sufficient that I had heard  an
         appeal by the appellant's father (who was to give evidence  in  the
         present appeal) or that I had reached findings in an  appeal  which
         had essentially the same factual basis."

13.  Plainly,  Judge  Pooler  had  regard  to  a  possible  perception   of
    unfairness, as relied upon by Mr Mahmood.

14. Judge Pooler proceeded to give careful consideration  to  the  relevant
    case law including the guidance given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  TK
    (Consideration of prior  determination  -  directions)  Georgia  [2004]
    UKIAT 00149.  Reference was also made to  the  guidance  given  by  the
    Court of Appeal in AH and AA [2007] EWCA Civ 1040  and  Ocampo  v  SSHD
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1276.

15. Judge Pooler then set out in detail the precise findings which  he  had
    made in the context of the Appellant's father's appeal.  He then states
    as follows at paragraph 20:

         "The appellant in the present appeal has  given  substantially  the
         same account as was given by his father in 2011, when the appellant
         had also given evidence; and his father has given  broadly  similar
         evidence in the present appeal to that which he  gave  in  his  own
         appeal.  I asked Mr Mahmood to identify  specifically  for  me  any
         evidence which was not before the Tribunal in 2011.  He directed me
         to photographs at pages 179 to 181 of the appellant's bundle  which
         showed broken windows in the  house  of  the  appellant's  maternal
         grandparents, caused by an attack on the house,  and  three  police
         reports dated respectively 10 January 2011, 22 August 2011  and  12
         October 2011.

         Under the Devaseelan guidelines, evidence  which  could  have  been
         before the earlier Tribunal but was not adduced may require  to  be
         treated with a degree of circumspection.  It appears that the first
         of these three reports relates to an incident on 16 April 2010; and
         it appears from my earlier determination at paragraph 11 that I was
         provided with a translation of a police report  made  on  16  April
         2010 by the appellant's grandmother.  Accordingly this evidence had
         previously been considered."

16.  Judge  Pooler  has  correctly  taken  his  earlier  findings  as   the
    appropriate starting point for his consideration.  This is confirmed at
    paragraph 27.  Clear and cogent reasons have been given in  support  of
    the judge's conclusion that he was not satisfied to the lower  standard
    of proof that the Appellant would be at real risk from the  authorities
    in Sri Lanka.

17. The judge proceeded to deal with the  Appellant's  private  and  family
    life claim under Article 8.  The determination records that it was  not
    the Appellant's pleaded case that he met the requirements of the  Rules
    relating to private life.  At the date of the  appeal  hearing  he  was
    aged 22, had been in the United Kingdom for a little over six years and
    had retained ties with Sri Lanka having been educated there to the  age
    of 16 and having relatives  still  living  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge
    concluded that no arguably good case was advanced for a grant of  leave
    outside the Immigration Rules and it was noted that Mr Mahmood did  not
    advance the Appellant's case on that basis.

18. I am satisfied that this  determination  discloses  no  error  of  law.
    Judge Pooler was obviously alert to the possibility of a perception  of
    unfairness or  bias  because  this  was  raised  by  Mr  Mahmood  as  a
    preliminary issue.  Judge Pooler's analysis of the situation is, in  my
    estimation, scrupulously fair  and  procedurally  correct.   I  am  not
    satisfied that there is any basis on which a fair-minded  and  informed
    observer could conclude that there was any  real  possibility  of  bias
    leading to unfairness arising from the manner in which the hearing  was
    conducted.

19. So far as the appeal  under  Article  8  is  concerned,  this  was  not
    seriously pursued by Mr Mahmood at  the  hearing  before  me.   In  any
    event, I am satisfied that Judge Pooler dealt fully and fairly with the
    Appellant's appeal under Article 8 at paragraph 34 onwards.

20. Miss Johnstone's submission on behalf of the Respondent was brief.  She
    relied upon a Rule 24 response dated 25th September 2014 and  upon  the
    recent guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in MM (Unfairness; E and R)
    Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC).  The head note to that  decision  states
    that where there is a defect or impropriety of the procedural nature in
    the proceedings at first instance, this may amount to a material  error
    of law requiring the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  set
    aside.  For the reasons which I have already given, I am satisfied that
    there was no such defect or impropriety in  the  proceedings  at  first
    instance.

NOTICE OF DECISION

I uphold the First-tier Tribunal's determination and dismiss the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 6th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 6th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Coates




