
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04250/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 March 2015                              |On 17 April 2015              |
|Delivered orally                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                     AR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION preserved)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Sultan, Legal Representative of Hamlet
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of Bangladesh born on  10
    May 1972, against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fitzgibbons
    QC, who  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  12  December  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on 29 December 2014 dismissed his  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

2.   At paragraphs 1  and  2  of  his  determination  the  First-tier  Judge
    succinctly summarised the Appellant's immigration history as follows:

         "1.  The Appellant was born on 10 May 1972  and  is  a  citizen  of
             Bangladesh.  Between 1991 and 2002 he lived in Abu Dhabi where
             he was employed as a  domestic  worker.   He  arrived  in  the
             United Kingdom on 13 October  2002  from  Abu  Dhabi,  with  a
             domestic worker (visitor) visa that was valid until  19  April
             2003.  By his own admission he overstayed.  On 16 August  2008
             he applied for further leave to remain outside the Immigration
             Rules relying on Articles 2 and 3 of the  European  Convention
             of Human Rights (ECHR).  He maintained that his employers  had
             tortured him and he  could  not  return  to  Bangladesh.   The
             Secretary of State refused his  application  and  he  lost  an
             appeal against the decision in April 2010.

         2.   On 9 April 2013 the Appellant was found working illegally at a
             restaurant.  He  was  arrested  and  held  in  detention.   He
             claimed asylum on 9 April 2013 and had a  screening  interview
             that day and a full asylum interview on 28 May  2013.   On  12
             June 2014 the Secretary  of  State  issued  a  notice  of  her
             decision to remove him to  Bangladesh  and  a  refusal  letter
             (RL).  The  Appellant  appeals  under  Section  82(1)  of  the
             Immigration, Nationality and Asylum Act 2002."

3.    It  was  noted  that  the  Appellant  claimed  that  he  would   "face
    persecution and/or grave breaches of human rights" due to  his  support
    for the banned Jamaat-i-Islam party (JI), and/or because his  political
    opponents were involved in a dispute about the ownership of his  family
    land.  The Judge noted that alternatively,  the  Appellant  claimed  an
    entitlement to humanitarian protection  and  that  his  "removal  would
    place the United Kingdom in breach of its obligations under Articles  2
    and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights" (paragraph 3).

4.   Having heard the Appellant give oral  evidence  and  having  considered
    that evidence both oral and  documentary  in  its  totality  the  Judge
    concluded that the Appellant's claim was a  fabrication.   It  was  not
    credible and that he only made it:

         "... with  the  intention  solely  of  defeating  the  Respondent's
         intention to remove him as an overstayer and not because  he  fears
         persecution or breaches of human rights on return.  As he  said  in
         2010 and repeated at the hearing on 12 December  2014,  he  prefers
         life in the UK."

5.   It would be as well for the purpose of this determination  to  set  out
    in full the First-tier Judge's comprehensive reasons  for  so  finding.
    They are set out at paragraphs 8 to 15 of his determination as follows:

         "8.  The Appellant has given two dates for joining the student wing
             of JI: at Q3-4 of his asylum interview he said  he  joined  in
             1984 when he was 12 and at Q7-8 he said he was 17 or 18.   His
             membership caused no problems  while  he  was  in  Bangladesh,
             before he went to Abu Dhabi.  He maintains that the banning of
             JI in 2013 and a subsequent violent and persecutory  crackdown
             by the authorities puts him at risk if he returns.

         9.   In his evidence he was unable to indicate why he thought  that
             his membership of JI's student wing twenty years ago  when  it
             was a legal party would place him in danger  today.   He  said
             his activities consisted in organising speeches  and  lectures
             by party figures in his home area.  He said that his skull-cap
             and his beard marked him out as a devout Muslim and  this  was
             enough to put him at risk, but he  accepted  that  very  large
             numbers of religious Bangladeshi  men  have  beards  and  wear
             skull-caps and are not persecuted.  Mr Kannagara [the  Counsel
             who appeared before the First-tier  Judge  on  behalf  of  the
             Appellant] relied on the generalised risk from the authorities
             that he said attached to those associated with JI.

         10.  The Appellant had no documentary evidence of his membership or
             association  with  JI.   When  asked  about   any   continuing
             involvement during his time in the UK, he first said  that  he
             had had none because he has never had enough money  to  travel
             to events; but later he claimed he had gone to  a  meeting  in
             Cardiff in the summer of 2014 and  had  dealings  with  a  man
             called Khaled Ali.  He did not  ask  Mr  Ali  to  support  his
             appeal as he did not think it would be necessary.  It is clear
             that his JI activity since he left Bangladesh in 1994 has been
             minimal.

         11.  I am not  satisfied  that  he  has  ever  had  a  high  enough
             political  profile  to  be  of  interest  to  the  Bangladeshi
             authorities.  There is no evidence to suggest that a member of
             the student wing  of  JI  twenty  years  ago  is  at  risk  of
             persecution or human rights breaches in Bangladesh  today.   I
             note that in  his  2010  appeal  he  said  nothing  about  his
             political activities and views as  the  basis  for  his  human
             rights claim.  At that time, JI  leaders  were  on  trial  for
             their part in war crime committed in the 1971  Pakistan  civil
             war that led to the founding of Bangladesh as a separate state
             and there was much violence directed by  and  towards  JI  (as
             reported in the latest Country of Origin Information Report in
             August 2013, which was not referred to  at  the  appeal).   He
             gave evidence about the date he joined the  student  wing  and
             whether he had continued his activities in  the  UK.   If  his
             political activities had been a matter of potential concern to
             him, I would expect him to have mentioned them  in  his  human
             rights appeal in 2010.  I conclude that they were not and that
             the fears he now says he has are exaggerated and are not well-
             founded.

         12.  The second limb of his appeal is his fear of persecution as  a
             result of a land dispute.  He asserts that his father and  his
             uncle are in dispute with other family members.   The  dispute
             had been going on since 2008.  Those on the other side of  the
             dispute are members of the Awami League, the party in power in
             Bangladesh and opponents of JI.  He fears  that  his  past  JI
             involvement will create a  specific  risk  because  the  Awami
             members will use it against him in the land dispute and either
             kill or injure him with impunity or expose him to risk of ill-
             treatment by the authorities for political reasons.

         13.  In my view, the credibility of this part of his claim was very
             low.  The determination of his 2010 appeal makes no  reference
             to evidence about land dispute even though he  now  claims  it
             began in 2008.  His evidence to me was that he did mention  it
             in the  previous  appeal.   The  Immigration  Judge  wrote  at
             paragraph 10 'I enquired of the Appellant  why  he  could  not
             return to Bangladesh.   He  told  me  he  had  no  family  and
             preferred to live in the UK'.  He now says  that  he  and  his
             father and uncle are there (and  the  family  members  on  the
             other side of the dispute).  He said that  what  he  meant  in
             2010 was that there was no-one  there  capable  of  supporting
             him.  I reject his explanation for the change of his  account.
             I follow the guidance in  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  by
             taking previous findings of fact as my starting point, subject
             to revision in the light of further  credible  evidence  or  a
             change of circumstances.  I am satisfied that the  Immigration
             Judge correctly recorded his evidence and that he asserted  he
             had no family in Bangladesh.  If he had meant that he had  no-
             one who could support  him,  he  would  have  said  it.   This
             evidence, together  with  his  failure  to  mention  the  land
             dispute, give a clear indication that he has  fabricated  this
             part of his claim recently.  He  has  failed  to  produce  any
             documentary  evidence  about  the  dispute  or   any   witness
             statements from family members engaged in it.

         14.  I also bear in mind that  he  only  made  the  present  asylum
             application  after  he  was  found  working  illegally  as  an
             overstayer.   His  immigration  history  is  poor  as  he  has
             overstayed since 2003.  He was unable to give  a  good  reason
             for not attempting to regularise his status  during  the  five
             year period between 2003 and 2008 or the three  years  between
             the dismissal of his  human  rights  appeal  and  the  present
             claim.  Having considered his  evidence  in  the  round  I  am
             satisfied that he has  made  this  claim  with  the  intention
             solely of defeating the Respondent's intention to  remove  him
             as an overstayer and  not  because  he  fears  persecution  or
             breaches of his human rights on return.  As he  said  in  2010
             and repeated at the hearing on 12 December  2014,  he  prefers
             life in the UK.

         15.  I therefore  find  that  this  part  of  his  account  is  not
             credible, even on the low standard of proof  that  applies  in
             this case.  It follows  that  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant has discharged the burden of proving he is  in  need
             of international protection."

6.   The Appellant made a successful application for  permission  to  appeal
    that decision, claiming that the Judge  had  "failed  to  consider  the
    Appellant's Article 3 claim properly", and that he had  "not  evaluated
    the current circumstances of the Appellant".   Further  the  Judge  had
    failed to consider the Appellant's private life, given that he had been
    in the United Kingdom since October 2002. In addition, that  the  Judge
    had made an earlier finding that the Appellant  was  not  credible  and
    finally the Judge in finding that the Appellant had "little claim  with
    Article 8 and therefore can be deported" had  "wrongfully  given  extra
    weight on the Appellant's credibility".

7.   In granting permission First-tier Judge Osborne appears to have  wholly
    rejected the Appellant's challenge to the Judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings but continued:

         "Nonetheless the Judge  failed  in  the  Decision  and  Reasons  to
         mention Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR and further failed to  mention
         the Appellant's appeal in relation to private life  which  although
         not particularised in the grounds as  relying  upon  Article  8  is
         nonetheless mentioned in terms of the Appellant's record during his
         stay in the United Kingdom and his medical problems which he claims
         should be taken into consideration in the interests of justice."

8.   Although not the subject of challenge in the grounds in support of  the
    Appellant's application for permission to  appeal,  FtJ  Osborne  noted
    that in the original grounds the Appellant had made a  brief  reference
    to Article 15C of the EU Qualification Directive  that  the  Judge  had
    failed to consider.

9.   Thus the appeal came before me on 17 March 2015,  when  my  first  task
    was to decide whether the determination of  the  First-tier  Judge  was
    such as may have materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

10.  At the outset of the hearing, Mr Sultan  made  an  application  for  an
    adjournment.  He explained that he was  instructed  to  do  so  by  the
    Appellant and was thus  simply  following  instructions.   He  produced
    medical evidence that Mr Sultan maintained showed  that  the  Appellant
    could not attend the hearing before me although I  must  say  that  the
    records that I am looking at talk about X-rays on some specified  date.
    Notably and realistically and indeed most fairly Mr Sultan continued:

         "I accept there is nothing in that  evidence  to  suggest  that  he
         would be unable to attend today and be fit to give oral evidence if
         required.  In any event I recognise this is an error of law hearing
         and that unless a material error of  law  is  found  the  Appellant
         would not be required to give such evidence  today.   I  am  simply
         following my client's instructions."

11.  Not surprisingly  in  such  circumstances  Mr  Avery  raised  a  strong
    objection to  this  adjournment  request  maintaining  that  there  was
    nothing within it that would warrant an adjournment.   I  informed  the
    parties that for the reasons not least most  fairly  and  realistically
    acknowledged by Mr Sultan, with which I entirely agreed, that there was
    indeed nothing in this request to suggest that it would be  unfair  not
    to grant it and that the request to adjourn was therefore refused.

12.  Further at the outset of the hearing,  Mr  Avery  produced  a  document
    that being a typed copy of the notes of the Presenting  Officer,  Ms  N
    Ibe, taken contemporaneously at the hearing before the First-tier Judge
    and within which the following was stated:

         "The Appellant clearly admitted that he had lied  in  the  previous
         appeal.  The Appellant confirmed to the Judge that he had no family
         when the Appellant clearly does.  The Appellant is a  42  year  old
         man who is able to live an independent life in the UK and therefore
         can live in Bangladesh independently."

13.  At the top of  the  notes  under  the  subheading  "Preliminaries"  the
    following is stated:

         "HOPO had not received the Appellant's  bundle.   IJ  provided  the
         HOPO with the bundle  and  provided  the  HOPO  time  to  read  the
         documents.  The Appellant would no longer seek to rely upon Article
         8 as there was a previous determination" (Emphasis added).

14.  In response to that matter Mr Sultan clarified to me as follows:

         "I cannot comment on the  HOPO's  note  because  there  is  nothing
         before me from the Counsel who appeared on behalf of the  Appellant
         before the First-tier Tribunal and I am therefore not in a position
         to say that Article 8 was  as  recorded  by  the  HOPO  not  to  be
         proceeded with."

15.  Mr Sultan continued, however, that the grounds of permission to  appeal
    raised a  challenge  to  the  First-tier  Judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings but he acknowledged that First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne had
    not granted permission to challenge those  findings.   This  of  course
    placed him in a difficult situation in terms of arguing that the  Judge
    materially erred in law in what he put was an absence of  consideration
    of issues relating to Articles 2 and 3.  He nonetheless relied  on  the
    grounds, at least to the extent upon which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.

16.  Mr Avery in response referred  me  to  the  Rule  24  response  of  the
    Secretary of  State  in  her  letter  of  3  February  2015  where  the
    Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant   demonstrated   any
    freestanding risk of a breach of Article 2 or 3 of the ECHR and that in
    respect of Article 8 the Judge would have in any event  been  bound  to
    follow Section 117B of the 2014 Act  and  placed  little  weight  on  a
    private life built up by the Appellant whilst his stay was  precarious.
    It followed, said Mr Avery, that even if the contention that the  Judge
    failed to consider Article 8 was made  out,  there  would  still  be  a
    failure to establish an error of law material to the outcome,  in  that
    had he done so, he would have been bound to follow  the  provisions  of
    117B when, in the  light  of  the  Appellant's  precarious  immigration
    history, such a claim would have failed in any event.

Assessment

17.  I have had no difficulty in concluding that the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Judge fails to disclose even an arguable error of  law,  let
    alone an error material to the outcome of this appeal.

18.  With great respect to the Judge who granted permission  to  appeal,  it
    was not the Appellant's contention that the Judge  failed  to  consider
    the Appellant's Article 3 claim but that he did not do  so  'properly'.
    Further the grounds seeking permission to appeal  made  no  mention  or
    raised any challenge to the determination of the  First-tier  Judge  in
    terms of Article 2 and the  original  grounds  raised  no  issue  under
    Article  8.   In  addition  there  is  nothing   within   the   Judge's
    determination to suggest that an Article 8 issue was raised before  him
    at the hearing in circumstances where I note  that  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Counsel.  I am reinforced  in  that  conclusion  by  the
    production by Mr Avery of the Presenting Officer's notes of the hearing
    which  included,  and  it  is  worth  repeating,  the  following:  "The
    Appellant would no longer seek to rely upon Article 8 as  there  was  a
    previous determination".  In fairness to  Mr  Sultan  he  felt  himself
    unable to comment upon  the  Presenting  Officer's  recording  of  that
    matter.  It is in any event not in such  circumstances  an  appropriate
    challenge to the Judge's findings to seek to raise  such  issues  after
    the appeal has been heard.  For the sake of completeness, I  would  add
    that I find myself in accord with Mr Avery in his submission, that even
    if the Judge had considered Article 8 it would have failed,  not  least
    because he would have been bound to follow the  provisions  of  Section
    117B of the 2014 Act  and  placed  little  weight  on  the  Appellant's
    private life built up whilst his stay was precarious.

19.   It  is  also   apparent   from   reading   the   determination,   that
    (notwithstanding the brief reference that was developed no  further  in
    the original grounds and, I would repeat, to  which  no  challenge  was
    raised in the grounds in support of the application for  permission  to
    appeal) issues relating to Article 15C were not raised before the First-
    tier Judge at the hearing.

20.   It  is  absolutely  clear  that  the  Judge's  comprehensive   adverse
    credibility findings were amply supported by and open  to  him  on  the
    evidence and thus sustainable in law.  I have reminded the  parties  of
    the guidance of the Supreme Court in MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC  49  that
    held inter alia, that where a person tells lies about issues which that
    person thinks are important to their claim which because of the passage
    of time otherwise are not, it is open to the Tribunal given the earlier
    lies to approach with caution that person's evidence regarding  matters
    that are essential to the current claim.

21.  Mindful that the Appellant at ground  1  contended  there  had  been  a
    failure to consider  his  Article  3  claim  'properly'  the  challenge
    continued:

         "The Appellant says that he fears the prosecution (sic) if deported
         as the local police is easily influenced by the local party leader.
          He says that it is not  necessary  that  he  must  hold  a  higher
         position to be prosecuted, but the likelihood of being referred  to
         the police, showed the FtT should have  considered  the  Article  3
         claim and would have found that the Appellant  fears  the  risk  of
         going into prison or prosecuted or be tortured  by  the  police  in
         Bangladesh."

22.  Further at ground 4 it is said that:

         "The FtT erred in finding that the Appellant  has  no  credibility.
         The Appellant always  provided  credible  evidence  issued  from  a
         competent authority.  The fact is that the Appellant did not  claim
         asylum  at  his  earliest  opportunity  and  has  a  very  credible
         explanation.  The  Appellant  was  scared  of  being  deported  and
         apprehended by the Home Office in any event.  Not only, any refusal
         of his claim would require  him  contacting  a  private  solicitor,
         which is very expensive.  Therefore he would not be able to  afford
         to conduct his case."

23.  The grounds continued that had  the  Judge  considered  the  Article  8
    claim

         "... he would have found that the Appellant has a valid  Article  3
         claim and therefore  cannot  be  deported  to  Bangladesh  and  any
         attempt to remove him from the United Kingdom  would  lead  to  the
         violation of his human rights."

24.  Ground 6 contends that the Judge had "wrongfully given extra weight  on
    the Appellant's credibility".

25.  As I reminded Mr Sultan at the hearing,  and  with  which  he  did  not
    disagree, the grounds of  permission  excluded  any  challenge  to  the
    Judge's adverse credibility findings.

26.  In EN v SSHD [2014] ScotCS CSIH 47 it was noted in  MA  (Somalia)  that
    the court should not be astute to characterise as an error of law  what
    in truth is no more than a disagreement with the Tribunal's  assessment
    of facts, and it would appear that  is  the  approach  that  First-tier
    Judge Osborne took in not granting permission  in  respect  of  grounds
    that challenged the First-tier Judge's adverse credibility findings.

27.  I am entirely satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal were  entitled  to
    reject the substance of the claim.  In light of the First-tier  Judge's
    adverse credibility findings I find it cannot  even  arguably  be  said
    that the Judge in inter alia dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  under
    Articles 2 and  3  of  the  ECHR  without  further  reference  to  thus
    materially erred in law.  It could not have been more self-evident from
    the Judge's reasoning, that the Appellant had failed even to the  lower
    standard of proof to establish that he would be at  real  risk  to  his
    life and/or Article 3 ill-treatment if now returned to Bangladesh.

28.  Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982 I find that it cannot be  said  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's findings were irrational and/or Wednesbury unreasonable such as
    to amount to perversity.  It cannot be said that they were  inadequate.
    It is not a case where the First-tier Judge's reasoning was  such  that
    the Tribunal was unable to understand the  thought  processes  that  he
    employed in reaching his decision.

29.  I find that the Judge properly  identified  and  recorded  the  matters
    that he considered to be critical  to  his  decision  on  the  material
    issues raised before him in this appeal.  The  findings  that  he  made
    were clearly open to him on the evidence and thus sustainable in law.

Decision

30.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law and I order that it shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 9 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

