

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      AA/04139/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 17th October 2014                         |On 13th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AAH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr Tarlow,  Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Chirico, Counsel instructed by Coram Children's
                       Rights Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Trinidad and Tobago. On the  30th  July
    2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Traynor) allowed his appeal against
    the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain
    and to remove him from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s47  of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.   The Secretary  of  State
    now has permission to appeal that decision[1].


 2. The basis of the Respondent's claim was that he  faced  a  well-founded
    fear  of  persecution  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  for  reasons  of  his
    membership of a particular social group.  He  is  a  gay  man,  and  he
    claimed to have suffered persecution because of this.


 3. The Secretary of State accepts that the Respondent is gay, and that  he
    has had relationships with other men in both Trinidad and the UK. It is
    further accepted that he suffered physical and mental  abuse  from  his
    own parents when they discovered the truth about his  sexuality  whilst
    he was still a young teenager. The Secretary of State did  not  however
    believe that the Respondent faced  a  currently  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Trinidad. It  was  not  accepted  that  the  police  had
    refused to protect him. Although homosexuality is  unlawful  there  the
    country background material indicates that  there  have  not  been  any
    prosecutions  for  many  years.  It  is  accepted  that  there  is  not
    widespread societal tolerance of homosexuality, but  the  Secretary  of
    State considers there to be a sufficiency of protection such  that  the
    discrimination  that  is  faced  by  gay  men   does   not   constitute
    persecution. Asylum was therefore refused.

 4. The Respondent appealed this decision to the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    Tribunal heard oral evidence from the Respondent, and took into account
    a large bundle of country background evidence submitted on his  behalf.
    This included an expert report by Dr Keith  McNeal,  an  anthropologist
    based at Houston University  who  has  recently  published  a  book  on
    homosexual identity in Trinidad and Tobago. Dr McNeal found all of  the
    Respondent's evidence to be in keeping with his  own  understanding  of
    the difficulties faced  by  homosexual  men  there  who  wish  to  live
    'openly'. The First-tier Tribunal further had the benefit of a  medical
    report prepared by Professor Katona,  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist,  who
    concluded that the Respondent was suffering  from  complex  PTSD  as  a
    result of his experiences in Trinidad.

 5. The Tribunal found as fact that the Respondent had faced persecution in
    the past. There was only one material credibility issue to resolve, and
    that was about the attempt by the Respondent to access protection  from
    the police. He had claimed that after being assaulted by his parents he
    had gone to the police who had "laughed in his  face".    The  Tribunal
    weighed in the balance the Respondent's own consistent  evidence  about
    this incident, the fact that he had been found to be  credible  by  the
    Secretary of State about the core of his claim, the "very objective and
    balanced" report of Mr McNeal  about  the  likelihood  of  him  getting
    sufficient protection and the medical  evidence  of  Professor  Katona.
    Against this the Tribunal considered the  country  background  material
    relied upon by the Secretary of State, in particular the  material  set
    out in the refusal  letter.  Having  done  so  he  concluded  that  the
    Respondent had discharged the burden of proof. The police  in  Trinidad
    had refused to help him in the past.  This led the Tribunal to conclude
    that the Respondent would not  receive  sufficient  protection  in  the
    future.  As to the Respondent's ability to  live  "discreetly"  and  so
    avoid further problems the Tribunal attached considerable weight to the
    report of Professor Katona, to the effect that it would be "impossible"
    for this  young  man  to  conceal  his  identity.  He  found  that  the
    Respondent was suffering from PTSD and there  would  be  a  significant
    likelihood of him being re-traumatised should he  return  to  Trinidad.
    He was  a  vulnerable  young  men  experiencing  episodes  of  suicidal
    ideation and he required  urgent  and  intensive  therapeutic  support.
    Having  regard  to  those  particular  features  of  the   Respondent's
    personality, the First-tier Tribunal found that he would be at risk  in
    Trinidad today.   The appeal was allowed on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds. In respect of the latter, the Tribunal had regard to Professor
    Katona's "entirely reliable" evidence  about  the  Respondent's  mental
    health and suicidal ideation. Having done so it found his removal to be
    a disproportionate interference with his private life.


 6. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
    following respects:

        i) Failure to take into account of and/or resolve conflicts in  the
           evidence.


           The particulars of this complaint  are  that  the  Secretary  of
           State  had relied on country background material which indicated
           that gay people in Trinidad and Tobago suffered  discrimination,
           but not persecution.


       ii) Making a material misdirection in law.


           The grounds allege that the determination refers in three places
           to "discrimination" when that is not the relevant test under the
           Refugee Convention.


      iii) Failing to apply the test in  Gulshan  (Article  8  -new  rules-
           correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 to the findings of Article  8,
           in   particular   failing   to    identify    the    "compelling
           circumstances".


    Error of Law

 7. There is no error of law in this decision.


    Ground 1


 8. The first ground submits  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to  pay  any  or
    adequate regard to the country background evidence  which  showed  that
    gay men in Trinidad suffer discrimination. As I understand  it,  it  is
    suggested that this was relevant to  the  risk  assessment  because  it
    showed that gay men are not persecuted in  Trinidad,  suffering  "only"
    discrimination.  As a preliminary observation I would note that none of
    the evidence cited in the refusal letter was actually made available to
    the First-tier Tribunal. It is therefore somewhat surprising  that  the
    Judge is now being criticised for failing to consider evidence that was
    not in fact before him. In his Rule 24 response Mr  Chirico  highlights
    the potential problem  in  expecting  the  Tribunal  to  treat  refusal
    letters as evidence: paragraph 71 of that letter sets  out  an  article
    from 'Gaytimes.com" which, I am told, does not in fact exist. No source
    reference is provided for this article and it cannot be located  by  an
    online search.

 9. All of that said I am not satisfied that the Tribunal did overlook  the
    material set out in the reasons for refusal letter, since much of it is
    reproduced in full  at  paragraphs  28-32  of  the  determination,  and
    referenced elsewhere. Moreover this argument overlooks two basic tenets
    of asylum law. The first is that there is no need  for  a  claimant  to
    establish that everyone in his social group faces a real risk of  harm.
    There may well have been country background evidence out there  showing
    that not all gay men are persecuted. The situation would for  instance,
    be very different for a rich tourist than for  a  poor  local.   It  is
    enough to show that the claimant himself, for whatever  reason,  is  at
    risk. That leads to the second problem. That is the clear  findings  of
    fact that this claimant had already suffered persecution for reasons of
    his sexual identity, persecution from which the  state  was  unable  or
    unwilling to protect him.  Paragraph  339K  of  the  immigration  rules
    states that this must be taken as a serious indication that  such  harm
    would be repeated, unless there were good reasons to believe  that  the
    situation had changed. There were no such reasons.  The  Tribunal  took
    care in distinguishing the position of this claimant as opposed to  the
    generality of gay men in Trinidad. Particular emphasis  was  placed  on
    his mental state, and the great  importance  to  his  identity  of  not
    living in  the  closet.    The  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  reach  the
    conclusions it did, notwithstanding the Secretary of State's recitation
    of the country background material in the refusal letter.


    Ground 2


10. This ground is entirely without merit.   I asked Mr Tarlow to  identify
    where in the  determination  the  term  "discrimination"  was  used  in
    isolation. He could not. The Tribunal  refers  to  "discrimination  and
    persecution"  "discrimination  or  direct  violence",  "discrimination,
    abuse and ill-treatment".  It nowhere suggests that  discrimination  of
    itself could constitute persecution.


    Ground 3


11. This ground is also entirely without merit. Apart from  the  fact  that
    the Gulshan "test" has now been disapproved by the Court of Appeal in R
    (MM) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 it  is  self-evident  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances in this case, those being that the  Respondent
    is gay man facing return to a country where he  had  faced  persecution
    and rejection by those closest to him, where he would face overwhelming
    societal discrimination should he chose to leave the closet  and  whose
    fragile mental health would deteriorate further faced with the constant
    fear of violence and abuse.  I am not aware that the Rules provide  for
    consideration of such a factual matrix: this being  one  of  the  cases
    where they are not a 'complete code' the Judge was obliged  to  conduct
    his own Huang/Razgar assessment of proportionality.   He did this,  and
    there is no fault in his reasoning.


      Decisions

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.


13. I make a direction for anonymity having had regard to Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders:


      "Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,   the
      Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall
      directly or indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This
      direction applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
      Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt of  court
      proceedings".







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           8th November 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 28th August 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Simpson

