
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04892/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On the  21st  April  2016                                                 On
the 4th May 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                          DR MOHAMMAD K.H.M. ASSAF
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                    Claimant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                             Appellant in the Upper Tribunal
Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr Ly (Counsel)
For the  Secretary  of  State:  Mr  Duffy  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Adio promulgated on  the  16th  February  2016  in
      which he allowed the Claimant's appeal on asylum grounds and on  Human
      Rights grounds pursuant to Article 3.  For  the  purposes  of  clarity
      throughout this decision, although Dr Assaf was the  Appellant  before
      the First-tier Tribunal,  he  will  be  referred  to  throughout  this
      decision as "the Claimant" and the Secretary of State will be referred
      to as "the Secretary of State".

   Background

   2. It is the Claimant's case that he is a Palestinian national.  His date
      of birth is the 15th March 1975.  On the 15th April  2014  he  claimed
      asylum.  It is the Claimant's case that he initially left Palestine at
      the age of 19 years old and lived in  Romania  as  a  student  for  13
      years, where he had a residency permit which has since expired.  It is
      his case that he had had problems in Palestine when he applied  for  a
      job in the Ministry of Health and was asked to  bring  clearance  from
      the security authority.   Further,  he  encountered  problems  when  a
      militant group demanded money from his cousin and accused  his  cousin
      of being an agent, working as an informer for the Israelis  and  ended
      up killing his cousin in July 2011.

   3. The Claimant claims that he was very vocal  and  outspoken  about  his
      cousin's death as those responsible were not held accountable and that
      around October 2011 he was assaulted and warned that if he carried  on
      talking he would have the same fate as his cousin.  He  said  that  he
      went to the  police  but  they  advised  him  not  to  make  a  formal
      complaint.  The Claimant's case is that his father was  assaulted  and
      asked about the Claimant's whereabouts.

   4.  The Claimant was granted a spouse visa for the United Kingdom between
      the 25th August 2011 and the 25th November 2013.  On the 16th  January
      2012 he left Palestine, travelling to Jordan  by  bus  and  then  left
      after 2 days, flying to Romania.  On the 13th March 2012  he  flew  to
      the UK travelling on his own passport.  He came to join his wife.  His
      application for extension of his visa was  refused  and  he  separated
      from his wife in 2013. On the 15th April 2014 he claimed asylum. As at
      the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  he  had  a  Romanian
      girlfriend who he had been seeing for 5 years.  It was  said  that  he
      feared the al-Aqsa militants.

   5. The  Claimant's  claim  for  asylum  was  initially  rejected  by  the
      Secretary of State in a refusal letter dated the 4th March 2015.   The
      Secretary of State noted that on his first 2  visa  application  forms
      for the United Kingdom the Claimant had stated  that  his  nationality
      was Jordanian and that he had never held  any  other  nationality  and
      that his parents were Jordanian nationals and it was not accepted that
      he was a Palestinian national with no other nationality or entitlement
      to residency.  Nor was it accepted by the Secretary of State that  the
      Claimant's cousin was murdered as claimed or  that  the  Claimant  was
      threatened or would be at risk as a result on the basis  that  it  was
      found that the Claimant had not mentioned his cousin being murdered at
      the screening interview and did not provide a reason pertaining to his
      cousin's murder for claiming asylum during his asylum  interview.   It
      was further found by the Secretary of State that the Claimant would be
      able to return to Jordan where he had previously lived  without  being
      at real risk of persecution or serious harm and it  was  not  accepted
      that he had genuine subjective  fear  on  return  to  the  Palestinian
      Authority or to Jordan.  It was found that there  was  sufficiency  of
      protection for the Claimant in Jordan and that on his basis his  claim
      for asylum, humanitarian protection and in respect of his Human Rights
      was rejected.

   6. The Claimant sought to appeal against that decision to the  First-tier
      Tribunal and that appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio
      on the 18th August 2015, the 19th October 2015 and  the  19th  January
      2016.  Within his decision Judge Adio accepted that the Claimant is  a
      Palestinian national.  He found that the  Claimant  held  a  Jordanian
      passport was simply "as submitted by  Mr  Ly  due  to  the  fact  that
      following  1988  new  regulations  were  enacted  that  rendered   the
      passports of Palestinians living in the West Bank temporary." at  [33]
      of his decision and that the new temporary passports were  only  valid
      as a travel document and did not confer citizenship and did not have a
      national number at [34] and [35].

   7. Within his findings First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio  found  that  the
      Claimant was afraid of non-state agents  and  that  the  Claimant  had
      mentioned that he feared the outlaw organisation, specifically the al-
      Aqsa militants in his  asylum  interview  and  that  he  had  given  a
      consistent account regarding the beatings that he had received at  the
      hands of the group and how the group had beaten and broke his cousin's
      leg in March 2010 and gone on to kill his cousin in July 2011 and  how
      the Claimant himself had been beaten in the streets  in  October  2011
      and that following attack in the Claimant's home in  January  2012  he
      left and his father had been beaten.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio
      found that there was a consistent account regarding the harassment and
      torture that the Claimant had received at the  hands  of  the  al-Aqsa
      group and that this was a case of imputed  political  opinion  as  the
      Claimant did state that his cousin was seen as  an  informant  to  the
      Israelis at [40].

   8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to find that internal relocation
      within the West Bank would be difficult for the Claimant at  [43]  and
      that it would be unreasonable to expect him to relocate  in  the  West
      Bank where he had already suffered an attack on the  streets  and  his
      father had suffered an attack at home and where the Claimant  had  not
      lived in Gaza for over 20 years and would have no means of  supporting
      himself.  The Judge therefore allowed the Claimant's appeal on  asylum
      grounds and on Article 3 grounds.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  now
      sought to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal.

   The Grounds of Appeal

   9. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge has erred in law in finding that although the Claimant  holds  a
      Jordanian passport he does not have the right to reside in Jordan.  It
      is argued that it is unsustainable that  the  holder  of  a  country's
      passport would not be legally allowed to enter that country or allowed
      to live there and that it is the Home Office's intention to return the
      Claimant to Jordan.

   The Grant of Permission to Appeal

  10. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Davidge on the 1st March 2016 who found that  there  was  an  arguable
      error of law in the assessment of risk  in  the  country  of  intended
      removal, namely Jordan.  It was on  that  basis  that  the  case  came
      before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   Oral Submissions

  11. In his oral submissions on behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Duffy
      quite properly conceded that the  ground  of  appeal  upon  which  the
      Secretary of State had  sought  permission  to  appeal  and  had  been
      granted permission to appeal in fact had no merit.

  12.   Mr Duffy conceded that the ground of appeal  that  argued  that  the
      Judge had erred in finding that the holder of a Jordanian passport did
      not have  the  right  to  reside  in  Jordan  and  that  that  was  an
      unsustainable finding, was in effect an argument about perversity, but
      that on the evidence actually before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
      that was a finding that was open to him.  Mr Duffy on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State referred me specifically to  the  letter  from  the
      Palestinian Mission to the UK dated the 31st March 2015 at page 11  of
      the Claimant's bundle in which the consular department had stated that
      the Claimant "holds a temporary Jordanian passport that the government
      of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan used to provide to the  Palestinian
      citizens, before the creation of the Palestinian authority,  in  order
      to facilitate their movement and travel only.   To  the  best  of  our
      knowledge and belief, the temporary Jordanian passport does not  grant
      its holder the right to reside or work in Jordan.".  He also  referred
      me to the letter from the Embassy of the Hashemite Kingdom  of  Jordan
      at page 12 of the Claimant's bundle which  stated  that  "This  is  to
      confirm that Mr Mohammad K.H.M. Assaf is the  holder  of  a  Jordanian
      temporary passport issued in Amman on 10/8/2011, valid  for  5  years.
      Mr Assaf is not a Jordanian citizen and he  doesn't  have  a  national
      number.".  Mr Duffy also said that the Judge did have before  him  the
      research  article  from  Mr  Gabbay  in  respect  of  the  status   of
      Palestinians  in  Jordan  and  the  anomaly  of  holding  a  Jordanian
      passport, and that in light of all of this evidence the  finding  that
      "although the Appellant had completed application forms  which  showed
      that he stated that he was a Jordanian national, the  reality  of  the
      matter is that this was only  a  travel  document  for  the  Appellant
      because of his Palestinian background" was a finding that was open  to
      the Judge and that the Judge  was  also  entitled  to  find  that  the
      Claimant was not a Jordanian citizen with full rights of citizenship.

  13. However, Mr Duffy argued that one point that had not  been  raised  by
      the Secretary of State within her Grounds of Appeal and also which  Mr
      Duffy conceded in respect of which permission to appeal had  not  been
      granted, was whether or not the correct test which  he  said  was  the
      balance  of  probabilities  had  been  applied  by  the   Judge   when
      considering the question of the nationality of the  Appellant  and  in
      determining whether or not  he  was  Jordanian  and/or  a  Palestinian
      national.  In this regard Mr Duffy referred me to the Court of  Appeal
      case of RM (Sierra Leone) v  The  Secretary  of  State  For  the  Home
      Department [2015] EWCA Civ 541 and the  conclusions  of  Lord  Justice
      Underhill at paragraphs 35 and 36 of the Judgment.  He told me that he
      appreciated his difficulty in making that submission, as permission to
      appeal had not been granted in respect of that point,  but  sought  to
      argue that it was a Robinson obvious point which the  Tribunal  should
      therefore consider.

  14. Mr Ly on behalf of the Claimant, sought to argue  that  there  was  no
      material error of law in the Judge's reasoning and that  the  findings
      of the Judge were open to him on the evidence.   He  sought  to  argue
      that the Judge had applied the correct standard of proof, but even  on
      the balance of probabilities, the  finding  regarding  the  Claimant's
      nationality based upon the letter from the  Palestinian  Mission,  the
      Jordanian Embassy, and the research article would have been the  same.



  15. In answer to my question as to the country the removal directions  had
      stated the Claimant was due to be removed to, Mr Duffy confirmed  that
      the removal directions only provided for the Claimant to be removed to
      Palestine, rather than Jordan.  Mr Duffy also agreed  that  under  the
      case of RM (Sierra Leone) v  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department, that a different standard of proof was to be adopted  when
      considering nationality, depending upon the legal issue  to  which  it
      was relevant and that if the question was relevant as  to  whether  or
      not a Claimant would suffer persecution,  the  lesser  standard  would
      apply, but it was relevant to other issues, such as whether in fact it
      was possible for him to be returned and any rights that may accrue  if
      it is not, the standard was then  the  balance  of  probabilities,  as
      stated by the Court of Appeal at [35] of the Judgment in the  case  of
      RM (Sierra Leone).

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  16. Within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that:

      "It is submitted that the Immigration Judge  has  erred  by  making  a
      finding that although the Appellant holds a Jordanian passport he does
      not have the right to reside in Jordan  (see  para  33  &  34  of  the
      determination).  It is submitted that it is an  unsustainable  finding
      that the holder of a country's passport to  which  there  is  not  any
      suggestion that it was false or wrongly obtained, is not a person that
      would legally be allowed entry to that country, in this  case  Jordan,
      or be allowed to live there.  It is the  Home  Office's  intention  to
      return the Appellant to Jordan.".

  17. However, as was quite properly conceded on behalf of the Secretary  of
      State by Mr Duffy, that the Grounds of Appeal as drafted, in fact have
      no merit, despite the fact that permission to  appeal  is  granted  in
      respect of them.  Mr Duffy himself  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
      State, referred me to the letter from the consular department  at  the
      Palestinian Mission to the UK at page  11  of  the  Claimant's  bundle
      dated the 31st March 2015, that the Claimant  does  hold  a  temporary
      Jordanian passport which the  Hashemite  Kingdom  of  Jordan  used  to
      provide to the  Palestinian  citizens,  before  the  creation  of  the
      Palestinian authority, in  order  to  facilitate  their  movement  and
      travel only and that to the best  of  their  knowledge  and  belief  a
      temporary Jordanian passport does not grant its holder  the  right  to
      reside or work in Jordan. He also referred me to the letter  from  the
      Embassy of Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan at page 12 dated the  8th  June
      2015  which states that Mr Assaf is not a Jordanian citizen  and  does
      not have  a  national  number,  despite  having  been  issued  with  a
      Jordanian temporary passport.

  18.  Mr Duffy also referred me to the  article  regarding  the  status  of
      Palestinians in Jordan and the anomaly of holding a Jordanian passport
      by Mr Gabbay at the University of Denver, Colorado, in  which  it  was
      stated that "In Jordan, not all passports grant the  same  privileges.
      Following the 1988  judicial  administrative  disengagement  from  the
      occupied territories, new regulations were enacted that  rendered  the
      passports of Palestinians living  in  the  West  Bank  temporary.   In
      practical  terms,  this  designation  meant  that  the  new  temporary
      passports were now only valid as a travel  document  -  it  no  longer
      conferred citizenship and it no longer had a  national  number.   This
      situation created an anomaly 'a counterintuitive  result  whereby  the
      holders of a passport [with no national number] have far fewer  rights
      (in fact none) compared to the holder of a mere  [Jordanian]  identity
      card which includes a national number'.

  19. Mr Duffy quite properly conceded that in light of these documents  the
      findings  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio  that  the   temporary
      Jordanian passport held by the Claimant was only  a  travel  document,
      were open to him. He also conceded that the finding that the  document
      did not confer full citizenship was open to the Judge on the evidence.



  20. Although within the grant of permission to appeal it was  stated  that
      the Judge had arguable failed to appreciate the holding of a Jordanian
      passport meant the Claimant had  a  right  to  reside  in  Jordan  and
      accordingly he would legally be allowed to  enter  into  the  country,
      given the evidence from the State of Palestine consular department  at
      page 11 that the holder of a temporary Jordanian passport did not have
      the right to reside or  work  in  Jordan,  I  find  that  the  Judge's
      findings in that regard were open to him.  The Secretary of State  has
      been unable to produce any evidence, as was conceded by Mr  Duffy,  to
      in fact show that the Claimant would have had a  right  to  reside  in
      Jordan, or that  he  would  in  fact  have  had  the  rights  of  full
      citizenship, without a national number.

  21. In any event, although within the Grounds of Appeal it was stated that
      it was intended that the Claimant be removed to Jordan,  as  Mr  Duffy
      conceded on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  in  fact  the  removal
      directions simply refer to the Claimant being  removed  to  Palestine.
      Any suggestion, therefore, within the grant of  permission  to  appeal
      that the Judge had arguably wrongly failed to take into account as  to
      whether or not the Claimant would be entitled to enter Jordan, was not
      in fact the basis of any of the findings made by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Adio, and there was no error in  the  Judge's  findings  between
      [33] and [35] in  respect  of  whether  or  not  the  Claimant  was  a
      Jordanian national and/or a Palestinian national.  The Judge  did  not
      make findings as to whether or not the Claimant could safely  live  in
      Jordan, as that was not  being  argued  before  him,  what  was  being
      argued, was whether or not he could safely be returned Palestine.

  22. In respect of the argument raised by Mr Duffy that  the  Secretary  of
      State should be allowed to argue that the wrong standard of proof  was
      adopted by the Judge when considering the question of  the  Claimant's
      nationality and that the standard  of  proof  that  should  have  been
      applied was a balance of probabilities rather than the lower  standard
      of proof, I find that this argument was not raised by the Secretary of
      State, nor was permission granted on such a basis  to  raise  such  an
      argument before  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Davidge.  This is an entirely new argument  that  was  not  previously
      raised, and in respect of which permission  to  appeal  has  not  been
      granted.

  23. I do not consider that in the circumstances of this case, the question
      as to whether or not the Judge had applied  the  correct  standard  of
      proof in respect of the nationality of the Claimant for  the  purposes
      of considering the claim under the Refugee Convention or the ECHR  was
      an  obvious  point  for  the  purpose  of  being  "Robinson  obvious",
      following the case of R v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      ex parte Robinson [1997] 3WLR 1162, given that as was  stated  by  the
      Court of Appeal in the case of RM (Sierra Leone) v  The  Secretary  of
      State For the Home Department at [35] the standard of proof should  be
      applied to the question of an applicant's nationality depends upon the
      legal issue to which it is relevant.  If it is relevant to whether  or
      not he will suffer persecution (whether by reference  to  the  Refugee
      Convention or Article 3) the lesser standard will apply but if  it  is
      relevant to some other issue - such as whether it is in fact  possible
      in practice for him to be returned, and any rights that may accrue  if
      it is not - the standard is a balance of  probabilities.   Given  that
      the standard of proof in such circumstances depends upon the issue  to
      which it relates, I do not consider that this is an obvious point when
      reading the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio.   This  is  a
      technical legal argument and is not a Robinson obvious point.

  24. I therefore find that the Secretary of State should not be allowed  to
      argue this new argument, not having relied upon this  argument  within
      the Grounds of Appeal and not having been granted  permission  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge or the Upper Tribunal to argue the point.

  25. However, even if I am wrong  in  this  regard,  in  my  judgment,  the
      argument in any event has no merit,  given  that  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Adio was clearly considering the question as to whether  or  not
      the Claimant was a Jordanian and/or  a  Palestinian  national  between
      [33] and [35] before then going on to consider immediately thereafter,
      the question as to whether or not the Claimant's claim that  he  would
      be at risk upon return  to  Palestine  should  be  accepted.   He  has
      therefore  considered  it  as  part   of   the   overall   credibility
      consideration, when determining whether or not the Claimant  would  be
      at real risk of persecution upon return to Palestine.  The  Judge  has
      not considered whether or  not  the  Claimant  could  be  returned  to
      Jordan, as the removal directions, as conceded by Mr  Duffy,  did  not
      provide for him to be returned to Jordan, they only provided  for  him
      to return to Palestine.  Therefore, the Judge  has  correctly  applied
      the correct standard of proof being the lower standard of proof,  when
      considering  the  question  of  the  Claimant's  nationality  for  the
      purposes of determining  the  question  of  whether  he  would  suffer
      persecution either under the Refugee Convention or Article 3.

  26. However, even if I am wrong in this regard, and the Judge should  have
      applied the balance of probabilities, any error  in  this  regard  was
      immaterial, given that on the evidence presented from the  Palestinian
      Mission, the Jordanian Embassy and the research article regarding  the
      status of Palestinians in Jordan, even if the Judge had considered the
      evidence in that regard on the balance of probabilities, his  decision
      would inevitably have been the same.  The Secretary of  State  had  no
      evidence to put before the Tribunal, to say that that evidence  should
      be disregarded or was in any way wrong.  The  findings  of  the  Judge
      would  therefore  inevitably  have  been  the  same  on  this   issue,
      irrespective of the standard of proof  adopted,  as  to  whether  that
      should  have  been  to  the  lower  standard  or  on  the  balance  of
      probabilities.

  27. In such circumstances the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio
      does not disclose any material error of law and is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Adio  does  not  contain  any
material error of law and is maintained.

Signed
[pic]

Deputy      Judge      of       the       Upper       Tribunal       McGinty
Dated 23rd April 2016

