
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04136/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                  |
|On 28 July 2015                      |On 11August 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                 MAJID ABDUL
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer (counsel), instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    I have considered whether any party  requires  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of the appellant.  Having  considered  all  of  the  circumstances  and  the
evidence, I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity order.

2.    This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Keith promulgated on 10 December 2014, dismissing his  appeal
against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse his asylum claim.

Background

3.    The appellant is an Afghan national, born on 1 January 1995.

4.    The appellant entered the UK on 10 November 2009  and  claimed  asylum
the day he arrived. On 10 May 2010, his application for asylum  was  refused
but, because he was a minor, he was granted discretionary  leave  to  remain
until 1 July 2012. He did not  exercise  a  right  of  appeal  against  that
decision. On 29 June 2012, he applied for  further  leave  to  remain.  That
application was refused by the respondent on 6  June  2014.  It  is  against
that decision that the appellant appealed on 20 June 2014.

The Judge's Decision

5.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Keith ("the judge") dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The
judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness.

6.    On 5 May 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge  Lindsley  granted  permission  to
appeal, noting inter alia "the appellant will however have to show that  the
arguable errors, particularly with regard to the background  evidence,  also
show that return to Kabul is unduly harsh or unsafe for  the  appellant  for
ultimately there to be a material error of law in the First Tier  Tribunal's
decision on the asylum appeal".

The Hearing

7.    Mr Palmer, Counsel  for  the  appellant,  relied  on  the  grounds  of
appeal, submitting that it was arguably impossible to  see  that  the  judge
considered  all  of  the  evidence  placed  before  him  and  made  rational
findings, and that there was no proper reason for not finding the  appellant
to be a credible witness. He complained that for  the  pivotal  findings  in
fact, inadequate reasons were given and that  inadequate  consideration  had
been given to the totality of the background  materials  placed  before  the
judge. He argued that the appellant is a vulnerable  young  man  who  cannot
safely return to Kabul and that it is  unreasonable  for  the  appellant  to
relocate to Kabul from his home area of Ghanzi.

8.    For the respondent,  Mr  Kandola  stated  that  although  the  judge's
findings in fact were brief, the judge has set out  enough  to  support  his
conclusion; that the judge was entitled to make the  findings  that  he  did
and to consider the weight to be given to each piece of evidence. He  argued
that the judge's findings in fact demonstrate that there is nothing  unusual
about this appellant's circumstances and that this appellant is  a  19  year
old adult male who will not attract the  attention  of  the  Taliban  if  he
returns to either his home province of Ghanzi or to Kabul.

Analysis

9.    Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
authority or to distinguish it  with  adequate  reasons,  ignoring  material
considerations by taking into account  immaterial  considerations,  reaching
irrational conclusions on facts or evaluation or giving  legally  inadequate
reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,  constitute  errors  of
law.

10.   It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration  Judge  to  give
too little weight or too much weight to a factor,  unless  irrationality  is
alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to  deal
with every factual issue under argument. Disagreement with  an  Immigrations
Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence or assessment  of
credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give rise  to  an  error  of
law.  Rationality  is  a  very  high  threshold  and  a  conclusion  is  not
irrational just because some alternative explanation has  been  rejected  or
can be said to be possible. Nor is it necessary to consider  every  possible
alternative inference consistent with truthfulness  because  an  Immigration
judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If a  point  of  evidence  of
significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a  failure  to  take
into account a material consideration. In Mibanga v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ
367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging such findings:

    "Where, as in this case, complaint is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
    adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
    credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that the criticism
    is as to the fundamental approach of  the  adjudicator,  and  does  not
    merely reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate tribunal that  it
    might itself have taken a different view of the matter from  that  that
    appealed to the adjudicator."

11.   I have looked at the decision in SSHD - v - AJ  (Angola)  [2014]  EWCA
Civ 1636 that an error of law by the First-tier Tribunal may  be  considered
immaterial -

    " ... if it is clear that on the  materials  before  the  Tribunal  any
    rational Tribunal must have come to the same conclusion  or  if  it  is
    clear that,  despite  its  failure  to  refer  to  the  relevant  legal
    instruments, the Tribunal has in fact applied the  test  which  it  was
    supposed to apply according to those instruments."

12.   Credibility assessments by first instance fact finding Tribunals  will
normally be challengeable only on the basis of irrationality: Edwards - v  -
Bairstow [1956] AC 14.

13.   The refusal letter of 10 May 2010 accepts the general  credibility  of
the appellant's history in Afghanistan  and  accepts  that  the  appellant's
father's corpse was returned to the family home by the Taliban, but that  is
not sufficient for the appellant to be  successful.  The  appellant's  claim
turns on a continued  interest  by  the  Taliban  which  would  give  him  a
significant profile on return to Afghanistan. The Home  Office  reasons  for
refusal letter of 6 June 2014 does not accept  the  appellant's  claim  that
his brother was murdered by the Taliban nor that  he  had  received  written
threats from the Taliban. The appellant  had  fair  notice  that  those  are
matters for proof by credible and reliable evidence.

14.   Although the appellant produces a bundle  under  Rule  15(2a)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, counsel  for  the  appellant
chose not to refer to any  part  of  that  bundle.  I  have  considered  the
background materials contained in that  bundle.  They  make  it  clear  that
Afghanistan is far from peaceful, the Afghan  parliament  was  recently  the
subject of an armed attack by the Taliban, and that  returns  to  Kabul  for
young men who have had protection and education  in  the  UK  through  their
childhood is not without difficulty, but none of the evidence placed  before
me demonstrates that the appellant has  a  particular  profile  which  would
make return to Kabul unduly harsh for the appellant.

15.   In AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT  00163(IAC)  the
Tribunal held that whilst when assessing a claim in the context  of  Article
15(c) in which the respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a  viable
internal relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both
in assessing "safety" and reasonableness") not only the  level  of  violence
in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that city's  poor  and
also the many  Internally  Displaced  Persons  (IDPs)  living  there,  these
considerations  will  not  in  general  make  return  to  Kabul  unsafe   or
unreasonable.

16.   In Husseini v Sweden (Application no. 10611/09) ECtHR (Fifth  Section)
the Afghani applicant was from Ghazni and was of mixed  Hazara  and  Pashtun
ethnicity.  The ECtHR held  (in  October  2011)  that  that  there  were  no
indications that the situation  in  Afghanistan  was  so  serious  that  the
return of the Applicant thereto would constitute, in itself, a violation  of
Article 3.  Although there were impediments to  enforcing  expulsion  orders
to Ghazni province, it was possible and reasonable to expect  the  Applicant
to re-settle elsewhere in Afghanistan, for  example,  in  Kabul  or  Mazar-e
Sharif.  Having regard to that conclusion and UNHCR guidelines, it  appeared
that an internal relocation alternative was available to  the  Applicant  in
Afghanistan.

Conclusion

17.   The judge's findings in fact are brief but they are to the point.  The
judge states in unambiguous terms that he did not find the appellant  to  be
a credible witness. Before making that finding in fact, the judge  carefully
discusses all of the evidence produced in the  case  and  gives  appropriate
self-direction on the relevant law.

18.   The conclusions reached by  the  judge  were  conclusions  which  were
manifestly open to him on the evidence  produced  in  this  case.  They  are
supported by the judge's findings  in  fact.  In  reality,  the  grounds  of
appeal  argued  amount  to  little  more  than  a  disagreement   with   the
conclusions reached by the judge. They do not amount to  an  argument  which
sets out material errors of law.

CONCLUSION

19.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20.   The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      3rd August 2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
