
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04938/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on 6 March 2018                          |on 30 April 2018                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                PAUL DUFFOUR
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Farryl, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates   Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with permission against a  decision  of  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Alis, promulgated on 27 June 2016, in  which  the
       Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights
       grounds.




Background


    2. The appellant is a national of Ghana who entered the  United  Kingdom
       as a visitor on 9 October 2003. His leave to enter expired on 4 March
       2004 and he has remained unlawfully as an overstayer ever since.  The
       appellant claimed asylum on 12 March 2014  and  a  decision  for  his
       removal pursuant to section 10 Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  was
       served on 10 March 2015. On 23 March 2015 the  appellant  lodged  his
       appeal which is the matter before the Judge.

    3. At [19] the Judge writes "The  respondent  accepted  in  her  refusal
       letter the appellant's account is credible but argued that either his
       claim was not a Convention reason  or  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
       protection or internal relocation was  available.  Additionally,  she
       submitted the appellant did not satisfy the Immigration Rules  as  it
       was not disproportionate to require him and, if necessary,  his  wife
       and child to relocate to Ghana or Zimbabwe".

    4. The Judge noted the evidence provided with  the  required  degree  of
       anxious scrutiny before setting out findings of fact between [37] and
       [73] of the decision under challenge. The  Judge's  findings  can  be
       summarised, inter-alia, in the following terms:

             i. The appellant claims his account of his  problems  in  Ghana
                started after he came to the United  Kingdom.  He  suspected
                his wife of having an affair. In October 2003 he was  unable
                to contact his wife and eventually in January  2004  he  was
                told she had moved Mr Kwame into what was  his  family  home
                [37].


            ii. The appellant had not spoken to or seen Mr  Kwame  since  he
                arrived in the United Kingdom  but  believed  him  to  be  a
                "notorious criminal" who the police  will  not  take  action
                against [38].


           iii. The appellants fear is  simply  that  his  wife  has  a  new
                partner and that he would be at risk from him. The appellant
                has failed to show he is a member  of  a  particular  social
                group and advanced no evidence that would  demonstrate  this
                man has any control anywhere  other  than  where  he  lived.
                [43].


            iv. At best, Mr Kwame is a non-state actor and no  evidence  was
                adduced to support the claim that the police  would  not  do
                anything about him. It is also the case internal  relocation
                will be available. The appellant accepted he could  live  in
                Accra. The Judge did not find it reasonably likely that  the
                appellant would bump into someone who lived in  a  city  150
                miles away [44].


             v. The appellant is healthy, in a fresh  relationship,  with  a
                young child. No adverse medical evidence was produced  about
                the child [46].


            vi. The appellant's wife  is  HIV-positive  but  the  Judge  was
                provided with no evidence  regarding  the  same.  The  Judge
                found it appears this was something she contracted a  number
                of years ago and now has twice yearly check-ups and receives
                medication to control her condition [47].


           vii. The refusal letter addresses both the  question  of  whether
                the appellant's wife and child would be allowed  into  Ghana
                and the availability of medication in Ghana [48]. The  Judge
                finds the Country of Origin Information  Report  for  Ghana,
                May 2012,  confirms  the  appellant's  wife  be  allowed  to
                accompany  him  as  long  as  she  applied  in  the   manner
                prescribed.  The  Judge  concludes  she  will  be  able   to
                accompany the appellant as will their child [49].


          viii. The Judge found that sufficient treatment for the wife's HIV
                is available in Ghana [50] and that  as  Ghana  is  English-
                speaking there will be no language issues [51].


            ix. Relocation other than to the appellant's home area  was  not
                found to be either unreasonable or unduly harsh [52].


             x. The Judge finds the appellant is not a refugee or  a  person
                entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection and that  the
                appellant failed to establish he faces  a  risk  of  serious
                harm.


            xi. The Judge finds there is no evidence the appellant would not
                receive protection in his home state, if required,  and  had
                not established risk of serious  harm.  There  has  been  no
                direct contact between the appellant and his wife  in  Ghana
                [59].


           xii. The Judge notes the appellant's representative  accepted  in
                his oral submissions  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  the
                Immigration Rules. The Judge finds the appellant had  failed
                to  establish  insurmountable  obstacles  to   family   life
                continuing outside the United Kingdom [62]. The Judge  finds
                the  appellant  had  failed  to  show   the   existence   of
                significant obstacles to reintegration into Ghana [63].


          xiii. Adopting the structured  approach  set  out  in  Razgar  and
                considering section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
                Asylum Act 2002, the Judge found it a proportionate decision
                as medical facilities for HIV are available in Ghana and the
                appellant's wife (the child's mother) has no  lawful  status
                in the United Kingdom [71].


           xiv. The child's mother is a  national  of  Zimbabwe.  The  Judge
                finds the child would remain with his parents and  there  is
                nothing before the Judge to suggest that requiring the whole
                family to move to either Ghana or possibly Zimbabwe will  be
                disproportionate.


    5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
       another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  8  January  2018.  The
       matter comes before the Upper Tribunal for the purposes of  assessing
       whether an error of law has been made material  to  the  decision  to
       dismiss the appeal.

Error of law


    6. The appellant asserts the Judge erred  as  his  wife  and  child  are
       Zimbabwe nationals whereas the appellant is Ghanaian.  The  appellant
       claims that other members of the family have no right  to  reside  in
       Ghana and claims that his wife and child will not be able  to  settle
       with him in his home state. The appellant also claims the  child  has
       been born in the United Kingdom and attends school here and questions
       whether the Judges  carried  out  the  correct  assessment  regarding
       whether the appellant can return.

    7. The appellant asserts he has a right to know how the decision is made
       and that the Judge failed to show it was  not  in  the  child's  best
       interests to remain in the United  Kingdom  with  both  parents.  The
       appellant states the Judge should have made such a finding.

    8. A reading of the Reasons for Refusal letter  shows  the  respondent's
       case was that the parties can relocate to either Ghana  or  Zimbabwe.
       The appellant claims that his wife and child  will  not  be  able  to
       travel to Ghana with him but a response to a question  asked  of  the
       appellants representatives was that no application had been  made  to
       the Ghanaian authorities to ascertain whether they  were  willing  to
       grant the appellant's wife and child leave to  enter  and  remain  if
       they accompanied him from the United Kingdom.

    9. The reality is that no member of this family unit has  any  right  to
       reside in the United Kingdom. In addition, there was no evidence that
       the appellant could not return with his wife and child to Zimbabwe.

   10. The child is not a qualifying child. Although  Mr  Bates  raised  the
       question of whether the child  is  a  duel  national,  this  was  not
       pursued before the First-tier Tribunal.

   11. The evidence does not show the  child  has  health  or  developmental
       difficulties and had only just started school  at  the  date  of  the
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

   12. It is clear the Judge  considered  the  evidence  with  the  required
       degree of anxious  scrutiny  and  has  given  sufficient  reasons  in
       support of the findings made. As such the weight to be given  to  the
       evidence was a matter for the Judge.

   13. The best interests of the child are clearly for the child  to  remain
       with both parents. The burden remained upon the  appellant  to  prove
       his case and the finding by the Judge  that  the  appellant  had  not
       discharged this burden on the evidence made available is  within  the
       range of findings reasonably open to the Judge. It was  not  for  the
       respondent to prove the appellant could do something but  rather  for
       the appellant to prove he could not if this is what he  was  alleging
       as part of his appeal.

   14. It was not made out before the  Judge  that  the  appellants  partner
       would be unable to secure the necessary permission to  enter  and  to
       remain in Ghana provided she remained living with him and that he had
       lawful rights of residence in Ghana. The  reference  in  the  grounds
       seeking permission to appeal that a woman married to a man who  is  a
       national of  Ghana  can  apply  for  registration  as  a  citizen  is
       different from the question of whether a person can secure  entry  to
       Ghana to accompany their spouse.

   15. In relation to Zimbabwe, no evidence was provided  to  the  Judge  to
       show the appellant could not accompany his wife and child or that  it
       would be unreasonable to expect him to relocate to that  country,  if
       required.

   16. Section  55  and  the  best  interests  of  the  child  were  clearly
       considered as was the appellant's wife HIV status.

   17. On the basis of the evidence before the  decision-maker,  it  is  not
       made out the Judge erred in law in a manner material to the  decision
       to dismiss the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper  Tribunal
       interfering in this decision.


Decision

   18. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.


  Anonymity.

   19. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 26 April 2018












