
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/04528/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Sent           |
|On 3 February 2014                            |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey and
                         Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

                                   Between

                               SHAPOUR HASSANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson (of Counsel) instructed by Broudie
                  Jackson Canter, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

1.   The Appellant is a national of Iran, aged 33 years.   This  appeal  has
    its origins in a decision made on behalf of the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department ("the Secretary of State), dated 25th  April  2013,
    whereby the Appellant's application for refugee status was refused.
 2. Our analysis is that the Appellant's  application  for  refugee  status
    entailed the following core assertions:

     (i) He first attended an anti-government  demonstration  in  Tehran  on
         15th June 2009, designed to highlight the lack of voting rights  of
         Irani citizens.

    ii)  Between 18th June 2009 and 25th May 2012 he attended five  further
        comparable demonstrations in Tehran.  His role  was  that  of  mere
        participant and he was not the subject of any adverse attention.


   iii)  In the course of these  demonstrations,  his  friends,  using  the
        Appellant's mobile phone, recorded footage showing sections of  the
        crowd, including the Appellant, chanting, together with the burning
        of waste bins.

    iv)  The Appellant subsequently uploaded these videos onto his computer
        and retained them.

     v) On 20th November 2012, the police escorted the Appellant's  brother
        to the police station and went to the  family  home,  seizing  some
        unspecified belongings, including the Appellant's laptop.   At this
        juncture, another brother advised the Appellant not to go home.  He
        stayed in a friend's house for two nights.  On the second of  these
        dates, the police went to the Appellant's place  of  work  and  his
        parent's home, signalling an intention  to  detain  him.   He  then
        travelled to the north of Iran, staying in Ramsar for six nights.


    vi) With the assistance of a brother and an agent, he then travelled to
        Turkey and onward to the United Kingdom, arriving on  6th  December
        2012.

 3. The Appellant claimed asylum upon arrival in the United Kingdom on  7th
    December 2012.  Following the customary interviews, the  aforementioned
    decision on behalf of the Secretary of State  ensued.  The  refusal  of
    refugee status was based mainly on a close analysis of  various  claims
    and assertions made by the Appellant  which  were  deemed  unworthy  of
    belief.   Various  perceived  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  were
    highlighted.  It  was  further  determined  that,  in  any  event,  the
    Appellant would not be exposed to a real risk of any form of proscribed
    treatment upon return to Iran, essentially on  account  of  his  modest
    profile.

FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL DETERMINATION

 4. The First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT") dismissed the  Appellant's  ensuing
    appeal.  We distil from the determination the following clear findings:

     a) The Appellant, in  common  with  hundreds  of  thousands  of  other
        Iranians, engaged in three public demonstrations protesting against
        the Presidential election, in June and July 2009,  encountering  no
        problems with the authorities.


     b) These were the only political activities  in  which  the  Appellant
        engaged.

     c) Some demonstrations were recorded on his mobile phone.

     d) He did not upload and retain these recordings on his laptop.

     e) He has engaged in no political activities in the United Kingdom.

    It was not disputed by either parties' representative that, by virtue of
    finding (d), the Judge, by necessary implication, rejected  those  parts
    of the Appellant's story relating to subsequent seizure by the police of
    an incriminating laptop and discovery of the alleged video recordings.


 5. Duly analysed, we consider  that  the  Appellant's  claim  for  refugee
    status  had   three   core   elements:   his   participation   in   the
    demonstrations, the recording of some of these  events  on  his  mobile
    phone and the subsequent uploading of these records  onto  his  laptop,
    with the consequences which he attributes to the latter  element.   The
    Judge accepted the first two elements, but disbelieved the third. Thus,
    the Appellant's case was found to be credible in two key respects,  but
    not credible in one further, critical respect.  The Judge articulated a
    series of reasons for disbelieving the third element of the Appellant's
    claim.  We summarise these as follows:

       i) The Appellant gave two markedly inconsistent explanations for  the
          alleged uploading and retention of the  video  recordings  on  his
          laptop.


      ii) He stated in his evidence that there was no internet connection in
          his home area.

     iii) Given this lack of internet connection, he was unable  to  explain
          how his younger brother had illegally downloaded  music  from  the
          internet onto "pirated" CDs, which he sold for a living.

      iv) While (on the one hand) claiming that his younger brother had been
          arrested (in  effect,  the  event  precipitating  the  Appellant's
          flight), he (on the other hand) testified that he  had  not  asked
          his  parents  about   his   brother   during   several   telephone
          conversations following his flight from Iran.

       v) He then stated that during his brother's detention the  recordings
          on the Appellant's laptop had been exposed -  based  on  what  his
          brother had told him.

      vi) Next, he  testified  that  he  had  not  spoken  to  his  brother,
          repeating this.

     vii) This was followed by an answer to the effect  that  he  was  "only
          guessing" what his brother had said in detention.

    viii) Whereas when interviewed  the  Appellant  stated  that  his  older
          brother had informed him of the release  of  his  younger  brother
          from detention  before  21st  March  2013,  his  evidence  to  the
          Tribunal was that he did not know for how  long  the  brother  had
          been detained.

      ix) Whereas in the screening interview he stated  that  he  went  into
          hiding in the north for eight days, at the main  asylum  interview
          his account was that he had  spent  two  days  with  a  friend  in
          Shahriyar, followed by six days in Ramsar in northern Iraq.

    The  Judge  made  the  following  explicit  statements  regarding   the
    Appellant's credibility:


         "In my judgement, there is a clear contradiction in the Appellant's
         oral  evidence.  I  find  that  the  Appellant  cannot  keep  to  a
         consistent story because he has not been telling the truth ....


         I find that there are material inconsistencies in  the  appellant's
         evidence relating to  the  core  elements  of  his  asylum  account
         notwithstanding the fact that it is a relatively simple story.   At
         the hearing, the Appellant  showed  himself  to  be  an  unreliable
         witness ..."

 6. In the Determination, the Judge also referred to the  decisions  in  BA
    Iran CG [2011] UKUT 00036 (IAC) and SB Iran CG [2009] UK AIT 00053.  In
    a latter passage, he stated:

         "By reference to the Country Guidance Case Law in SB  and  BA,  the
         Appellant will not face a real risk of return  to  Iran  merely  by
         reason of him having exited [sic] Iran illegally or being  returned
         from the UK  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  I  conclude  that  the
         Appellant's claim on the ground of his imputed political opinion is
         not well founded."

    This passage is found at the end of paragraph  [36].   The  Judge  then
    expresses his omnibus conclusion:


         "[37]    On the basis of the facts as described above, I find  that
             the Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof of having
             a well founded fear of persecution for a reason recognised  by
             the Geneva Convention."

         [Emphasis added.]


    The Judge, in similar terms, also rejected the Appellant's  claims  for
    humanitarian protection and under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.




PERMISSION TO APPEAL: PRACTICE

 7. We consider it necessary to highlight an issue of practice relating  to
    applications for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    context is the following.

 8. An application was made for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
     This was based on grounds settled by  Counsel.   The  application  was
    refused by a Judge of the FtT.   Next,  the  application  was  renewed,
    based on newly formulated grounds settled by different  Counsel.   This
    resulted in permission to appeal being granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb.

 9. At the outset of the hearing of this appeal, much time was expended  in
    this Tribunal's attempts to establish with clarity  the  terms  of  the
    grant of permission to appeal.   Ambiguities  and  doubts  abounded  on
    account of the existence of two separate sets of grounds of appeal.  As
    a result, there was substantial obscurity about the "grounds" to  which
    the  Judge  was  referring  in  the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal.
    Uncertainty bordering on confusion resulted.  As we pointed out at  the
    hearing, this was pre-eminently avoidable by the  simple  mechanism  of
    ensuring that where an initial application for permission to appeal  is
    refused, any subsequent application must  be  framed  in  comprehensive
    terms, in a composite document.  This, sadly,  did  not  occur  in  the
    present  case.   We  would  emphasise  that,  in  furtherance  of   the
    overriding objective  and,  in  particular,  the  avoidance  of  wasted
    Tribunal time and effort, the unsatisfactory practice which this appeal
    exposed will no longer be acceptable.  It will be  substituted  by  the
    good practice which we have identified.

THE APPEAL: CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSIONS

10. The case which was argued before us had two central strands.  The first
    consisted of an attack on certain  findings  made  by  the  FtT  Judge,
    coupled with an asserted failure to make other  findings.   The  second
    was based on the decisions in SB and BA  and  focused  on  the  Judge's
    treatment of the issue of risk upon return to Iran.

11. The first of the two strands which we have  identified  above  entailed
    arguments  by  Counsel  that  certain  findings  by  the   Judge   were
    unsustainable as  they  are  contaminated  by  perversity.   The  first
    finding challenged in  this  way  was  the  Judge's  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's claim that he had uploaded the mobile phone  recordings  of
    certain political demonstrations to his laptop.  In paragraphs [31] and
    [32] of the Determination, the Judge gives a series of reasons for this
    finding. They are included in the list  which  we  have  formulated  in
    paragraph [5] above.  We remind ourselves that the test to  be  applied
    is that enshrined in the decision of the House of Lords in Edwards -  v
    - Bairstow [1956] AC 14.  We consider that it was open to the Judge  to
    make this discrete finding, that no irrationality has been demonstrated
    and that sufficient  and  intelligible  supporting  reasons  have  been
    provided.  The significance of this is that the  Judge's  rejection  of
    what we have identified as the third of the three core elements of  the
    Appellant's story is vindicated.

12. Next, the Judge's evaluation of the Appellant's  evidence  relating  to
    the issue of post-flight contact with  his  younger  brother  was  also
    condemned as perverse.  We reject this contention.  In paragraphs  [33]
    and [34] of the Determination, the  Judge  expresses  intelligible  and
    sustainable reasons for this  particular  assessment.   We  discern  no
    irrationality in these passages. Moreover, it is quite clear to us that
    the Judge would have rejected the Appellant's internet uploading  claim
    in any event, quite apart from this finding, for the reasons  expressed
    in the earlier passages in the  Determination,  in  paragraphs  [31]  -
    [32].

13. Next, we turn to the challenge to the Judge's  finding  concerning  the
    Appellant's  movements  in  the  immediate  aftermath  of  the   events
    allegedly involving the security forces.  In short, the Judge  found  a
    material discrepancy between the Appellant's account  when  interviewed
    and his evidence under cross examination.  We  remind  ourselves  again
    that the threshold to be overcome here is that of  irrationality.   Our
    evaluation of this particular challenge is more marginal.  However,  on
    balance, we consider that it was reasonably open to the Judge  to  find
    that a material discrepancy had been demonstrated.  We repeat that,  in
    any event, the Judge's earlier  expressed  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's  laptop  uploading  claim,  independent  of  this  discrete
    finding, are ample  and  unimpeachable.  They  are  unrelated  to  this
    discrete finding.  Thus this isolated  finding, even  if  erroneous  in
    law,  would  not  contaminate  any  of  the  other  findings   in   the
    Determination or  the  reasons  formulated  and  would,  therefore,  be
    immaterial.

14. We would highlight also the Judge's description of the Appellant as "an
    unreliable witness".  In our judgment, the findings littered throughout
    paragraphs [31] - [34] of the Determination, which we have found to  be
    unassailable, provide ample  grounds  for  this  assessment.   In  this
    context, we  enquired  of  Counsel  whether  the  "unreliable  witness"
    assessment could also be construed as embracing an  adverse  evaluation
    of the Appellant's demeanour when testifying.  Counsel replied  in  the
    negative, adding the submission that it was not part  of  the  judicial
    function to assess demeanour.  We consider this  submission  manifestly
    unsustainable.

15. Next, we turn to that part of the Appellant's challenge which is  based
    on the Judge's failure to make findings.  This relates to the post-2009
    demonstrations and,  hence,  whether  any  of  these  was  recorded  or
    subsequently uploaded to the Appellant's laptop.  We shall  deal  first
    with the latter issue.  As we have concluded, the Judge's finding  that
    the 2009 demonstrations were not uploaded as claimed  and  the  reasons
    therefore are beyond reproach.  We consider it inevitable that  if  the
    Judge had specifically addressed the issue of post-2009 demonstrations,
    precisely the same finding would have been made.

16. Thus the only remaining issue of substance to be considered is  whether
    the Judge erred  in  law  by  failing  to  make  a  finding  about  the
    Appellant's claim that he had attended post-2009 demonstrations.   This
    involves the following analysis:

     a) At the  screening  interview,  the  Appellant's  account  described
        participation in a single demonstration in 2009 and a single  video
        recording thereof.


     b) In response to question 3 of the asylum interview, he  stated  that
        he  was  in  fear  of   the   government   because   he   "attended
        demonstrations in 2009".

     c) In response to question 37, he stated  that  he  first  attended  a
        demonstration on 15th June 2009.

     d) In reply  to  question  47,  he  stated  that  he  attended  "other
        demonstrations" on 18th June 2009, 20th June 2009, 17th July  2009,
        14th February 2011 and 25th May 2012.

     e) In response to question 52 he stated:  "I  gave  my  mobile  to  my
        friends to video record and it was in all the demos".

     f) Replying to paragraph 56, he used the terminology "the demos".

17. In paragraph 13(ii)  of  the  Determination,  the  Judge  recorded  the
    Appellant's claim that he had  attended  all  of  the  above  mentioned
    public demonstrations  and  his  related  claim  that  these  had  been
    recorded via his mobile phone.  In paragraph [28], the Judge  used  the
    plural "demonstrations" without reference to any  specific  dates.   In
    paragraph [29], the Judge confined the Appellant's claim  to  attending
    demonstrations in 2009 only.   This  is  repeated  in  paragraph  [31].
    Finally, as noted above,  the  Judge  made  a  specific  finding  -  in
    paragraph [36] -  that  the  Appellant  attended  post-election  street
    "demonstrations" in Tehran in 2009.

18. On balance, we consider that the Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant
    participated in public demonstrations against the governing  regime  in
    Iran is confined to events in 2009.  This embraces the first  three  of
    the five demonstrations  described  by  the  Appellant  in  his  asylum
    interview. Thus there was no separate finding by the Judge  in  respect
    of the fourth and fifth events which, per the  Appellant,  occurred  on
    14th February 2011 and 25th May 2012.   The  Appellant's  challenge  to
    this Tribunal isolates this failure as an error of law.  We reject this
    submission.  As we have highlighted above, the Judge accepted the first
    two of the three core elements of the  Appellant's  claim.   The  first
    concerned his attendance  at  anti-Iranian  government  demonstrations.
    The Judge has explicitly found that the  Appellant  attended  three  of
    these. We accept that the Judge should have made a clear finding  about
    the Appellant's alleged attendance at  the  fourth  and  fifth  of  the
    alleged street protests.  However, it is clear that if  the  Judge  had
    explicitly addressed the issue of the Appellant's attendance at the two
    later demonstrations, the finding would have embraced these attendances
    also.  The  recording  of,   rather   than   attendance   at,   protest
    demonstrations was the issue. Nothing adverse to  the  Appellant  flows
    from the failure identified.  It is immaterial.  No error  of  law  has
    been demonstrated.

19. The third, and final, aspects of the Appellant's challenge rests on the
    Judge's application of the country guidance decisions in BA and SB.  We
    consider that the correct formulation of the question of law  for  this
    Tribunal is whether the Judge erred in law in any material  respect  in
    her application of either of these two decisions to the findings  made.



20. We  begin  by  addressing  the  question  of  the  Appellants  relevant
    characteristics. He is one of many hundreds of thousands of persons who
    attended a series of anti-government street protests in Tehran.  He did
    so on five occasions, between June 2009  and  May  2012.   He  recorded
    parts of these events on his  mobile  phone,  with  the  assistance  of
    friends.  He was a mere participant in each of  these  events.  He  has
    engaged in no other political activity in his life. He has at  no  time
    attracted any attention from the  security  forces  or  any  government
    agency.  His profile is modest and discrete.  If he returns to Iran  it
    will be evident that his provenance is the United Kingdom. It  was  not
    contended that the Appellant has any other material characteristic.


21. The argument that the Appellant, upon returning to  Iran,  will  be  at
    risk of proscribed treatment was founded on the following passages in a
    report published by the UK Home Office Country  of  Origin  Information
    Service in January 2013:

         "[Per the APCI report 2008] ....


              22. According to  Article  34,  any  Iranian  who  leaves  the
                  country illegally, without a  valid  passport  or  similar
                  travel documents, will be sentenced to  between  1  and  3
                  years imprisonment, or will receive a fine .....


                  In  order  to  proceed  the  cases  relating  to   illegal
                  departure, a special court is located in Mehrabad  Airport
                  in Tehran .....


                  If an Iranian arrives in the country, without  a  passport
                  or any valid travel documents, the  official  will  arrest
                  them and take them to this court.  The court assesses  the
                  background of the individual, the date of their  departure
                  from the country, the reason for their illegal  departure,
                  their connection with any organisations or groups and  any
                  other circumstances.  The judge will decide  the  severity
                  of the punishment ....

                  This procedure also applies to  people  who  are  deported
                  back  to  Iran,  not  in  the  possession  of  a  passport
                  containing an exit visa ...."


    In the same passage, the offence of  illegal  departure  from  Iran  is
    described as  "easily  observable  and  provable".   In  the  following
    paragraph, an excerpt from the Denish Immigration  Services  Report  is
    reproduced:


         "... A person who has left Iran illegally and who is not registered
         on the list of people who cannot leave Iran will not face  problems
         with the authorities upon return, though the person  may  be  fined
         .....

         The fine for illegal exit can run up to ....   approximately  5,000
         USD.  To the knowledge of the Embassy, people who  have  left  Iran
         illegally are not detained upon return."


         [Emphasis added.]


22. The next section of the COI report is entitled "Failed Asylum Seekers".
     This draws heavily on the Amnesty International Report  of  May  2011,
    which states:

         "Failed asylum seekers .... risk arrest if  they  return  to  Iran,
         particularly if forcibly returned, where their  asylum  application
         is known to the authorities."


          [Our emphasis.]


      This is followed by an anecdotal report from an unnamed Judge:


         "Asylum seekers are interrogated on return, whether or not they
         have been political activists in Iran or abroad.  If they have
         tried to conduct propaganda against Iran, then they are culpable
         and are detained until a judge decides the sentence."


      The Amnesty International report is the most recent  country  evidence
      of relevance to this appeal. The point was made that it post dates the
      extant country guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal in SB  Iran  CG
      [2009] UK AIT 00053.  We have considered in particular paragraph  [53]
      of SB, in the light of the further  country  evidence  presented.   We
      have also considered the subsequent decision of the Upper Tribunal  in
      BA Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC). In each of these cases  it  was  held
      that  Iranians  who  departed  their  country  illegally  and   return
      subsequently, whether by compulsion or otherwise, are not  in  general
      exposed to a real risk of  persecution  or  ill  treatment.  We  would
      highlight in particular paragraph [67] of BA:


         "While returning from Britain is at present is  an  increased  risk
         factor, the mere fact that an appellant is returning  from  Britain
         does not lead to a risk of persecution."


23. We have considered the Judge's findings, our analysis of their  content
    and scope, the country evidence brought to our attention, the decisions
    in SB and BA and the arguments addressed  on  the  Appellant's  behalf.
    Having regard to the Appellant's material characteristics, as  we  have
    assessed them, we conclude that upon returning to  Iran  the  Appellant
    will not be exposed to a real risk of persecution or any other form  of
    proscribed treatment, whether on account of  his  actual  or  perceived
    political opinion or  otherwise.   This  equates  with  the  conclusion
    expressed in paragraph [36] of the FtT's Determination. While  we  have
    conducted a somewhat  more  elaborate  exercise  than  the  Judge,  her
    conclusion betrays no error of law.
DECISION

24. On the grounds and for the reasons elaborated  above,  we  dismiss  the
    appeal.  The decision of the FtT is hereby affirmed.








                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                      Date: 13 February 2014







