

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04572/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th April 2016                    |On 15th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                                                M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brown, counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on [ ] 1995.   He  [was]
    granted discretionary leave to remain as an  unaccompanied  minor  when
    his asylum claim was refused by the respondent. He applied for  further
    leave to remain but this was refused. He appealed against the  decision
    on 24 June 2014 to refuse to vary his leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and to remove him by way of directions under Section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  His appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Feeney ("the FTTJ") who, in a decision
    promulgated  on  15  June  2015,  dismissed  his  appeal   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal. This was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Andrew on 21 July 2015 who  considered  it  was
    arguable that the FTTJ had

         "... misunderstood the nature of the Appellant's claim. Further, it
         is arguable that the Judge did not take into account the fact  that
         the appellant has moderate learning difficulties and a  mental  age
         of between 7 and 9 when making findings in relation to credibility,
         the viability of obtaining medication on return to Afghanistan  and
         also the viability of being able to relocate in Afghanistan bearing
         in mind his disability. In addition in view of his disability it is
         arguable that  the  Judge  came  to  an  irrational  conclusion  in
         relation to the Appellant's Article 8 claim".

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 4. For the appellant, Ms Brown relied on the  grounds  for  permission  to
    appeal which I summarise as follows.  First, the FTTJ's assessment  for
    the basis for the appellant's fear on return was materially  incorrect;
    secondly, the FTTJ had identified the appellant's learning difficulties
    as "mild" whereas the expert evidence was  that  they  were  "moderate"
    with the appellant having a mental age of 7-9 years; thirdly, the  FTTJ
    had made a credibility assessment without any reference to  the  expert
    evidence of Ms Kamal, effectively giving reduced weight to  her  report
    because the appellant's account was not credible; fourthly, the  FTTJ's
    conclusions on the availability of medical facilities to the  appellant
    were not open  to  her  given  the  expert  evidence  that  appropriate
    healthcare was not available  for  this  appellant  with  his  moderate
    learning difficulties.  The fifth ground was that the findings  on  the
    appellant's entry to Afghanistan were unsustainable given the  evidence
    of the appellant's health and moderate learning difficulties.  Finally,
    the FTTJ's conclusions with regard to Article 8  were  irrational:  the
    appellant's limited evidence with regard to the name of the  mother  of
    his child could not reasonably be taken as adverse to  his  credibility
    given his moderate learning difficulties and mental age.

 5. Ms Brocklesby-Weller,  for  the  respondent,  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    response to the effect that the FTTJ's conclusions were consistent with
    the circumstances as portrayed in the material before  her.   The  FTTJ
    had considered Ms Kamal's expert report and the appellant's account  on
    which that was predicated.  Even if the FTTJ had mistakenly referred to
    the appellant's learning difficulties as "mild", the  FTTJ's  reasoning
    on risk on return had been sufficiently explained. Ms Brocklesby-Weller
    pointed out that the report of Mr Sellwood, the psychologist, had  been
    prepared in December 2010. There was  subsequent  correspondence  which
    referred  to  his  mild  learning  difficulties,  including  one  by  a
    specialist nurse employed by Croydon Health Centre  which  referred  to
    his mild to moderate learning disability. The existence of his learning
    difficulties and epilepsy were not in contention between  the  parties;
    it was the degree and impact of these on his ability  to  integrate  on
    return which was the live issue.  The FTTJ had given due weight to  the
    fact the appellant was a minor at the date of interview; there had been
    no difficulties with his giving oral evidence at the  hearing,  through
    the interpreter [7].  The FTTJ had relied on the oral evidence  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant was now an adult, living  a  semi-independent
    life in the UK. It was accepted that there was no direct  reference  to
    Mr Sellwood's report in the FTTJ's decision.  It was submitted that  Ms
    Kamal's report had no direct bearing on the assessment of  credibility,
    which was a matter for the FTTJ; Ms Kamal's principal concern  was  the
    availability of medication and risk on return. She had had no  face  to
    face contact with the appellant.  The FTTJ had  noted  the  appellant's
    resourcefulness, his proven ability to endure the journey to the UK and
    his actions since arrival. It was reasonable for the FTTJ  to  conclude
    that he would be able to proceed in a similar fashion on  return.   The
    FTTJ's reasons were sustainable; it as a matter for her the weight  she
    gave to the evidence.

 6. Ms Brown replied that, even if some of the  evidence  demonstrated  the
    appellant suffered from only mild learning difficulties, the  FTTJ  was
    bound to give reasons why she preferred that evidence to  the  evidence
    of Mr Sellwood, the psychologist.  In any event, one of  the  documents
    on which the respondent relied, the letter from the  specialist  nurse,
    accepted the appellant may have a moderate learning  disability.   With
    regard to the appellant's starting to live an  independent  life,  this
    was unaffected by any  diagnosis  of  learning  difficulties;  the  two
    issues were not inconsistent.   Whilst  one  or  more  of  the  grounds
    individually may not establish error of law,  taken  together  the  six
    grounds demonstrated that this decision was not  sustainable.   It  was
    not accepted that Ms Kamal's evidence had no  bearing  on  credibility:
    the expert's comments  on  the  appellant's  claim,  as  she  correctly
    understood it, were  relevant  to  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    ability  to  articulate  his  circumstances  on  return.   The   FTTJ's
    erroneous assessment of the appellant's learning difficulties as "mild"
    rather than "moderate" had an impact on  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,
    relating as it does to her assessment of credibility. The error of  law
    tainted both the asylum and Article 8 claims.

Discussion and Findings

 7. Mr Sellwood, Chartered Psychologist, was instructed by the  appellant's
    solicitors to provide a psychological assessment to  determine  whether
    or not the appellant  had  a  learning  disability.   He  examined  the
    appellant on 17 December 2010 and his report is dated 17 January  2011.
    The FTTJ makes no reference to Mr Sellwood's report, even at [9]  where
    she lists the documents provided by the  parties.   Nor  is  there  any
    reference in her decision to the opinion of Mr Sellwood.  That  opinion
    is that the appellant has "moderate learning  difficulties"  (paragraph
    65 of his report), that his cognitive skills  in  all  areas  ...  were
    significantly limited" (paragraph  66)  or  that  his  mental  age  was
    between 7 years and 10 months and 9 years and 8 months (paragraph  61).
    Given the absence of any reference to the report or its content,  I  am
    bound to conclude that the FTTJ did not take it into account in  making
    her assessment of the evidence and her findings.  Whilst the respondent
    makes the point that the report was somewhat dated by the time  of  the
    hearing, it nonetheless has a significant bearing on the issues in  the
    appeal, not least it means that the appellant should have been  treated
    as a vulnerable witness at the hearing and during the assessment of his
    evidence, notwithstanding his ages at the date of examination  and  the
    date  of  hearing.   The  content  of  Mr  Sellwood's  report  is  also
    consistent with the correspondence  to  which  I  was  referred  by  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller (none of which was created by persons  able  to  give
    expert evidence on the issue of learning disability).

 8. I note Mr Sellwood's opinion that the appellant should  not  give  oral
    evidence; that he would make a poor witness,  finding  the  questioning
    and cross-examination "too difficult to deal with".  Mr Sellwood states
    that the appellant's "working memory is severely limited".  This  is  a
    factor which  should  have  been  taken  into  account  in  the  FTTJ's
    assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility:  the  FTTJ   refers   to
    "inconsistencies and implausibilities in his evidence ...  [which]  may
    seem trivial in nature".   She  also  refers  to  his  implausible  and
    inconsistent explanation [37] and his failure to provide  a  reasonable
    explanation [38].

 9. Alternatively, if the FTTJ had rejected the evidence  of  Mr  Sellwood,
    she should have indicated why that was the case and the basis  for  her
    assessment of the appellant's learning difficulties as "mild".

10. In summary, I find that the FTTJ erred in law in failing to  take  into
    account the expert evidence of  Mr  Sellwood.  Had  she  done  so,  her
    findings on the appellant's credibility might have been different.  Her
    failure to give consideration to Mr  Sellwood's  expert  opinion  is  a
    fundamental flaw in her assessment of the reliability  and  credibility
    of the appellant's evidence.   As a result, the FTTJ's findings on that
    issue cannot stand.

11. I am also satisfied that the FTTJ's  failure  to  consider  the  expert
    evidence of Ms Kamal in the round  but  to  consider  it  after  making
    adverse findings on the appellant's credibility is an error of  law.  I
    do not accept  the  submission  for  the  respondent  that  Ms  Kamal's
    evidence had no bearing on the appellant's credibility. Ms  Kamal  took
    into account the appellant's account of events in Afghanistan  and  the
    FTTJ  should  have  considered  her  opinion,  albeit  not  necessarily
    accepted  it,  in  considering  the  plausibility  of  the  appellant's
    account. Instead, consideration of Ms Kamal's evidence  appears  to  be
    something of an afterthought in the  decision-making  process  [77  and
    78], appearing as it does under the heading "Article  8  and  the  1950
    Convention".  Ms Kamal's evidence is of relevance to risk on return and
    should have been considered in that context.

12. It is also  highly  relevant  that  the  FTTJ  has  misrepresented  the
    appellant's asylum claim in her decision: she refers to his fear of the
    Taliban [44] whereas his claim relates to his being at  risk  from  his
    paternal cousin's family who seek to avenge a cousin's death;  he  does
    not fear the Taliban in general.  This misstatement of the  appellant's
    case, taken with the factors above, constitutes an error of law because
    it calls into question the reliability of the  assessment  of  risk  on
    return.

13. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an
    error of law in the assessment of the evidence and the FTTJ's  decision
    must be set aside in its entirety.  All parties were  agreed  that,  in
    such circumstances, it was appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be  heard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.  I agree with that proposal.





Decision

14. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ Feeney.

15. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    my references to the appellant's health and learning disability, such a
    direction is now required.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 6 April 2016



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
  Dated: 6 April 2016
