
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04739/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st August 2016                  |On 07th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     RP
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, Mansfield Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  dated  3rd  November  2015  to   dismiss   the
    appellant's claim for asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  protection
    under the European Convention.

 2. The background to the claim is that the appellant is a citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka born on 4th May 1993 and is now 22 years of age and with a child.
     The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 31st March  2008  as  a
    minor and claimed asylum at the same day.   She  subsequently  withdrew
    that claim but applied again on 28th January  2009.   That  application
    was refused but she was granted discretionary leave to  remain  outside
    the United Kingdom until 4th November 2010.

 3. On 20th February 2013 she applied for further leave to remain.

 4. The appellant's claim was that  she  would  face  discrimination  as  a
    single mother having a child outside wedlock  and  would  be  a  single
    female and a mother with no support network in Sri Lanka.   That  claim
    was  set  out  in  her  witness  statement  dated  6th  May  2014   and
    specifically considered in the Secretary of State's refusal decision on
    24th June 2014.  By way of background the appellant's appeal was  first
    heard by Judge Chohan on 12th August 2014 and he dismissed the case but
    that decision was set aside owing to an  error  of  law  and  thus  the
    matter was considered for a  second  time  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Andrew.

 5. The challenge  by  the  appellant  to  the  decision  of  Judge  Andrew
    rejecting her claim was threefold, namely

      i) that the judge failed to afford sufficient weight to the fact  that
         the appellant was a minor when she entered the United Kingdom,

     ii) that the judge irrationally rejected the brother's account  of  his
         sister being sought after by the authorities in Sri Lanka and

    iii) that the judge  engaged  judicial  knowledge  of  the  exchange  of
         garlands in the Hindu tradition, finding that  the  child  was  not
         born out of wedlock and that that was a  clear  material  error  of
         law.

Permission was refused on the first two grounds  on  renewal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal but granted in respect  of  whether  the  appellant  would  be
    regarded as a single mother on return to Sri Lanka, stating:

    "Although the FtJ referred to the police report in which the  appellant
         is described as being married, that  is  arguably  not  a  decisive
         factor when one considers the report, and the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge stated that she 'used her judicial knowledge' of the means by
         which a marriage would be regarded as lawful in 'Hindu  tradition'.
         It is not clear whether the FtJ was stating that the matter is  one
         that a judge could take judicial notice of, or whether  that  is  a
         matter that  she  personally  knows  about.   In  either  case,  an
         arguable error of law arises."

 6. At the hearing before me Mr  Paramjorthy  confirmed  that  he  had  not
    represented the appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  was  not
    certain as to the detail regarding the particular social  group  ground
    that was raised or what was placed before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    judge, however, had erred in assuming her personal knowledge or  taking
    judicial notice in regards to the marriage.

 7. Mr Kotas resisted  the  application  and  noted  that  the  success  or
    otherwise of the appeal rested on the  credibility  of  the  appellant.
    The judge had effectively rejected wholesale the appellant's claim.  He
    also noted that the claim had shifted.  At paragraph 9 of  her  witness
    statement she had claimed that she could not trace her family but  that
    was patently not true because she  had  called  her  brother  to  be  a
    witness at the hearing and he in turn  confirmed  that  he  had  indeed
    visited her family on return.

 8. The grounds of challenge do not condescend to particulars of the  basis
    upon which the appellant would be at risk  as  a  single  mother  as  a
    member  of  a  particular  social  group.   No  authority  and  minimal
    background evidence is referred  to.   I  note  the  skeleton  argument
    before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  this  issue  was  also  light  on
    particulars.  It seems from the Tribunal  file  that  submissions  were
    made on this issue with reference to background material but it was not
    possible from  the  documents  on  the  Tribunal's  file  to  make  any
    meaningful assessment as the material was so dated and sparse.

 9. It is clear and I note that the skeleton  argument  advanced  that  the
    appellant believed she would face discrimination  as  a  single  mother
    having had a child out of wedlock and secondly that the appellant was a
    single lone female and a mother with no support network in  Sri  Lanka.
    As such the appellant could not possibly live in Sri Lanka on  her  own
    or support herself and her  child  and  would  face  discrimination  in
    accessing healthcare and education for her child or being able to  work
    there.

10. The judge did make reference at paragraph 31 to judicial  knowledge  to
    know that simply  exchanging  garlands  and  entering  into  a  marital
    relationship was sufficient for Hindu tradition to consider  this  type
    of marriage to be lawful and acceptable.  That finding,  however,  came
    subsequent to her findings at paragraph 30 which I  shall  set  out  in
    full here.

         "30. I do not find the claims of the Appellant  that  she  was  not
             married to the father of her child to be  credible  ones.   In
             this regard I have noted the Police report which is  at  pages
             F41 to  F43  of  the  Respondent's  Bundle.   There  is  clear
             reference there to the Appellant having been married  eighteen
             months before (the report  is  not  dated  but  refers  to  an
             incident of domestic violence on 17th  April  2012).   When  I
             asked the Appellant about this  she  told  me  'No  I  am  not
             married here.  I would not have told anyone  this.'   I  asked
             her if she had told the Police she was married and she told me
             she did not marry legally.  I asked her if she was married  in
             a Temple and she replied  'we  exchanged  garlands'.   I  then
             asked if she was married to her husband in a  Temple  and  she
             responded 'Yes we did'.  She  then  went  on  to  say  in  re-
             examination 'it is not a marriage: we exchanged garlands.   We
             wanted satisfaction between my boyfriend and myself.'  I asked
             her then what she meant and the Appellant replied 'it was  not
             a complete marriage - it was not before a priest.'   She  went
             on to say that no-one was there only she and her boyfriend and
             that this had taken place at the Murgan  Temple  in  East  Ham
             when she was 17 in 2000."

11. It is clear that the judge relied not only  on  the  police  report  in
    which she referred to the  fact  that  she  was  married  but  also  in
    response to a question by the judge when asking if she was  married  in
    the temple, stating "I then asked if she was married to her husband  in
    a Temple and she responded 'Yes we did'."   It  was  in  re-examination
    that she claimed it was not a marriage.

12. It was open to  the  judge  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  she  took
    judicial notice of  the  garland  exchange  to  take  notice  that  the
    appellant had stated that she was  married  together  with  the  police
    report.  The judge was entitled to place reliance on this.

13. Moreover, as Mr Kotas submitted, the appellant's  credibility  was  not
    accepted.  The judge made allowance for the fact that the appellant was
    only 14 when she came to the UK and I  note  that  permission  was  not
    granted on the ground asserted that the judge had not taken  this  into
    account.  Prior  to  the  finding  on  the  marriage,  the  judge  made
    credibility findings against the appellant at paragraph 19, and  listed
    at paragraph 20 the concerns raised in the refusal letter albeit taking
    into account the appellant's rebuttal  statement.   The  judge  further
    disbelieved, and clearly found the appellant's  credibility  undermined
    by, the appellant's brother where he claimed he had been persecuted  in
    Sri Lanka when in fact he was granted status  as  part  of  the  Legacy
    Scheme and not as a refugee.  In particular the judge  noted  that  the
    appellant's brother had returned to Sri Lanka  on  two  occasions,  the
    first being for a marriage in 2014 when he stayed for a month  and  the
    second was this year when he stayed for two weeks.  Particularly it was
    clear from his evidence as recorded by the judge at paragraph  23  that
    the appellant's brother stayed  with  his  parents.   Specifically  the
    judge found a "clear inconsistency in the evidence of the appellant and
    her brother".

14. The judge also made a finding at  paragraph  25  that  the  appellant's
    brother attempted to embellish the appellant's claim and despite having
    made no mention in his statement that the appellant's  brother  claimed
    that there were warrants out  for  his  sister.   The  judge  recorded:
    "However, he did not bring them back to the United Kingdom with him  as
    he 'did not think they were  of  importance'."   That  left  the  judge
    unimpressed.

15. Overall, on the reading of the  judge's  decision  the  judge  rejected
    wholesale the credibility of the appellant.  Not  only  did  he  reject
    that the appellant had a child born out of wedlock  because  the  judge
    made a finding that she was married but even if she were not she  would
    not be returning to Sri Lanka as a single lone female and a mother with
    no support network.  It is clear that  the  appellant's  brother  still
    supports the appellant and the family and had contact with her parents,
    who remain in Sri Lanka and with whom the brother holidayed.

16. As I pointed out at the  hearing,  even  if  those  had  not  been  the
    findings the objective material placed before the judge in relation  to
    lone single women in Sri Lanka appeared  to  date  from  2003  and  the
    specific report which was referred to in the  background  material  was
    "Sri Lanka:  Whether  widows,  single  women  and  single  mothers  are
    vulnerable to violence or any other ill-treatment  in  Colombo".   That
    report, which is over twelve years old, identified that  one  in  every
    five households was headed by a woman, that there may be discrimination
    and social stigma but in light of the paucity of evidence  in  relation
    to the treatment of lone single women on return, which  the  appellant,
    the judge found, was not, it is difficult to see how  any  error,  with
    respect, could have been material.  The judge may have been in error in
    referring or taking judicial notice in  respect  of  the  garlands  but
    proceeded on the basis of findings based on the police report  and  the
    appellant's responses herself.

17. Crucially, the judge made credibility findings  against  the  appellant
    which were open to her and which on a reading of the determination as a
    whole undermined her claim separate from any findings in respect of the
    garlands issue.

18. I find no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    which is material to the outcome and the decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

I find no error of law and the decision shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 6th September 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Tribunal Judge Rimington

