

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
                                                               AA/04524/2014
                                                               AA/04656/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 7th November 2014                         |On 12th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Evenlyn Elenge
                           Happiness Devin Elenge
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:       Ms Wilkins, Counsel instructed by Sutovic and
                       Hartigan


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are both nationals of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
    They are respectively a mother and her minor son, now  two  years  old.
    On the 21st August 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Holt)  allowed
    their linked appeals against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse asylum[1]. The Secretary  of  State  now  has  permission[2]  to
    appeal that decision.


 2. The First Respondent arrived in the UK in 2001 and  claimed  asylum  on
    the grounds that she had a well-founded fear of persecution in the  DRC
    because of her political activity and that of her father.   She  stated
    that her father was a legal advisor for Jean-Pierre Bemba and that  she
    faced serious harm as a result.  That claim was  rejected  and  on  the
    21st October 2002 an Adjudicator Mr K.R  Moore  dismissed  the  appeal,
    finding the account given to  be  implausible.  The  matter  came  back
    before the then Immigration Appellate Authority in  February  2004  and
    the appeal was once  again  dismissed,  this  time  by  Adjudicator  Mr
    K.Brown. Mr Brown made negative credibility findings in respect of both
    the appellant before him (the First  Respondent)  and  her  sister,  Ms
    Moke.

 3. In March 2013 fresh  representations  were  made  on  the  Respondents'
    behalf. These raised issues as to the return of asylum seekers  per  se
    but in particular to lone women at risk of sexual violence,  and  to  a
    lone woman with a young baby.

 4. On the 13th June 2014 the Secretary of State apparently agreed to treat
    these representations as a fresh claim. The  refusal  letter  sets  out
    extracts from the previous determination of Adjudicator  Mr  Brown  and
    finds no risk to the Respondent arising from her  historical  claim  or
    the matter of return as a failed asylum seeker. There is no analysis of
    her claim to be at risk as a lone female with a young child. The  First
    Respondent was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  the  12th
    June 2016, with the Second Respondent subsequently being granted  leave
    in line with her.   Mr  Kandola  indicated  that  this  grant  was  not
    formally a 'Legacy' grant but was on the basis of her long residence in
    the UK.

 5. The Respondents appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  basis  of
    their appeals was that they would face a real risk of harm in  the  DRC
    today for their membership of a particular social group: she lone women
    with young children, he an infant  or  an  infant  separated  from  his
    parent.  The case was, in essence, that the  First  Respondent  had  no
    family left in Congo, had no  idea  how  she  would  find  or  pay  for
    housing, or how, with a young child to look after, she would manage  to
    find work to pay for basic necessities.  She would be exposed to a real
    risk of sexual violence and/or trafficking  and/or  being  forced  into
    prostitution.  The First Respondent was also afraid that on re-entry to
    DRC she would be detained and questioned  and  that  could  entail  her
    being separated from her child.


 6. In respect of both of these matters the Respondents relied on  evidence
    from the First Respondent's sister, Ms Moke, who was  able  to  give  a
    first-hand account  of  the  problems  she  had  encountered  when  she
    returned to Congo on a visit in  2011.  She  said  that  she  had  been
    constantly aware of the danger she faced as a  lone  woman,  that  were
    armed gang roaming the street and that these gangs frequently  targeted
    western "returnees" to attack and extort money from them.  As  she  was
    leaving the country the Direction Generale de Migration Congo (DGM) had
    picked her out from the queue (leaving her five year old child  on  her
    own) and confiscated her British passport. They were menacing  and  she
    was afraid that she was going to be transferred to detention.  She  had
    retained a copy of her passport and contacted the British embassy using
    her mobile phone. It was only when the officials realised what she  was
    doing that they returned the passport to her.  She  was  also  able  to
    tell the Tribunal  about  the  amount  of  women  she  saw  working  as
    prostitutes, and destitute street children.

 7. Judge Holt found Ms Moke's evidence to be "thoughtful,  articulate  and
    nuanced", elsewhere to be "very detailed and articulate" and  described
    her as a "particularly compelling and forceful witness" who left  Judge
    Holt in "no doubt" that she was telling the truth.   The  determination
    notes that Ms Moke is a psychiatric nurse registered with  the  Nursing
    and Midwifery Council and that as such the Tribunal felt able to attach
    significant  weight  to  her  evidence   (as   she   is   a   regulated
    professional).


 8. Having had regard to Ms Moke's evidence,  and  the  country  background
    information including the US State Department, OHCHR, Voice of  America
    News, Interpress Services News Agency,  Save  the  Children  UNCHR  and
    UNICEF Judge Holt determined that the Respondents  would  face  a  real
    risk of harm in the DRC today for reasons  of  their  membership  of  a
    particular social group: "I find that the risk faced by  the  appellant
    and her son as a single mother and child  is  sexual  and  gender-based
    violence,  forced  prostitution  and  destitution".   She  made   other
    findings favourable to the Respondents, including that they would  face
    a real risk as failed asylum seekers.


 9. The Secretary of State now appeals the decision of Judge  Holt  on  the
    following grounds:

        i) Failure to follow the country  guidance  in  BK  (Failed  Asylum
           Seekers) DRC CG [2007] UKAIT 00098


       ii) Failure to apply Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00712.   There were two
           previous determinations in respect of the First Respondent which
           contained assessments of her credibility and in the case of  the
           2004 determination, that of her sister. This  should  have  been
           the starting point in the present appeal;


      iii) There was a failure to resolve conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
           deal with the reasons why the Secretary of State  contended  the
           First Respondent could not be believed;


       iv) The appeal had been allowed on "asylum, humanitarian  protection
           and human rights grounds". In fact there was no power  to  allow
           it on human rights grounds since  this  was  an  appeal  brought
           under section 83(3) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
           Act 2002;




    Error of Law


    Country Guidance

10. The Secretary of State contends that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    failing to apply the extant country guidance of BK, in  particular  the
    findings in that case that there is no risk to  failed  asylum  seekers
    being returned to Congo.


11. It is clear that the Tribunal has regard to BK, since it is referred to
    (in fact the Court of Appeal decision in the same  case)  at  paragraph
    19.  At paragraph 20 the determination records  that  the  Respondents'
    representative had relied on objective country material upon which they
    submitted the Tribunal could depart from BK, it being  over  six  years
    old at the date of  the  hearing.  It  is  however  apparent  from  the
    paragraphs which follow that the Tribunal was  not  actually  concerned
    with the risk to failed asylum seekers per se, but  to  the  particular
    challenges faced by these appellants. Paragraph  21  sets  out  country
    background material from Save the Children and the COIR on the position
    of children in Congo, in  particular  the  risk  of  trafficking,  poor
    health and welfare standards and the risk of violence against children.
    At paragraphs 22 to 34 the Tribunal addresses the situation  for  women
    returnees.  Although at 41 the Tribunal does find a real  risk  to  the
    First Respondent as a "failed asylum seeker" she  goes  on  to  make  a
    discrete finding as to the risk she faces a member  of  the  particular
    social group "a single woman with a very  young  child".  There  is  no
    challenge in the grounds of appeal to that finding or that formulation.
      If there was any error in reaching findings contrary to those  in  BK
    about failed asylum seekers, in this case it is entirely immaterial.


      Devaseelan/ Failure to resolve conflicts in the evidence

12. In 2004 an Adjudicator made  negative  credibility  findings  about  Ms
    Moke. The Secretary of State relies on that decision and  submits  that
    there was a "failure to resolve conflicts in the  evidence".   In  fact
    these are two sides of the same coin.  The  submission  is  essentially
    that the  Respondent and  her  sisters  had  not  been  believed  by  a
    previous Tribunal and in those circumstances they could not  be  relied
    upon as witnesses of truth  in  the  present  case.   The  reasons  for
    refusal letter had set out two paragraphs from the  2004  determination
    in which Ms Moke was criticised. Those should have formed the  starting
    point for Judge Holt's  consideration.  That  she  did  not  put  these
    findings, determinative of the evidence at  the  date  that  they  were
    made, at the forefront  of  her  reasoning,  meant  that  the  positive
    findings in respect of Ms Moke's evidence were all flawed.


13. The relevant paragraphs from Mr Brown's determination were 37,  38  and
    40.  Paragraph 37 is the  general  conclusion  reached:  "I  have  many
    concerns about the appellant's evidence and the  evidence  provided  by
    her sister". The first  concern  is  set  out  at  38,  there  being  a
    discrepancy in that the sister did not  mention  the  appellant  having
    been arrested at the same time as her. The second is that neither could
    recall any details  about  their  father's  business,  which  Mr  Brown
    considered "beyond belief".


14. It is clear that Judge Holt was aware of those conclusions.  They  form
    the backbone of the refusal letter and were relied upon in  submissions
    before her. That she has had regard to both the  letter  and  the  oral
    submissions is specifically recorded in the determination at paragraphs
    11 and 12. The fact that the earlier appeals were dismissed is  at  15,
    and at 16 the Judge expressly directs herself to Devaseelan:

         "I find that the principles in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702  apply
         to the 1st appellant's case.  That  case  says,  inter  alia,  that
         matters arising since the first appellate decision,  and facts that
         were not relevant to the issues before the first immigration  judge
         can be determined by the  second.  Therefore  I  cannot  reconsider
         matters that were decided in the  February  2004  appeal  and  will
         confine myself to matters which have arisen since"

15. It is therefore far from clear that Judge Holt ignored the findings  of
    the earlier Tribunal.  It  is  true  that  she  does  not  preface  her
    assessment of Ms Moke's evidence with the words "I remind  myself  that
    this witness was not believed by an earlier Tribunal", but it might  be
    thought obvious from the extract set out above that she had it in mind.
    The subject matter of this  appeal  was  entirely  different  from  the
    subject matter of the earlier appeal. It was directed at a matter which
    had not  been  before  the  2004  or  2002  Tribunals:  the  particular
    vulnerability of the First Respondent arising from  the  birth  of  the
    Second Respondent. Even if it could be said to be an error not to  have
    made the statement I have just posited, it is clear from  the  detailed
    and comprehensive credibility findings  that  Judge  Holt  accepted  Ms
    Moke's evidence about these new matters.  For these reasons I  find  no
    error of law in the approach taken to her evidence.


16. As to the Respondent's own evidence, it is correct to say that this had
    been  comprehensively  demolished  by  earlier   Tribunals.   That   is
    immaterial, since the appeal has been allowed on the facts that she  is
    a woman, and her son a young child, neither of  which  were  contested.
    Mr Kandola questioned how the Tribunal could have properly reached  the
    conclusion that the Respondents had no family left in the DRC, when the
    earlier Tribunal had expressly found that they had. These decisions are
    now 12 and 10 years old, and clearly it might be  expected  that  there
    might be some change in circumstances in  that  time:  Judge  Holt  has
    accepted the evidence of Ms Moke on this point and for the reasons  she
    sets out, she was entitled to do so. I would also observe that this was
    not a matter raised in the grounds of appeal, and that  no  application
    was made to widen their scope.

17. I find these grounds are not made out.

    Scope of Appeal

18. At paragraph 11 of the determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  records
    that the First Respondent has been granted leave to remain  in  the  UK
    until December 2016.   The Second Respondent was granted leave in  line
    with his mother and these appeals were both brought  under  s83(2).  It
    would appear that the Tribunal had forgotten this by the time that  the
    conclusions at paragraph 45 were drawn, since the appeal is allowed  on
    "asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds".  There  are
    two errors here. If the Respondents are refugees they are not  entitled
    to humanitarian protection. There was no scope to consider human rights
    in this s83 appeal. I  set  that  paragraph  aside  and  remake  it  as
    follows: "the appeals are allowed on asylum grounds".



      Decisions

19. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    as identified at paragraph 18 above and it is set-aside  only  to  that
    extent.  All remaining findings are upheld and preserved.  I remake the
    decision by allowing both appeals on asylum grounds.


20. There was no request for an anonymity direction and I see no reason  to
    make one.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             8th November
                                    2014
                           -----------------------
[1] Both Respondents have been granted limited leave to remain until the
12th December 2016. Their appeals to the First-tier Tribunal were brought
under section 83 (2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on
asylum grounds alone.
[2] Granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on the 18th September 2014

