
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04781/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 January 2014                              |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Adeyinka Adewale Adekunle
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mason, instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASON

 1. The respondent, Adeyinka Adewale Adekunle, was born on 16 July 1983 and
    is a male  citizen  of  Nigeria.   I  shall  refer  to  the  respondent
    hereafter as "the appellant" (as he was before the First-tier Tribunal)
    and to the Secretary of State as the "respondent".

 2. The appellant had applied to the Secretary of State for asylum but,  by
    a decision dated 2 May 2013, the appellant's  application  was  refused
    and a decision was also made to refuse him leave to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Petherbridge) which, in a determination  dated  11
    September 2013, allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.  The Secretary of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant  claims  to  be  homosexual.   The  respondent  seeks  to
    challenge the judge's finding that the appellant  is  homosexual;  that
    grounds of appeal do not indicate that the Secretary of State  believed
    that the judge was wrong to conclude that a homosexual man would be  of
    real risk of persecution or ill-treatment on return  to  Nigeria.   The
    appeal turns, therefore, on the judge's findings of fact.

 4. First, the respondent asserts that the judge had failed to explain  why
    he  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  in  a  relationship  with   Mr
    Oluwasuyatin when  the  judge  himself  had  found  at  [70]  that  the
    appellant and Mr Oluwasuyatin  had  given  inconsistent  evidence.   At
    [70], the judge wrote:

         Of  course,  what  makes  the  appellant's  evidence  as   to   his
         circumstances in  Nigeria  with  regard  to  his  homosexuality  so
         difficult to believe is that his account of those  occurrences  are
         so inherently unlikely as not to be believable, but  the  appellant
         has at the Tribunal today in his oral evidence maintained  that  he
         was having an ongoing relationship with Mr Oluwasuyatin  which  was
         denied by Mr Oluwasuyatin and it is his evidence that I prefer.

 5. Prima facie, the judge's observations at  [70]  would  appear  to  cast
    considerable doubt on the credibility of the  appellant  including  his
    claim to be homosexual.   However,  at  [69],  Judge  Petherbridge  had
    written:

         I accept also the evidence of  Mr  Oluwasuyatin  that  he  and  the
         appellant did have a sexual relationship but it was a  'fling'  but
         notwithstanding what the appellant has said in  his  oral  evidence
         today did not continue beyond that one off 'fling' over  two  years
         ago.

 6. The judge's findings at [69] helped to put his comments at  [70]  in  a
    proper context.  The judge found that the appellant and Mr Oluwasuyatin
    were engaged in a homosexual relationship but  that  he  preferred  the
    witness's evidence as to the date  when  the  relationship  had  ended.
    That finding  left  intact  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  homosexual
    (indeed,  it  has  supported  that  claim)   whilst   reconciling   the
    inconsistencies between the evidence of the witness and the  appellant,
    at least as regards the core of the claim (the  appellant's  sexuality)
    was concerned.  The finding did not render the judge's primary  finding
    that the appellant is  homosexual  perverse  or  inexplicable,  as  the
    grounds of appeal suggest.

 7. The second ground of appeal observes that the judge had considered  the
    appellant's claim for asylum to be unreliable and that the  appellant's
    claim  to  have  joined  gay/lesbian  groups  said  nothing  about  the
    appellant's actual sexuality at all.

 8. At [63], the judge found the  appellant  "to  be  a  wholly  unreliable
    witness and I have considerable difficulty accepting his evidence as to
    the various events he refers to as  happening  to  him  on  account  of
    alleged  homosexuality  in  Nigeria."   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was involved with the UK Lesbian & Gay Immigration Group  and
    that he was a project coordinator "that is for the African Men Who Have
    Sex With Men Group at the NTL".

 9. There was some force in the submission that joining a gay/lesbian group
    sur place may  not  indicate  that  an  asylum  seeker  is  homosexual.
    However, there is no clear indication in  the  determination  that  the
    appellant's membership of gay groups in the United Kingdom has  in  any
    way tipped the balance  in  favour  of  his  claim  to  be  homosexual.
    Significantly, the judge had the opportunity of hearing  the  appellant
    and the witness Mr Oluwasuyatin give evidence.  The judge was not bound
    to reject their claim to have  had  a  homosexual  relationship  simply
    because he found other elements of  the  appellant's  account  of  past
    events in Nigeria to be unreliable.  I agree with  Mr  Mason,  for  the
    appellant, that the judge was  not  compelled  to  reject  all  of  the
    appellant's evidence simply because he had rejected part  of  it.   The
    judge has separated out his findings regarding the appellant's  account
    of past events from his findings regarding  his  relationship  with  Mr
    Oluwasuyatin, in respect of which he received detailed  oral  evidence.
    The judge has, in effect, concluded that the appellant is a  homosexual
    who has sought to bolster that true claim with  untrue  or  exaggerated
    accounts of past events in Nigeria.  I find that the  judge  has  given
    sufficient reasons in his determination for finding the appellant  was,
    on the one hand, telling the truth when he claims to be homosexual  but
    lying when he  described  the  particular  problems  he  had  faced  in
    Nigeria.  Further, it was open to the  judge  to  accept  as  true  the
    evidence of Mr Oluwasuyatin; part of that witness's evidence  was  that
    he had had a homosexual relationship with the appellant.  At [71],  the
    judge wrote:

         Whilst, therefore, I find the appellant to  have  been  largely  an
         unreliable witness, I do  accept  that  he  has  had  a  homosexual
         relationship  with  Mr  Oluwasuyatin  and  take  into  account  his
         involvement with the organisations referred to above, my conclusion
         is that the appellant is homosexual and that  entitles  him  to  be
         accorded refugee status.  I accept Mr Mason's final submission that
         the appellant as a gay man, cannot avoid a real risk of persecution
         in  Nigeria  without  suppressing  core  elements  of  his   sexual
         identity.  He cannot safely relocate without doing one or  both  of
         these.

10. I find that the judge has been very careful to record that his  finding
    that the appellant is homosexual may not  sit  easily  with  his  other
    findings of fact.  However, there was nothing perverse or faulty in the
    manner by which he reached his conclusions and I can identify no  error
    of law in his determination so serious as to justify setting it  aside.



DECISION

11. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 21 January 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
