
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04008/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th December 2015                |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Ma
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Anstis  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 11th August 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the claimant.

 3. The claimant arrived in the UK as a student on 13th September 2010  and
    claimed asylum on 24th March 2014.  In brief the  claimant  feared  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka as he is a Tamil and had supported  the  LTTE.
    He claimed that he had been arrested, detained and tortured.  Following
    his release he had received two summonses to attend court  but  he  had
    failed to attend and therefore  a  warrant  for  his  arrest  had  been
    issued.

 4. The application was refused on 23rd February 2015.

 5. The claimant appealed, and his appeal was heard by the FTT on 24th July
    2015.  The claimant gave evidence.  The FTT did  not  accept  that  the
    claimant had been involved with Tamil  politics  while  in  the  United
    Kingdom, but did accept his account of events prior  to  his  departure
    from Sri Lanka.  In particular the FTT placed weight  upon  documentary
    evidence submitted by the claimant and accepted the  claimant  was  the
    subject of an arrest warrant, and on that basis found that, applying GJ
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC) the Appellant would be  at  risk  if
    returned to Sri Lanka and therefore his appeal was  allowed  on  asylum
    grounds.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal relying upon three grounds which may be summarised as follows.



 7. Firstly it was contended that the FTT had failed to  adequately  engage
    with the points raised in the Respondent's refusal letter at paragraphs
    30-36, which relate to credibility.  It was submitted that the FTT  had
    failed to reconcile conflicts in the  evidence  when  making  findings,
    which amounted to a material error of law.

 8. Secondly it was contended  that  the  FTT  had  failed  to  follow  the
    approach in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  00439.   The  claimant  had
    submitted additional documentary evidence  after  his  application  for
    asylum had been refused.  At paragraph 32 the FTT had stated  that  the
    authenticity  of  the  documents  had  not  been  challenged,  but  the
    Secretary of State contended it was clear that the  Presenting  Officer
    before the FTT had made submissions challenging the credibility of  the
    claim.  The FTT decision did not demonstrate that the FTT had looked at
    the documentary evidence in the round as required by Tanveer Ahmed, and
    it was argued that the FTT had presumed the documentary evidence to  be
    authentic.

 9. Thirdly the FTT had failed to properly apply section 8  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  The  FTT  had
    considered the delay in claiming asylum, but  had  not  considered  the
    failure to submit a number of documents when requested by the Secretary
    of State, and therefore paragraph 339L(ii) was not  satisfied  as  this
    required a person claiming asylum to  submit  in  connection  with  his
    claim "all material factors at the person's disposal", and to supply "a
    satisfactory  explanation  regarding  any  lack   of   other   relevant
    material".

10. Permission to appeal was given by Judge Foudy of the FTT who stated;
         "The judge found that documents filed by  the  Appellant  were  not
         challenged however these were documents filed after the  Respondent
         had refused asylum.  The Respondent was under no duty to review the
         late  evidence  filed  by  the  Appellant  and  in  any  event  the
         reliability of the new evidence was challenged  by  the  Presenting
         Officer.  Failure to address this issue is  an  arguable  error  of
         law."

11. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

12. Mrs Sreeraman relied upon the grounds contained within the  application
    for permission to appeal.  The central challenge to the  FTT  decision,
    is the failure to engage with the principles in Tanveer Ahmed regarding
    documentation produced by the claimant for the first  time  before  the
    FTT.

13. This documentation included two court summonses.  It was accepted by Mr
    Paramjorthy on  behalf  of  the  claimant  that  these  documents  were
    submitted for the first time to the FTT.

14. Mrs Sreeraman submitted that the FTT had not considered  the  documents
    in the round and  the  FTT  had  not  explained  why  authenticity  and
    credibility of the documents was accepted, particularly given  that  it
    was clear that  the  FTT  had  concerns  about  other  aspects  of  the
    claimant's account.  I was asked to find that the  FTT  had  failed  to
    appreciate that the burden of proof was on the claimant, to  show  that
    the documents could be relied upon.  It was not for  the  Secretary  of
    State to explain why the documents were unreliable.

The Claimant's Submissions

15. Mr Paramjorthy argued that the FTT decision disclosed no material error
    of law.  I was referred to paragraphs 36-37 of the  decision  in  which
    the FTT considered the court summonses and the documentary evidence and
    found that the documentary evidence was consistent with the  claimant's
    account.   Although  there  was  no  reference  to  Tanveer  Ahmed,  Mr
    Paramjorthy submitted that the FTT had considered the evidence  in  the
    round, and having done that, concluded that  the  claimant  had  proved
    that the documents could be relied upon.

16. It was also argued that  the  FTT  had  engaged  with  all  credibility
    challenges in the reasons for refusal  letter  and  that  the  FTT  had
    accepted some, although not all of the claimant's account.  The medical
    evidence submitted in relation to scarring,  supported  the  claimant's
    account, and the FTT was entitled to accept that evidence.

17. Mr Paramjorthy submitted that the FTT had dealt properly with section 8
    of the 2004 Act, and had properly applied  the  country  guidance  case
    law, and the decision of the FTT should stand.

18. As the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. I find that the  FTT  materially  erred  in  law  in  relation  to  the
    documentary  evidence  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  claimant,  which
    evidence was submitted in a bundle of  documents  the  day  before  the
    hearing.

20. The FTT was wrong in law in paragraph 32 in describing the authenticity
    of the documents as not being challenged.  The documents  in  question,
    which are set out in  paragraph  24  of  the  FTT  decision,  were  not
    produced to the Secretary of State when the claimant  made  his  asylum
    claim.  The Secretary of State did not, prior to the hearing, have  the
    opportunity to question the authenticity of the documents,  although  I
    accept that there was no application for an adjournment  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary  of  State  in  order  to  verify  the  validity  of  the
    documentation supplied.

21. The FTT was incorrect to state that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    documentation, as the Record of Proceedings indicates  that  in  making
    submissions, the Presenting Officer did  refer  to  inconsistencies  as
    regard to the arrest and court summons.

22. The principles in Tanveer Ahmed are well-known and  they  are  that  in
    asylum and human rights cases it is for an individual claimant to  show
    that a document on which he seeks to rely can be relied on.  A decision
    maker should consider whether a  document  is  one  on  which  reliance
    should properly be placed after looking at  all  the  evidence  in  the
    round.

23. The FTT was wrong in law in paragraph 36 to state that "the  Respondent
    has no real answer to them" when referring to the two court  summonses.
    The FTT did not apply the Tanveer Ahmed  principles,  and  that  is  an
    error law.  The burden was on the claimant to show that  the  documents
    could be relied upon, and the FTT should have taken that  into  account
    and considered the evidence in the round.

24. The Secretary of State in paragraph 29 of the  refusal,  observed  that
    the claimant had stated that he had asked his sister to send the  first
    summons to him in the UK.  He had asked this the day before his  asylum
    interview  which  took  place  on  31st  October  2014.   The  claimant
    indicated that he thought his sister must have sent the second  summons
    as well.  He was given five working days to submit  the  documents  but
    failed to do so.  The summonses were therefore produced for  the  first
    time at the FTT hearing.

25. It is clear that the  FTT  placed  very  significant  weight  upon  the
    recently produced documentary evidence, including the court  summonses,
    commenting in paragraph 37 that  the  documentary  evidence  outweighed
    concerns that the FTT  had  about  the  medical  position.   The  court
    summonses persuaded the FTT that the Appellant had  been  arrested  and
    tortured and bailed to attend court, and  then  had  failed  to  answer
    bail, which meant that there was a warrant out for his arrest.  It  was
    for that reason that the FTT allowed the appeal.

26. I find that the error in considering the documentation, in  failing  to
    comply with the Tanveer Ahmed  principles,  is  a  material  error  and
    infected other findings, and means that the  decision  of  the  FTT  is
    unsafe.  Therefore the decision  of  the  FTT  is  set  aside  with  no
    findings preserved.

27. Both  representatives  agreed  at  the  hearing,  when  I  reserved  my
    decision, that if a material error of law was found,  as  contended  by
    the Secretary of State, then it  would  be  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal back to the FTT to be heard again.

28. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements dated 25th September 2012, and find that it  is  appropriate
    to remit the appeal back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  of  the
    nature and extent of judicial fact-finding that will  be  necessary  in
    order for this decision to be remade.

29. The appeal will be heard at the Hatton Cross  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by a FTT judge other than Judge Anstis.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FTT made an anonymity direction and  I  continue  that  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 18th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed   Date 18th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

