
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04694/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                           |On 6 October 2014             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MR MAHMUD HAY SADEK AHMED ABUARGOUB
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a respondent's appeal but  I  shall  henceforth  refer  to  the
    parties in the original terms detailed in the determination of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Buckwell following a hearing which  took  place
    at Hatton Cross on 12 August 2014.

 2. The appellant, born on 1 April 1981, is a citizen of Libya.

 3. He made application for asylum, Humanitarian  Protection  and  a  human
    rights claim.  His  application  was  refused  in  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 25 June 2014 which set removal directions for his home
    country of Libya.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision and on 12 August 2014  his
    appeal was heard by Judge Buckwell who dismissed it on  asylum  grounds
    but allowed  it  on  both  Humanitarian  Protection  grounds  and  with
    reference to Articles 2 and 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 5. On 9 September 2014 Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Reid gave  reasons
    for allowing the respondent's application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    They state:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Buckwell) who, in a
             determination promulgated  on  27  August  2014,  allowed  the
             appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision dated  25
             June 2014 to refuse the appellant asylum.

         2.   The grounds argue inter alia: the judge made a material  error
             of law by failing to give adequate reasons for finding that he
             could depart from  country  guidance  case  law  AT  &  Others
             (Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC); the judge  wrongly  extended
             the British government's advice to its own citizens to  Libyan
             nationals without reference to specific  evidence;  the  judge
             did not give adequate reasons for finding that Article 15c  of
             the QD had been breached; the judge gave weight to  immaterial
             matters including the  practicalities  of  how  the  appellant
             could be returned to Libya.

         3.   It is arguable that the judge failed to give adequate findings
             for his decision to depart from the  recent  country  guidance
             set out in AT & Others.

         4.   The grounds disclosed an arguable error of law."

 6. The  appellant  originally  based  his  application  for  international
    protection on the basis of his then opposition  to  President  Gaddafi,
    who at the time of his application was the President of the Republic of
    Libya,  known  as  the  Great  Socialist  People's  Libyan   and   Arab
    Jamahiriya.   The  appellant  stated  that  he  had  been  present   at
    demonstrations in London against the former regime in Libya, subsequent
    to his arrival in the United Kingdom as a visitor.

 7. By the time the appellant's appeal was  heard  by  Judge  Buckwell  the
    basis of his claim to be a refugee was agreed, by his  Counsel,  to  no
    longer subsist following the demise of the  former  President  Gaddafi.
    The appeal hearing proceeded on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  then
    asserted,  with  respect  to  country  conditions  and  that  returning
    individuals, including the appellant, to Libya, would be a violation of
    the requirements of Article 15c of the Qualification Directive and,  in
    parallel, would breach the human rights of the appellant with reference
    to Articles 2 and/or 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
    This appellant also relied on Article 8.

 8. Today Mr Kandola relied on the written grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal.  He submitted that the judge was not entitled  to  depart  from
    existing country guidance and particularly AT &  Others  (Article  15c:
    risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 000318 (IAC) which he  emphasised
    was only heard by the Tribunal in  November  2013  being  a  matter  of
    months before this appellant's appeal was heard by Judge Buckwell on 12
    August of the following  year.   He  suggested  that  the  judge  could
    rightly be criticised for wrongly departing from country  guidance  and
    that in so doing he had failed to provide substantial grounds for  that
    departure.  He acknowledged that the judge properly found that Articles
    2 and 3 "stood or fell" with the claim for Humanitarian Protection  and
    argued  that  too  great  an  emphasise  had  been  placed  on   travel
    recommendations made by the British government which were  directed  at
    British citizens considering going to Libya.

 9. Mr Hoshi began by placing no reliance  whatsoever  on  a  Libya  travel
    advice document that his instructing solicitors had  forwarded  to  the
    Tribunal in a letter of 20 October 2014.  He submitted that for a judge
    to depart from existing country guidance there  had  to  be  clear  and
    cogent evidenced based reasons for so  doing.   These  can  be  clearly
    gleaned from the determination of Judge Buckwell whose decision has  to
    be looked at alongside the  original  skeleton  argument  that  Counsel
    provided for the hearing within the First-tier Tribunal  and  which  is
    referred to at paragraph 59 of  Judge  Buckwell's  determination.   The
    background evidence he considered was not just aimed at  travellers  to
    Libya and research clearly identified a deteriorating situation by  the
    time that this appeal was heard by Judge Buckwell many months following
    consideration in the Upper Tribunal of  the  country  guidance  appeal.
    Not only did the judge have a proper basis for departing  from  country
    guidance but it was also incumbent on all to be aware that the  country
    guidance system was not meant to be inflexible and that Libya is a good
    example of where such flexibility is required given its  ever  changing
    country situation.

10. The material on the Tribunal's file includes the skeleton  argument  of
    Counsel for the Appellant referred to in  the  determination  of  Judge
    Buckwell.  Therein, amongst other things, there  is  reference  to  the
    security situation in Libya deteriorating in the  weeks  preceding  the
    date of the instant appeal to such  an  extent  that  the  Tribunal  is
    entitled to depart from the findings of AT & Others  on  the  issue  of
    indiscriminate  violence.   The  security  situation  is   sufficiently
    serious that, on return to Libya, the appellant would be at direct risk
    of a serious and individual threat to his life and person by reason  of
    indiscriminate violence in a situation of  international  and  internal
    armed conflict.  The skeleton argument then goes on to refer the  judge
    to country background materials within the appellant's bundle.

11. Those materials have clearly  been  considered  by  Judge  Buckwell  in
    coming to the conclusions he reached.  I do  not  find  the  judge  has
    erred as asserted by the respondent.  The findings that he came to were
    open to be made on the  evidence  that  was  before  him  and  adequate
    reasoning has been provided for the conclusions reached.

12. I appreciate that it may have been wiser for the judge to set out  more
    fully the material that he relied on within  the  determination  itself
    without, making reference to it via the appellant's Counsel's  skeleton
    argument.  For example at  paragraph  59  of  his  determination  Judge
    Buckwell states:

         "59. In recent weeks and months the country  situation  in  Tripoli
             has  deteriorated  significantly.   The  particulars  in  that
             respect are set out in paragraphs  20  onwards  in  Ms  Jones'
             skeleton argument.  It is  also  relevant  to  state,  as  she
             indicates at paragraph 19 of her skeleton, that  the  findings
             made by the Upper Tribunal had to be based on evidence  as  to
             country circumstances as presented to the Upper Tribunal by 22
             November 2013."

13. Nonetheless it is clear from the determination that the material within
    the appellant's bundle which persuaded  Judge  Buckwell  to  allow  the
    appeal for the reasons that he did had properly been taken into account
    by him.

14. In all the circumstances it was  open  to  him  to  conclude  that  the
    country circumstances  had  deteriorated  so  significantly  since  the
    previous November that by returning this appellant to  Libya  it  would
    constitute a breach of Article 15c of the Qualification Directive.  The
    judge founded his decision on reliable evidence within the  appellant's
    bundle which he refers to at paragraph 64 of his  determination  before
    concluding that  the  country  situation  in  Libya  has  significantly
    altered this year.  The judge has  referred  to  specific  evidence  of
    indiscriminate violence in  Libya  and  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
    Office report mentioned within the grounds seeking permission to appeal
    is by no means the sole material he  has  taken  into  account  and  it
    cannot be said, as asserted in the grounds, that he has given weight to
    "immaterial matters".

15. This is a careful and detailed determination where Judge  Buckwell  has
    given cogent and sustainable reasons which were fully open  to  him  on
    the evidence for concluding that the country  situation  in  Libya  had
    altered to such an  extent  that  for  this  individual  appellant  the
    respondent was unable to rely on AT & Others.

16. The judge was entitled to depart from country guidance as he  had  been
    shown, on the evidence before him, that circumstances within Libya  had
    changed in a material way which resulted in a different decision  being
    made.  The judge has given proper reasons for coming to the conclusions
    that  he  did.   I  appreciate  the  proximity  in  time  between  this
    appellant's hearing and the making of the country guidance within AT  &
    Others.  However, the situation in Libya is plainly  fluid  and  it  is
    clear that Judge Buckwell has applied flexibility  to  accommodate  the
    individual circumstances of this appellant's case taking  into  account
    changes, fresh evidence and other circumstances.

17. The conclusions of Judge Buckwell were open  to  be  made  in  all  the
    circumstances.


Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 4 November 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard


