
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04817/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 15 December 2014                  |On 22 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  an (drc)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:     Mr E Tufan, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    None


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State has appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  from  the
    decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  claimant's  appeal
    against the decision by the Secretary of State to refuse to grant him a
    further period of discretionary  leave  to  remain,  having  previously
    granted him leave to remain as an unaccompanied asylum  seeking  minor,
    whose asylum claim has been rejected but in respect of whom at the date
    of the grant there were not adequate reception facilities  for  him  in
    his country of return.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity
    direction, and I consider it is appropriate to maintain  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Following a hearing at Taylor  House  on  14  August  2014,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C M Phillips dismissed the claimant's appeal on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and  human  rights  grounds,  but  allowed  the
    appeal outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.  The  judge  found  that
    the claimant did  not  qualify  for  further  leave  under  either  the
    Appendix FM or Rule 276ADE routes, applying Ogundimu (Article 8 -  new
    rules) Nigeria [2013]  UKUT  0060  (IAC).   She  also  found  that  the
    claimant had at least one adult family member in the DRC with  whom  he
    could potentially re-establish contact.  But  she  allowed  the  appeal
    outside the Rules on the basis that, although the claimant was now aged
    over the age of 20, he was "a vulnerable young adult who has not proved
    himself capable of independent living".

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. On 21 October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Warr granted the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal on all grounds raised.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Tufan produced a letter dated 22 September
    2014 which had been sent by UK Visas and Immigration (West Midlands) to
    the claimant.  This  letter  informed  him  that  his  claim  had  been
    reviewed, and it  had  been  decided  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion should be exercised in  his  favour:  he  had  been  granted
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom for a reason not  covered
    by the Immigration Rules.

 5. Mr Tufan explained that he only discovered the existence of this letter
    when preparing for the hearing on Friday.  So far as he was  concerned,
    the letter had been issued in error.  The  proper  procedures  had  not
    been followed by the local immigration team in the West Midlands.  They
    should not have issued the letter when the Specialist Appeals Team  was
    pursuing an appeal from the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  which
    had, apparently, triggered the issuing of the letter  of  22  September
    2014.

Discussion

 6. The error of law challenge has prima facie merit, and it is clear  from
    the chronology that the letter of  22  September  2014  was  issued  in
    error.  But the grant of further discretionary leave to remain has  not
    been withdrawn, and there is no suggestion from Mr Tufan that the  Home
    Office has any plans to withdraw the  grant  of  further  discretionary
    leave to remain.  So I consider that the appeal should  be  treated  as
    abandoned pursuant to Section 104(4A) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and Rule  17A  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Decision

 7. The appeal is abandoned.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed        Date 15 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

