
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04454/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Hatton Cross on                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between

                                PA antou saho

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Robinson, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Logo, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant, who is a national of Gambia, born 11 November  1985  has
    been granted permission to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Rowlands  who  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human  rights  grounds  by  the  appellant  against  the
    decision of the respondent to remove him as an illegal entrant dated  7
    May 2013.

 2. On 6 April 2009 the appellant was issued with a student visa.   Further
    leave as a student was granted following an appeal against  an  initial
    refusal until 13 March 2011 and a final leave to remain on  this  basis
    was granted until 7 April 2013.  The appellant's application for asylum
    was made on 4 April 2013.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is his orientation as  a  homosexual
    that resulted in hostility towards him.  He has had relationships  both
    in Gambia and the United Kingdom.  His fear  is  that  the  authorities
    will prosecute him were he to be returned and he  would  face  fourteen
    years' imprisonment due to his orientation.

 4. The respondent did not accept he is a homosexual owing to inconsistency
    in his account of events in Gambia and concerns over  the  plausibility
    of that account. Furthermore the respondent did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had had a relationship  with  someone  called  Peter  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence from the appellant who was
    represented by Counsel but did not believe he was gay.  He concluded in
    answer to the first HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 question  that  the
    appellant was not gay and would not be  treated  as  gay  by  potential
    persecutors. He thus concluded the appellant would not  beat  risk  for
    any reasons were he to be returned to Gambia.  The judge  observed  the
    appellant did not put forward any suggestion that he had a  family  and
    private life in  the  United  Kingdom  sufficiently  strong  to  engage
    Article 8 and therefore did not consider the claim under that ground.

 6. Application for permission to appeal relied on grounds that  the  judge
    had erred in the credibility assessment, in failing to provide adequate
    reasons and failing to take relevant factors into account as well as HJ
    (Iran).

 7. The grounds challenge two specific aspects of the judge's findings,  in
    particular that it was not credible the appellant could  have gone into
    hiding after he was attacked by the local community (on discovering his
    orientation) and the fact that he waited  three  years  before  leaving
    Gambia which indicated that he was in no danger at all.

 8. The judge quoted an extract from the refusal  letter  setting  out  the
    basis of his claim as follows:

         "You claim that you are Pa Antou Saho, a Gambian national  born  on
         11 November 1985.   You are unemployed. You have no  dependants  or
         family in the UK. You  fear  returning  to  Gambia  because  'I  am
         homosexual'. You claim that people knew  about  your  sexuality  in
         Gambia and you received death threats  and  it  is  illegal  to  be
         homosexual in Gambia. You do not fear returning to Gambia  for  any
         other reason than your sexuality. You realised you were  homosexual
         when you were 19 years old,  but  you  do  not  remember  when  you
         specifically realised. You claim that you have never been attracted
         to women. Alternatively before you realised you were homosexual  in
         June 2008, you had feelings for women.  You claim that in June 2006
         the feeling you had for men was more than it was for women and that
         was the time you realised you were gay.   However,  you  could  not
         describe the feeling you had which made you realise you  liked  men
         more.  When you realised you were homosexual, you knew that  Gambia
         was a 'homophobic society against homosexuals'.  You also knew that
         it was illegal to be homosexual when you first  realised  you  were
         gay. It was after sleeping with your first partner  that  made  you
         realise you were gay.  Your first partner's name was  Kebba  Casey,
         whom you met  in  your  local  community.   You  met  Kebba  around
         February 2008, as he was new in your community and you made friends
         with him, showing him places and spending time in your house.

         Alternatively,  you  met  Kebba,  your  friendship  turned  into  a
         relationship in February 2006 and 'I had feeling for  him  that  he
         was gay as well, because of the way  he  dressed'  and  because  he
         would wear tight jeans. You then asked  Kebba  if  he  was  gay  in
         February 2006 because of the way he dressed and  the  tight  jeans.
         Kebba was the first person you asked if he was  gay  and  you  felt
         comfortable doing so. As soon as he sad he was gay,  you  told  him
         you  were  gay  and  you  would  go  out  and  started   a   secret
         relationship. You stated 'our relationship was a sexual one and  he
         used to come to my house and sleep  there  and  have  sex  all  the
         time'.  You would only have sex at your house and  'throughout  the
         day and night and have sex all  the  time'.   You  lived  with  our
         parents, one brother and one sister. You had sex for the first time
         at your house because 'no-one was there'.  Your parents were out at
         an evening ceremony and your sister had gone for a walk while  your
         brother was at a friend's house. You were not worried  about  being
         caught but you knew it was  risky.    You  didn't  do  anything  to
         reduce the risk of being seen with Kebba.

         You were in a  relationship  with  Kebba  for  about  a  year  from
         February 2008 - February 2007.  You conducted your relationship  in
         secret. Alternatively, you would go on dates together in public and
         'we used to hold hands and used to hold each other  on  the  back'.
         You  admit  it  was  risky  holding  hands  in  public.   Your  mum
         established you were gay around March  2006.  You  were  caught  in
         March 2006 as 'he normally comes to my house, sleeps there all  the
         time and my mum found out and saw us in the room as were  naked  in
         the house sleeping.  The door was closed  but  your  mother  caught
         you, she said it was a big disgrace in the family and so she kicked
         you out.  You then split up with Kebba in  March  2006.  Your  last
         contact with Kebba was in March 2007. You then moved to Baku  where
         you were initially sleeping rough before you got a  job  and  saved
         money and rented a small house.  When you moved to  Baku,  you  met
         and started another relationship with a  man  from  Senegal  called
         Lamil.  You met Lamin around June  2006.   You  met  Lamin  in  the
         pharmacy where you worked.  You realised Lamin was gay because when
         he came to your house, he told you he was on  the  run  in  Senegal
         because he was gay.  He told you this the first  time  he  came  to
         your house. Lamin did not know you were gay when he told you  about
         his problems in Senegal.

         You then started a secret relationship with Lamin  from  May  2006.
         Alternatively, you would go out in public holding  hands  together.
         Your neighbours found out about your relationship with Lamin around
         September 2006.  A woman named Haddy  who  was  looking  after  the
         compound where you lived 'found me sitting on a chair  outside  the
         house and Lamin was sitting on top of me', this took place  outside
         the front door of door of the house. She then informed everyone  in
         your compound that you were  gay  and  this  is  when  you  started
         receiving death threats in September 2006.  It was this threat that
         made you leave Gambia for the UK. The threats came from  neighbours
         in the compound. The threat was just verbal and 'the way he  talked
         to me, they were angry the way they talked to me'.  The landlord of
         the compound forced you to leave and you lived  with  one  of  your
         friends while securing a UK visa.  You then secured a visa  to  the
         UK and entered on 29 April 2009 to save your  life.  You  have  had
         four sexual encounters here in the UK. The first  relationship  was
         with John but you cannot remember his full name. You met him  in  a
         gay  bar  in  Windsor  called  Super  Nova  Bar.    You  claim  the
         relationship lasted a few weeks. On the other  hand,  you  met  him
         once and it was a one night stand. Your second and third  encounter
         was with Terry and Mel, they were both a one night  stand  and  you
         met him in the same bar as John in Windsor.  Your fourth  encounter
         was with Peter and he was the only one you had a relationship.  You
         met Peter in Leicester in a gay bar called Dover  Castle.  You  met
         him in 2011, then you said you met him in 2012.  You have submitted
         three photographs of you kissing Peter in a bar. You took no  other
         photos of you and Peter together. Your relationship lasted for  six
         months and it ended in December 2012."

 9. The appellant adopted a statement at the hearing and he also produced a
    letter from a former friend who had helped him when his landlord  threw
    him out.

10. The judge recorded at [8] and [10] of his  determination  the  evidence
    given in cross-examination as follows:

         "8.  In cross-examination he confirmed that his mother  had  thrown
             him out when she discovered he  was  gay  because  she  was  a
             strict person. His father agreed. He said he did not know  his
             parents' views because he only found when they  discovered  he
             was gay.  He did however know that it was against the laws and
             societies' views. He was then asked why he had done it at home
             and he said because it was in his home and no one  was  there.
             The door was closed. It was put to him that  they  could  have
             come back at any time and he said when he closes his  door  no
             one should enter.  His mother had found out because they  were
             asleep by then and had fallen asleep.  It was put to him  that
             he had been very inconsistent about  how  he  had  behaved  in
             Gambia saying at one point that he had  tried  to  keep  it  a
             secret but he had also said that he had held hands with one of
             his friends in public.  He said  it  was  only  in  the  quiet
             places that they had done that  they  went  to  quiet  beaches
             although he accepted they were public beaches and he took  the
             risk because he had strong feelings.

         9.   He confirmed that his father had thrown him out  in  2008  but
             had actually sponsored him to come to the  United  Kingdom  in
             2009 because he wanted to see him succeed in life. He had gone
             to Baku in 2007 not  l2006  as  he  had  previously  said.  He
             confirmed that with Lamin he had conducted himself openly.  It
             was gay life.  It was the only thing  he  could  do.   He  met
             Lamin in 2006 according to his interview but he  was  confused
             it was actually in 2007,  he  could  not  remember  the  dates
             properly it was eight years ago. He confirmed he had the death
             threats in 2006 and had not made the application  until  2008.
             He said that was because he waited before going to his parents
             for support they wanted him to be successful which is  why  he
             waited for three years. He agreed that the death threats  were
             actually in 2007 he hadn't gone back because he had no-one  to
             go back and stay with.

         10.  As far as the photographs were  concerned  he  confirmed  that
             they had been taken on a day out with  his  partner  they  had
             gone to a gay club and taken those  photographs,  it  was  his
             first camera."

11. There were matters arising in re-examination recorded at  [13]  of  the
    determination:

         "13.     He said that after he had been thrown out of the house  he
             used to go home about once a month  or  more  often  to  visit
             there were no problems with this.  His  relationship  came  up
             again in 2005.  As far as Lamin was concerned they were sat on
             each others laps on the compound. The death threats were  only
             from people in the compound he moved out  and  stayed  with  a
             friend. He didn't go out. He delayed leaving  because  he  had
             not completed his course.

         14.  He told me that the college was about  30  minutes  away  from
             where he was staying. It was a technical college where he  did
             a course Association of  Accountancy  Technician.  There  were
             about 40 in the class but it was a  really  big  college.   He
             could not say how many there were there and no-one knew he was
             gay. That was the end of his evidence."

12. After setting out his submissions,  the  judge  gave  his  reasons  for
    finding the appellant had not told  the  truth  about  his  orientation
    which may be summarised as follows:

      i) Although it was not surprising that none of the men with  whom  the
         appellant had had brief encounters was available to  give  evidence
         before  the  Tribunal,  the  situation  with  Peter  was   slightly
         different.  The judge acknowledged however there was no  rule  that
         says that corroboration is compulsory.

     ii) The letter from the friend in Gambia could not be  given  too  much
         weight as it was typed, unsigned and without any verification as to
         the identification of the author.

    iii) The three photographs produced were extremely grainy  and  of  poor
         quality. There appeared to be mixed sex couple in  the  background.
         It could be that some heterosexual people go "there" because it was
         a famous gay bar. The photographs in themselves did not  prove  the
         appellant is gay.

     iv) The appellant had claimed he was thrown out by his parents  because
         of his sexuality yet it was perfectly clear that not only did  they
         agree to sponsor him to come to the UK but he was visiting them  on
         a regular basis.

      v) The appellant claimed to have gone into  hiding  but  in  fact  was
         working and attending what sounded like a huge  college.  This  was
         not something he would have been able to do  if  he  had  been  the
         subject of attack in any kind of way as claimed.

     vi) The appellant had waited three years before living Gambia which was
         indicative he was in no danger at all.

13. The first ground of application for permission  to  appeal  offers  the
    explanation that the appellant had responded  to  the  threats  he  had
    received by leaving his accommodation and moving to another  area;  his
    former neighbours did not know where he moved to.  He continued to work
    and to attend college but lived discreetly.   It  is  argued  that  the
    judge did not set out where the appellant  stated  that  he  went  into
    hiding and further argued that any  reference  to  that  term  referred
    principally to hiding his sexuality. Accordingly the  judge  failed  to
    consider that the appellant had moved away from the compound  to  avoid
    further problems.

14. The second ground examines the judge's reasoning based on the appellant
    having waited for three years before leaving. It is explained  that  he
    was living discreetly and  hiding his sexuality (during this time). The
    complaint  is  made  that  the  fact  that  the  appellant  could  live
    discreetly in Gambia hiding his sexuality did not assist in answering a
    material question, namely whether he was gay and what would  happen  to
    him if he lived in Gambia as an openly gay  man.   The  judge  is  also
    criticised the failing to  take  account  of  the  obstacles  that  the
    appellant would face in leaving Gambia.  The  explanation  advanced  is
    that this was so he could  further his studies to be in a  position  to
    apply for a student visa.

15. The renewed grounds of application to the Upper  Tribunal  develop  the
    argument regarding the application of HJ (Iran) and it is  argued  that
    the judge failed to consider or apply the key principles,  namely  that
    if a gay man could avoid persecution by living discreetly he  satisfies
    the requirements for refugee status.

Submissions and Discussion

16. The  parties  had  complied  with  Judge  Kopieczek's  directions  that
    transcripts should be  provided  of  their  note  of  the  proceedings.
    Although Mr  Logo  did  not  produce  the  Presenting  Officer's  typed
    transcript until the day of the hearing, Ms Robinson had  had  time  to
    read it and was content to proceed.  She referred to an email  from  Mr
    Sills  (who  had  represented  the  appellant  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal) explaining that he had typed his  note  of  the  hearing.   I
    observed that Mr Behl's note (the Presenting Officer) was likely to  be
    fuller than Mr  Sills',  particularly  when  the  appellant  was  being
    questioned by Mr Sills.

17. Ms Robinson opened  her  submissions  with  the  observation  that  the
    challenge came down to a narrow issue relating to the interpretation by
    the judge of the evidence of what had happened to the  appellant  after
    the residents in the compound where he had moved to in Bakau discovered
    his orientation and connection with Mr Lamin.  Her  argument  was  that
    the judge had misunderstood the evidence.  The answers crucial to  this
    point emerged in re-examination. Her argument was  that  the  appellant
    had referred to was the concealment of his orientation (as opposed to a
    physical hiding) and so this explained his ability  to  remain  without
    harm in Gambia until he set out for the United Kingdom.  She  confirmed
    that  the  matters  raised  in  the  paragraph  2  of  the  grounds  of
    application were not relied on but instead those in paragraphs 3 and  4
    relating to the judge's understanding of  the  evidence.   Her  further
    argument was that the misunderstanding affected  the  findings  by  the
    judge as to what the appellant had encountered  after  2007  and  as  a
    consequence all the findings needed to be revisited.

18. I thereafter read to the parties the judge's note as re-examination:

         "I am with Peter in the photograph.

         I aim to go home about once  a  month  to  visit.   There  were  no
         problems with them.

         My relationship with Kebba began in 2005.  Re: Lamin we were sat on
         lap in the compound.

         The death threats were from people in the compound.  When  I  moved
         out I stayed with friend.  I didn't go out.  No gay relationships.

         I delayed because I had not completed my course.

         The college was about 30 minutes.   Technical  College  Association
         Accounting Technician.  40 plus, really big college.  No one knew I
         was gay."

19. Before inviting further submissions from Ms  Robinson,  based  on  that
    record I reminded the parties of  the  evidence  before  the  judge  in
    particular the timelines relied on by the appellant in support  of  his
    claim.  There is no need to  repeat  them  in  detail  here  except  to
    observe that there were clear  inconsistencies  relating  to  when  the
    appellant discovered he was gay, when he first met Kebba, the length of
    their relationship, the timing  of  when  his  mother  discovered  them
    together, the length of his relationship with Lamin and the  timing  of
    the hostility towards them in the compound.

20. Two further matters emerged in the course of discussion.  The first was
    that the appellant had explained when the judge observed in the  course
    of cross-examination that for two years absolutely nothing had happened
    to him that his parents had passed away.  The point does  not  seem  to
    have been taken when in re-examination, the appellant had responded  to
    questions from Mr Sills about why he had waited for two to three  years
    to leave Gambia.  His  answer  was  in  terms  that  he  was  studying,
    completing his course and then his parents helped him come to  the  UK.
    The further point related to the length of  the  relationship  with  Mr
    Lamin.  According to answers given at interview, this had been for  one
    year and six months from  May  2006  whereas,  as  pointed  out  by  Ms
    Robinson, in his statement the appellant had referred to having come to
    the United Kingdom soon after his relationship with Mr Lamin  had  come
    to an end.

21. Ms Robinson acknowledged the difficulties with  the  dates  but  argued
    that the key strands in the evidence and the sequence  of  events  were
    the same.

22. By way of response Mr Logo argued that the word hiding should be  given
    its ordinary meaning.  The appellant was talking about physical hiding.
     He referred to the evidence of the appellant's  activities  whilst  in
    "hiding".  He referred also to the other reasons given by the judge for
    his adverse credibility findings.

23. By way of reply Ms Robinson responded in terms that she relied  on  the
    submissions already made.





My Conclusions

24. I explained at the hearing that I did not consider that the  judge  had
    made an error on a point of law and gave  brief  reasons  which  I  now
    develop. The challenge is to the judge's understanding of the  evidence
    in particular whether the appellant had referred to being in "physical"
    hiding or whether he had been concealing his orientation and thus  able
    to carry on studying and working.  If the latter, it might  well  be  a
    legitimate explanation for the ability of  the  appellant  to  continue
    living in the Gambia without difficulty.

25. The typed transcript of Mr Behl's record includes this:

         "When you left compound did they know where you went? - No.

         Any further contact with these people? - No.

         Explain why you did not receive any threats  between  2006-2007  to
         2009 - I stayed hiding with my friend.

         Any gay relationships in that period - No.

         Explain why you waited two to three years to leave Gambia -  I  was
         studying, completing my course.  Then my parents helped me to  come
         to the UK."

    These were questions by Mr Sills in re-examination.   The  judge's  own
    record broadly accords with the above note.  I have explained above why
    it was likely Mr Behl had a fuller note than Mr Sills.  The  judge  was
    entitled to infer from what he heard that the appellant  had  explained
    that  he  was  physically  hiding,  not  that  he  was  concealing  his
    homosexuality and thus out of harm's  way.   The  judge  was  therefore
    entitled to treat the evidence he heard  with  that  of  the  appellant
    being able to continue to lead his  life  without  coming  to  harm  as
    inconsistent.

26. The judge had before him an account of events  in  Gambia  infected  by
    serious problems over the consistency of the chronology of  key  events
    and although these inconsistencies did not form  part  of  the  reasons
    given by the judge for disbelieving the appellant, there  is  no  doubt
    that he had them in mind, particularly in the light of the reproduction
    of parts of the refusal  letter  and  furthermore  his  record  of  the
    submissions heard from Mr Behl.  Even if  I  were  persuaded  that  the
    appellant had intended to refer to the concealment of  his  orientation
    as an explanation for his lack of harm following the hostility  in  the
    compound (whether that was in 2006 or  2007),   having  regard  to  the
    other unchallenged  reasons  given  by  the  judge  for  rejecting  the
    appellant's account, I am not persuaded  that  the  conclusion  by  the
    judge the appellant was not gay was not open to him.   As  observed  by
    Laws LJ in Subesh v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 56 cited with  approval  in  R
    (Iran) and Ors v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at [8]:

         "It would only very rarely be able to overturn a  finding  of  fact
         based on oral evidence and the assessment of credibility"

27. This is not such a  case.   Examination  of  the  record  of  what  the
    appellant said shows that the judge understood all  the  evidence  that
    was before him, correctly directed himself as to the  law  and  reached
    conclusions open to him on the  evidence.   As  Ms  Robinson  confirmed
    there is no suggestion that the findings otherwise disclose  perversity
    or irrationality.

28. Accordingly the appeal by the appellant is dismissed and  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal stands.






Signed                                  Date  4 July 2013.

[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

