
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04631/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2016                         |On 15th December 2016         |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                        MOHAMED SAFRAN MOHAMED IRUFAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Broudie Jackson
& Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Coates
    made following a hearing a Stoke-on-Trent on 21st January 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 16th August  1990.   He
    arrived in the UK on 25th October 2009 with a student  visa  issued  on
    6th October 2009, valid until 5th February 2013.

 3. On 26th January 2013 the appellant was  hospitalised  after  a  suicide
    attempt  and  was  discharged  two  days  later.  He  claimed   asylum,
    following, he says, advice from medical staff, on 2nd February 2013.

The Appellant's Claim

 4. The appellant said that he was friends with a young man named Kumar who
    was arrested for storing  weapons  for  the  LTTE  at  the  appellant's
    brother-in-law's pharmacy on 11th February 2009.   He  was  accused  of
    assisting Kumar and was detained and tortured for a six  month  period,
    and then released upon his father paying a  substantial  bribe  to  the
    authorities.  The appellant procured a student visa and came to the UK.
    When here, he embarked upon a course of study but  gave  up  after  six
    months.  In his oral evidence, he said that the authorities had visited
    his home twice, once, two or three months after he arrived  in  the  UK
    and the second time before the arrest warrant was submitted in 2015.

 5. The judge considered all of the evidence, including the  oral  evidence
    and the documentary evidence submitted on the appellant's behalf.

 6. In particular, there was a report from  The  Medical  Foundation  which
    supports the appellant's case that he has been tortured and burned with
    cigarettes.  Dr Bonnet identified a number of burns on the  appellant's
    body and considered whether they  could  have  been  self-inflected  or
    applied bye a third party with the appellant's consent.  She  concluded
    that they had not been.

 7. The judge wrote:

         "I am prepared to accept that Dr  Bonnet's  report  is  capable  of
         providing some independent support  of  the  appellant's  claim  of
         torture. However, it does not necessarily demonstrate that  he  was
         ill-treated in the circumstances claimed or to the extent which  he
         claims."

 8. The judge considered the appellant's oral evidence and  concluded  that
    there were a number of inconsistencies in relation to his obtaining  of
    the student visa, and implausibilities in  relation  to  what  occurred
    after his arrival in the UK.  He also took into account the  fact  that
    the appellant did not claim asylum until he had been in the UK for four
    years.

 9. The judge then referred to the  other  documents  which  the  appellant
    produced, including an arrest warrant, a letter from an attorney in Sri
    Lanka and a police report.  He relied on a letter from the British High
    Commission in Sri Lanka referring to RALON, an organisation involved in
    assisting the UK Visas  and  Immigration  there  with  verification  of
    documents submitted in asylum  applications  since  approximately  June
    2014.  RALON has carried out approximately  130  verifications  in  Sri
    Lankan asylum cases  and  has  found  that,  in  98.5%  of  cases,  the
    documents have been found not to be genuine.  To date there  were  only
    two cases where they did appear to be genuine.  On that basis the judge
    declined to find that the warrant of arrest and other  documents   were
    probative of the appellant's case.

10. He considered the appellant's case against the country guidance case of
    GJ & Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319
    and considered that the appellant did not fall within any of  the  risk
    categories identified by the Tribunal.

11. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

12. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had not given adequate reasons  for  not  accepting  the  powerful  and
    compelling medical evidence from The Medical Foundation as probative of
    the appellant's claim to have been tortured.

13. It was also submitted that the judge had come to a different conclusion
    to that of the respondent in respect of whether  the  original  student
    visa was genuine,  and  he  had  taken  into  consideration  immaterial
    matters relating to issue of the appellant's sexuality and discovery of
    his adoption.

14. He had also erred in his consideration of the arrest warrant and  other
    documents, and in concluding that the appellant did not fall  within  a
    risk category outlined in GJ.

15. Finally, the judge had failed to consider the appellant's mental state,
    and in concluding that treatment was available to him in Sri Lanka, had
    reached a conclusion contrary to the findings of the Upper Tribunal  in
    GJ   which  was  satisfied  that  the  resources  in  Sri  Lanka   were
    insufficient to provide appropriate care for mentally ill people.

16. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Shaerf for the reasons stated
    in the grounds.

Submissions

17. Miss Patel relied on her grounds  and  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to properly engage with the very strong findings in the doctor's
    report, which had found that many of the  scars  were  attributable  to
    burns  with  cigarettes  -  seven  lesions  have  the    characteristic
    appearance of cigarette burns.  The doctor said that she could think of
    no accident causing marks of the  appearance  or  distribution  on  the
    appellant's body, and the pattern of distributing was  out  of  keeping
    that usually seen in deliberate self harm.  She could find no basis  on
    which to assess it likely that  the  lesions  had  been  inflicted  for
    secondary gain.

18. She also considered the appellant's  mental  state,  in  particular  in
    relation to his relatively recent discovery that he was adopted and his
    anxiety about  whether  he  was  homosexual.   She  diagnosed  moderate
    depression and post traumatic stress disorder. With respect to  suicide
    risk, she  recorded  that  the  appellant  had  taken  an  overdose  of
    medication in January 2013  and  should  be  considered  vulnerable  to
    taking such steps in the future if his circumstances  changed,  and  he
    once again felt  hopeless.   He  had  many  risk  factors  for  suicide
    although his religious belief and desire to be reunited with his  birth
    family were protective factors.  He currently had no plans or  thoughts
    of harming himself.

19. Miss Patel submitted that the judge had not given adequate reasons  for
    rejecting the doctor's conclusions and had applied the  wrong  standard
    of proof in his assessment of the evidence.

20. She repeated  her  point  made  in  the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    approached the issue of the student visa differently to the respondent,
    and submitted that he had given inadequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
    other documentation. In her submission the appellant fell  within  risk
    category 7A of GJ i.e. he was an individual who was perceived to  be  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka because he was perceived to have a
    significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism.  She
    also submitted that he would be at risk under subheading  4,  namely  a
    person detained by the Sri Lanka security services.

21. Finally, she argued that the judge had  not  properly  dealt  with  the
    mental health aspects of this case and had  impermissibly  stated  that
    there was adequate care available for the appellant in Sri  Lanka  when
    the Tribunal in GJ had found that there were not.

22. Mr Harrison defended the determination which he said  was  through  and
    well reasoned.   The  grounds  amounted  to  a  disagreement  with  the
    decision.

Findings and Conclusions

The Medical Evidence

23. Dr Bonnet's report is indeed very supportive of the  appellant's  case.
    She identifies a number of scars as having  been  caused  by  cigarette
    burns and she concludes that it is unlikely that they  were  caused  by
    accident or by self-harm.

24. The judge recognises the strength of the report.  He  said  that  there
    was no reason to doubt Dr Bonnet's expertise or qualifications  and  he
    had no reason to suppose that she had  expressed  views  not  genuinely
    held.  He was prepared to accept that it was capable of providing  some
    independent support for the  claim  of  torture.   He  then,  properly,
    considered it in the round with all of the other evidence before him.

25. He cannot properly be criticised for stating that the  report  did  not
    necessarily demonstrate that he was ill-treated  in  the  circumstances
    claimed or to the extent which he claims.  That is merely  a  statement
    of  the  obvious  and  certainly  not  an  indication  that  this  very
    experienced Immigration Judge misapplied the standard of  proof  to  be
    applied.

26. Clearly, to be weighed against Dr Bonnet's report, is the fact that the
    appellant failed to claim asylum until he had been in the UK  for  four
    years despite saying that he came to the UK in order to save his  life.
    The judge quite  properly  regarded  the  very  extensive  delay  as  a
    significant hurdle which the appellant had  to  overcome,  and  he  was
    right to put the medical report in that context.

27. The remaining points in the grounds have little merit.  The Immigration
    Judge was perfectly entitled to take a different view to  that  of  the
    respondent in relation to the appellant's state of mind when he came to
    the UK.  That was entirely a matter for  him.   He  was  not  bound  to
    follow the respondent's initial view that the  appellant  had  employed
    deception in saying that he came to the UK  to  study.  The  judge  was
    quite entitled  to  conclude  that  in  fact  the  appellant  may  have
    originally wished to study and  only  later  decided  to  claim  asylum
    before the end of his visa.

28. The remaining grounds and submissions amount  to  a  mere  disagreement
    with the decision.  It cannot properly be argued that it was  not  open
    to the judge to rely on the letter from the British High Commission  in
    Sri Lanka dated 2nd November 2015 recording that the vast  majority  of
    cases where documents have been tested, by RALON, they have been  found
    not to be genuine. Grounds 17-21 merely reargue the appellant's case.

29. Moreover, even if  appellant  had  been  ill-treated  in  2009,  as  he
    claimed, that would not in itself mean that  he  was  entitled  to  the
    protection of the Refugee Convention in 2016.  Miss  Patel's  reference
    to risk category 4 in GJ and  Others  is  misconceived.   The  Tribunal
    stated that, at 4, "If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan  security
    services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
    international protection." That is a reference to  the  risks  of  ill-
    treatment if detained on a return to Sri Lanka and not a risk per se to
    anybody who has been detained in the past.

30. Miss Patel submitted that the appellant fell  within  the  category  of
    persons perceived to be  a  threat  to  the  integrity  of  Sri  Lanka.
    However, that submission is predicated, as she accepted, upon a finding
    that the arrest warrant was genuine. The appellant does not  claim  any
    sur place activities in the UK which would give rise to such a risk.

31. Finally, there remains the issue of the appellant's mental health.  The
    evidence is that he made a suicide  attempt  in  2013.  There  is  also
    evidence  that  the  appellant  has  been  conflicted  in  relation  to
    information about his adoption and his anxiety in  relation  to  sexual
    orientation.  He  is  apparently  receiving  counselling  and   is   on
    medication. Without wishing to diminish the  undoubted  distress  which
    the appellant may be suffering, his mental state is  not,  fortunately,
    as fragile as that in the third appellant in GJ.   That  appellant  had
    firm plans to commit suicide rather than return and suffered from grave
    mental health problems with severe forms of both post traumatic  stress
    disorder and depression.  That  is  not  a  diagnosis  shared  by  this
    appellant.  The judge was therefore entitled to conclude that, for him,
    suitable treatment would be available in Sri Lanka.

32. In summary, the appellant produced strong medical evidence  in  support
    of his appeal but it was not determinative. It was properly analysed by
    the judge and considered in the round together with all  of  the  other
    evidence.  However, even if the judge was wrong, and the appellant  had
    been tortured in 2009, there can be no error in  the  judge  concluding
    that the appellant did not fall within any of the risk  categories  set
    out in GJ. The grounds amount to a lengthy and  sustained  disagreement
    with the decision but disclose no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The original judge's decision will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 15 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


