

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04345/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Sent           |
|On : 25th October 2013                        |On  : 30th October 2013      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                                    r. r.
                       (anonymity direction continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Iain Palmer, instructed by Barnes, Harrild &
Dyer, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tony Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, Miss RR, a young  Kurdish  woman  about  20  years  old,
    landed at Stansted Airport on 14th March this year and claimed  asylum.
    Within a very short time she had a screening interview ('SCR')  and  an
    asylum interview ('AIR'), followed by  the  issue  of  a  'Reasons  for
    Refusal' Letter ('RFRL').  An appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against
    the consequent decision to remove her came before Judge  Sweet  on  7th
    June 2013, when Miss RR was represented by Mr Palmer.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed, but the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, settled  by
    Mr Palmer, although unsuccessful initially, were thought on renewal  to
    evince an arguable error of law, and permission was granted.

2.    When the case came before me today, Mr Palmer relied on  his  grounds,
    which were strongly rebutted by Mr Melvin.   In  rejoinder,  Mr  Palmer
    argued persuasively that Judge Sweet had indeed erred in  law,  but  in
    the end I did not agree.  I am grateful  to  both  representatives  for
    setting out their positions so lucidly and succinctly.

3.   Mr Palmer's principal ground is that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not,
    when considering the risk to Miss RR on return to Iran, factor  in  the
    involvement of her close family with the Komala  Party.   According  to
    the appellant, her father was executed in 2008  for  his  oppositionist
    activity, while her brother met the same fate in 2012.  Another brother
    sought asylum in this country in  2008,  and  although  his  claim  was
    initially rejected, he won his appeal before the Asylum and Immigration
    Tribunal, and now enjoys refugee status.   With  such  close  relatives
    having incurred the wrath of the  Iranian  authorities,  the  appellant
    will be at real risk of serious ill-treatment on  return,  contends  Mr
    Palmer, because of her connexion to them, regardless of whether she had
    any involvement with Komala herself.

4.   The trouble with that contention, as Mr Melvin points out, is that  the
    appellant never had any trouble from the  Iranian  authorities,  except
    when they were looking for her father and her  brother.   According  to
    the appellant, she and the rest of her family were  detained  and  ill-
    treated in 2004 because of her father's political activities,  and  she
    was detained for another week in 2012 when the authorities were looking
    for her brother.  Now that both these opponents are dead, she will  not
    be of interest to the authorities on their account.  Mr Palmer protests
    that Judge Sweet did not count in the appellant's favour the fact  that
    her surviving brother was found  credible  by  the  AIT  and  has  been
    recognised as a refugee, but again Mr Melvin insists that this does not
    mean that the appellant will be  at  risk  because  of  her  relatives'
    activities.

5.   I agree with Mr Melvin.  The appellant has three sisters in  Iran,  two
    of them adults, and she has not mentioned any problems incurred by them
    with the authorities.  Nor did she herself have any  trouble  with  the
    authorities, except when they were looking for her father and  brother.
    She has never been targeted just because she is a relative of political
    activists.  It was accordingly not an error of law for Judge Sweet  not
    to make an explicit finding on whether the appellant would be  at  risk
    on return for this  reason.   He  did  take  account  of  the  'country
    guidance' in SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 53
    and BA (demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT
    36 (IAC), neither of which, as Mr Palmer frankly  admits,  specify  the
    relatives of political opponents as a category of persons  at  risk  on
    return.

6.   Judge Sweet focused on whether the appellant had herself taken part  in
    oppositionist activities.  Her own account was that she had  held  back
    from Komala as long as her mother was alive, but when her mother passed
    away in January this year, she joined Komala  in  February,  and  began
    distributing leaflets.  This did not  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities, but shortly afterwards she heard that a friend of hers had
    been arrested, and that her own  name  had  now  become  known  to  the
    authorities.  This had caused her to flee  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
    March.

7.   Mr Palmer contends that Judge Sweet did not give adequate  reasons  for
    disbelieving this story, but it seems to me that he did  do  enough  to
    support his conclusion  that  the  appellant  was  "a  witness  lacking
    credibility."  The only thing he was prepared to believe was  that  she
    hailed from Iran, and that was only because her brother had been  found
    to hail from Iran.  It was not credible that her brother  had  no  idea
    that she was coming to this country  to  seek  asylum.   There  was  an
    inconsistency between her earlier account that she did not know whether
    she travelled here with any agents, and  her  later  account  that  she
    travelled with two agents.  Nor was it  plausible  that  she  travelled
    from Iran to the UK without any documentation at all, as  she  claimed.
    There was another inconsistency as to whether it was, or was  not,  her
    intention  to  be  politically  active  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellant was illiterate and had lived all her life in a small village.
     That would explain why she did not know much about  politics,  but  it
    would not explain why she suddenly became politically active and joined
    the Komala Party.

8.   On that last point, Mr Palmer suggests that, belonging to  a  political
    family, the appellant might well want to join the  Komala  party,  once
    she no longer had to avoid causing her mother anxiety.  But the task at
    the 'error of law' stage is not to enumerate reasons which  might  have
    occurred to the judge, but  did  not,  for  accepting  the  appellant's
    account.  Rather, the task is to assess whether it was rationally  open
    to the judge not to accept the account, for the reasons which he  gave.
    The matters which did cause the judge to doubt the  appellant's  story,
    listed in the previous paragraph, do seem to me sufficient  to  justify
    the judge's  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  not  "likely  to  be
    perceived  by  the  authorities  as  being  associated  with  political
    activities."  From there, it is a logical step for the  judge  to  find
    that "unless the Appellant has  been  politically  active,  it  is  not
    likely that the Appellant would be at risk on return  from  persecution
    or prosecution."

9.    Credibility  has  always  been  a  vexed  question   in   the   asylum
    jurisdiction.  Often, it is weaknesses at the periphery of the  account
    which undermine the centrepiece.  That this has happened in the present
    case is not an error of law,  and  the  First-tier  determination  must
    therefore stand.




     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           25th October 2013



