
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04905/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November  2015                |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     S S
                          (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 3rd  December  1981  and  he
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 9th March
    2015  refusing  to  grant  him  asylum,  humanitarian  protection   and
    protection under the European Convention.

 2. The appellant's claim was that he was educated in Iran to diploma level
    and stopped practising Islam at the  age  of  20  years  old.   He  was
    introduced to Baha'i by a childhood friend and over the following  year
    (in 2013) attended 8 -  10  Baha'i  house  meetings.  He  converted  to
    Baha'i.  He was arrested at  a  meeting  and  detained.   His  father's
    paternal uncle arranged for his release.  The condition of his  release
    was that he be available when required. The  appellant  was  afraid  to
    return to Iran lest he be persecuted by the authorities.

 3. The appellant's case was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Juss  who
    dismissed the appeal.  An application for permission to appeal was made
    by the appellant  asserting  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  provide
    sustainable reasons for his adverse credibility  findings.   The  judge
    materially erred by misrepresenting the evidence.   The  appellant  had
    explained in his evidence that  he  was  born  Shia  but  converted  to
    Baha'i.  This was not dealt with.  The appellant  stated  that  in  his
    screening interview that he had a religious problem and  it  was  clear
    that there was an  unrecorded  section  to  the  interview.  The  judge
    erroneously recorded that the appellant stated that he simply  attended
    meetings which was not correct. The  appellant  answered  many  of  the
    questions  relating  to  Baha'i  correctly  and  the  judge  failed  to
    acknowledge this. The judge took no account of the  appellant's  appeal
    statement or witness statement both of  which  were  presented  to  the
    First tier Tribunal. This was evident from the failure of the judge  to
    acknowledge the explanation of the appellant regarding the locations of
    the meeting houses and the judge had failed to address the  appellant's
    statement [W/s 10].  The judge based his rejection of  the  appellant's
    arrest, detention and ill-treatment on a materially flawed analysis  of
    the core of the appellant's account.

 4. First tier Tribunal Judge White granted permission to appeal. He  found
    that it was arguable that the  judge  had  failed  to  have  sufficient
    regard to the appellant's witness statement concerning his knowledge of
    the Baha'i faith and the locations of the meetings.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Gayle expanded on the  written  application
    for permission to appeal.   He pointed out that the judge  appeared  to
    rely substantially on the reasons for refusal  letter  but  there  were
    mistakes in the reasons for refusal letter, or at least mistakes in the
    interpretation of the evidence by the judge.  The judge had  criticised
    the appellant for not knowing answers but the answers he did know  were
    considered to be 'learned' for the purpose of the appeal.   Nowhere  in
    the decision was there an acknowledgement of the explanations  made  by
    the appellant for example as to the lack of knowledge of the  locations
    of the meetings. The judge did not refer  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement or his appeal statement.   The criticism of  the  appellant's
    response on the 'marriage question'  did  not  accurately  reflect  the
    background evidence.   The matter of the 'core beliefs' was  also  open
    to interpretation which had not been addressed. There were in  fact  no
    set prayers and no strict scriptures.

 6. Ms Sreeraman accepted that the judge  did  not  refer  to  the  witness
    statement but the judge identified that the appellant had been provided
    with a book after his arrival in the UK and thus  the  information  the
    appellant noted could have been learned after his arrival in the UK.

 7.  In  conclusion  there  was  clearly  an  issue  with  respect  to  the
    appellant's stated religion (Shia) as the appellant maintained  in  his
    witness  statement [2] ,which was before the First-tier Tribunal,  that
    when asked about his religion he explained at the  outset  that  during
    the Screening Interview, initially he was Shia but  then  converted  to
    Baha'i.  This is recorded in the appellant's witness statement. Indeed,
    there would appear to  have  been  some  unrecorded  information  given
    because at Question 4.1 the  appellant  stated  'As  I  said  I  had  a
    religious problem and for about 1 year I  was  with  Baha'i  in  Iran'.
    The judge makes no reference to the  appellant's  explanation  and  yet
    proceeds to make this finding the starting point  for  his  credibility
    assessment. The  appellant's  response  on  fasting  was  not  in  fact
    conclusive that the Baha'i do not fast although the judge  stated  that
    the appellant stated that they did not fast.

 8. When addressing at [17] of the  decision  the  appellant's  failure  to
    answer questions on the Baha'i faith, the judge does  not  address  the
    appellant's explanation for that failure or state why it was  rejected.



 9. The judge stated that

         'some things the appellant got categorically  wrong.   For  example
         when he was asked whether the Bahais believe in marriage (AIR  286)
         he replies  that  the  Bahais  must  marry  whereas  the  objective
         evidence is that for Bahais marriage is not the central purpose  of
         life and those who do not marry are not second class citizen' [17].



    In fact the appellant responded at  AIR  286  that  Bahais  must  marry
    officially which is not the same as stating that Baha'i must marry.

10. The judge noted the appellant's failure to identify the location of his
    meetings - which also formed the basis of the rejection of his  claimed
    arrest - but made no reference to the  appellant's  explanation  within
    his appeal statement at [15] and why he rejected that.

11. The appellant did manage to answer a number of questions correctly  but
    this was merely dismissed as having been subsequently learned.  I  note
    in respect of the core beliefs the refusal letter states  that  'it  is
    not  considered  that  you  have  been  wholly  inconsistent  with  the
    objective evidence'.

12. As there appeared to be some reliance by the judge  on  evidence  which
    was misinterpreted from the answers in his asylum interview, there  was
    no reference to the witness statement or  his  appeal  statement  which
    attempted to explain the deficiencies in his answers I find that  there
    are errors of law which may affect the outcome of  the  decision  in  a
    material way and substantially undermines the assessment in relation to
    the appellant's credibility.  This is fundamental to the findings.

13. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction regarding anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date 3rd November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

