
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/04517/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On December 14, 2015                 |On January 4, 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in
         the  interests  of  convenience  and  consistency,  replicate   the
         nomenclature of the decision at first instance.

      2. The appellant, citizen of Zimbabwe, claimed asylum on  November  2,
         2013 but this was refused by the respondent on  February  23,  2015
         and at the same time a  decision  was  taken  to  remove  him.  The
         appellant appealed this decision on March 17,  2015  under  section
         82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers on
         June 17, 2015 and he allowed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated
         on June 22, 2015.

      4. The respondent sought permission to appeal that  decision  on  June
         25, 2015 on the ground the Tribunal had  failed  to  make  or  give
         adequate findings on why the appellant would be at  risk  from  his
         former employer, [SP].

      5. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Holmes on July 7, 2015  on  the  basis  the  grounds  were
         arguable.

      6. The matter came before me on the above date  and  on  that  date  I
         heard submissions from both the  appellant  and  Ms  Johnstone.  Ms
         Johnstone had also  represented  the  respondent  at  the  original
         hearing.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and pursuant to
         Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
         extend that order now.

         ERROR IN LAW

      8. Ms Johnstone submitted the  Tribunal  had  erred  by  allowing  the
         appeal. No evidence, other than the oral evidence of the appellant,
         had been submitted that  demonstrated  he  would  be  at  risk,  if
         returned. The evidence before  the  Tribunal  was  the  appellant's
         employer had money problems and this was why they fell  out.  There
         was no evidence that either the appellant or  his  former  employer
         were public figures. The appellant was part  of  a  group  and  the
         Tribunal's finding was open to it.

      9. The appellant maintained that as a well known figure he would be at
         risk and the Tribunal was entitled to reach the decision he did. He
         submitted that he would not be safe, if returned, and the  Tribunal
         was entitled to reach the decision it did.

         DISCUSSION AND FINDING

     10. The appellant applied for asylum and it is  clear  from  paragraphs
         [12], [17] and [24] the respondent accepted the core of  his  claim
         namely that he worked for whom he claimed and that there had been a
         falling out between himself and [SP].

     11. The issue for the respondent and the Tribunal was whether there was
         sufficiency of protection and the respondent concluded at paragraph
         [26] the authorities did provide protection if the same was  sought
         and at paragraph [29] it concluded  the  appellant  had  failed  to
         establish there had been a  sustained  and  systematic  failure  of
         state protection. The Tribunal further concluded at paragraph  [30]
         that he had failed to demonstrate his employer  had  any  influence
         over the state. The respondent went on to state at  paragraph  [35]
         that even if the appellant could not return to where  he  lived  he
         had failed to demonstrate it was unreasonable for  him  to  go  and
         live elsewhere.

     12. At the hearing the Tribunal noted there was police  corruption  and
         that the judicial system was subject to  political  influence.  The
         Tribunal concluded that  a  determined  individual  with  influence
         could act with impunity.

     13. Ms Johnstone's submission is that there was no  objective  evidence
         to support the appellant's claim his employer was such a person.

     14. An article about the group was submitted to the respondent but this
         did not support the appellant's claim. A newspaper article referred
         to the appellant absconding from the group due to poor remuneration-
         the appellant himself claimed that he had been told he would not be
         paid.

     15. The appellant's case was  built  only  on  his  evidence.  Although
         others had absconded from the dance group  there  was  no  evidence
         before the Tribunal that they had sought  asylum  or  come  to  any
         harm.

     16. The real issue for me to consider was whether, in  the  absence  of
         any adverse objective  material,  about  his  former  employer  the
         Tribunal could reach the conclusion it did.

     17. Bearing in mind the appellant's claim I am satisfied  the  Tribunal
         should have considered  why  there  was  an  absence  of  any  such
         evidence. The objective evidence in the refusal letter only applies
         to persons of influence but the appellant had provided no  evidence
         to show his former employer was a person of influence.

     18. I am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal's  decision  was  inadequately
         reasoned and there is therefore an error in law.  I  therefore  set
         aside the decision to allow the claim on asylum  and  human  rights
         grounds.

     19. Both parties had indicated at the hearing that  a  further  hearing
         was unnecessary and that the decision could be made on the evidence
         currently before me.

     20. The fact I found there to be a material  error  and  the  reason  I
         found a material error means the decision allowing the appeal  must
         be reversed. Whilst his employment and dispute may  be  credible  I
         have no evidence to support the appellant's claim that he would  be
         at risk in Zimbabwe. The total lack of any adverse  material  about
         [SP] undermines the appellant's claim that he would be at  risk  of
         persecution or serious harm, if returned.

     21. It is insufficient to merely be a credible witness.  The  appellant
         has to show he is either at risk of persecution or serious harm and
         to do that he needed to present some evidence to support his  claim
         that [SP] was a man of influence and that he would be both at  risk
         from him and the state would not provide protection.

     22. The appellant failed to do this and I therefore dismiss  his  claim
         for asylum and under human rights.

         DECISION

     23. There was a material error.

     24. I set aside the  original  decision  and  dismiss  his  appeal  for
         asylum, humanitarian protection or protection under human rights.




    Signed:      Dated:


    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis






    FEE AWARD

    I uphold the fee award.




    Signed:      Dated:


    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


