
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: AA/04447/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard             at             Field             House,             London
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the               2nd               March               2018
      On the 14th March 2018

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:

                                   MR K.D.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss Everitt (Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Butler promulgated on the 21st September 2017, in which
      he dismissed the Appellant's protection and Human Rights appeals.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on  the  5th  May
      1983.  He claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  imputed  political
      opinion.  His case is that between June and November  2008  he  helped
      his friend P by transporting car parts from Colombo to Jaffna on 4  or
      5 occasions and that he was arrested on the 9th July 2009 and detained
      for 3 months, during which time he says was questioned about his links
      to P and whether he assisted the LTTE.  He says he was released  after
      payment of a bribe by his uncle.  He says that he was then abducted on
      the 28th July 2012 by the Army and detained and questioned  about  why
      he had been to France in 2005 and about P and that he was tortured and
      taken to hospital.  He again says his uncle secured  his  release  and
      that he then stayed with his uncle for 3 to 4 months during which time
      he says the authorities visited his mother claiming to have an  arrest
      warrant.

   3. In his decision  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Butler  found  that  the
      Appellant was not a member of the LTTE and that he had varied  in  the
      evidence he had given regarding the assistance he had given to P,  and
      Judge Butler did not accept for the reasons given in his decision that
      the Appellant had been arrested by the authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  or
      detained or beaten as claimed.  Judge Butler further went on  to  find
      that in terms of the Appellant's mental health he had  not  reached  a
      high threshold discussed in the case of N v The  United  Kingdom,  and
      found that little weight could  be  attached  to  the  reports  of  Dr
      Persaud,  who  provided  psychiatric  evidence  in  respect   of   the
      Appellant's appeal.

   4. The Appellant now appeals against that decision for  the  reasons  set
      out within the Grounds of Appeal.  That is a matter of record  and  is
      therefore not repeated in its entirety here, but  in  summary,  it  is
      argued by the Appellant that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
      his assessment of the psychiatric evidence of Dr Persaud and that  the
      Judge's finding that Dr Persaud has based his clinical findings on the
      conclusions of an unnamed psychotherapy service was a factual  mistake
      and that Dr Persaud referred  to  treatment  from  the  NHS  that  the
      Appellant was undergoing and that he had concurred with the  NHS  that
      the Appellant had PTSD and depression.  It is argued the second report
      of Dr Persaud was given very limited consideration and the  Judge  did
      not engage  the  clinical  findings  and  it  is  argued  had  focused
      irrationally upon the findings relating to the Appellant's ability  to
      give evidence  and  had  not  adequately  engaged  with  the  clinical
      findings of Dr Persaud.  It was further argued that the Judge was pre-
      occupied  with  the  identity  of  the  person  who  carried  out  the
      interpretation of the Appellant when being assessed by Dr Persaud  and
      had further materially erred in finding that it was imperative for  Dr
      Persaud to consider the Respondent's refusal letter.   It  is  further
      argued in the Grounds of Appeal that the Judge erred  procedurally  in
      not asking the Appellant's mother about whether she had been  arrested
      a week after the Appellant had left for France and to make an  adverse
      finding in that regard against the Appellant when that  had  not  been
      put to her.  It is argued that his assessment  of  the  mother's  oral
      evidence was such that the Judge was never going to attach  weight  to
      it.

   5. Permission to appeal had been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hodgkinson on the 25th October 2017 who found  that  it  was  arguable
      that the Judge had erred in his consideration of Dr Persaud's addendum
      report for the reason indicated in  the  Grounds  and  that  that  had
      arguably tainted the Judge's consideration of the medical evidence  as
      a whole and that all of the grounds could be argued.

   6. Within the Respondent's Rule 24 Reply dated the 30th November 2017, it
      is argued, inter alia, he  directed  himself  appropriately  and  that
      Judge Hodgkinson had found it was not  arguable  that  the  Judge  had
      failed to consider the report of Dr Persaud  but  it  was  argued  the
      Judge had given a  full  account  of  why  the  appeal  failed  to  be
      dismissed and in that regard the Secretary of State  relied  upon  the
      case of JL (Medical Reports -  Credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  145.
      Various paragraphs from the head note are quoted, which I  have  fully
      taken account of in reaching my decision.

   7. It is on that basis the case came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   8. I have also listened carefully to the oral submissions made by both Mr
      Paramjorthy and Miss Everitt.  In his oral submissions, Mr Paramjorthy
      argued that although it  was  unhelpful  for  the  psychiatric  report
      referred to by Dr Persaud not to have been included within the papers,
      he has still made clinical findings regarding the  Appellant's  mental
      health, which the Judge had failed to properly  consider.   He  argued
      that at [54], the Judge appears to have found that the  Appellant  was
      suffering from some anxiety in relation to the appeal and that he  had
      not satisfied the burden upon him of proving  to  the  lower  standard
      that his mental health problems had been caused by being  tortured  in
      Sri Lanka and that Dr Persaud had not been alerted to the  credibility
      issues raised within the refusal letter and that therefore the  report
      could not be regarded as having  significant  weight,  as  the  author
      would not have been alerted to the possibility that the account of the
      patient had been fabricated.  It was argued  by  Mr  Paramjorthy  that
      irrespective of causation, Dr  Persaud  had  given  a  clear  clinical
      diagnosis that the Appellant suffered from both PTSD  and  depression,
      and that the Judge had not adequately dealt with or  explained  as  to
      whether or not he was simply rejecting  the  causation  aspect  of  Dr
      Persaud's evidence, or if he was rejecting the entirety of the report,
      and if so what were the Judge's reasons  for  rejecting  the  clinical
      diagnosis.

   9. Mr Paramjorthy also further argued that the Judge had gone on at  [55]
      to seemingly conduct his own research regarding  the  availability  of
      mental health treatment in Sri  Lanka  from  the  Commonwealth  Health
      Online, which evidence was not put by  the  Judge  to  either  of  the
      parties at the hearing, and appears to have been  research  undertaken
      by the Judge after the appeal hearing.

  10. Mr Paramjorthy did not pursue the argument before me that the  Judge's
      consideration  of  the  Appellant's  mother's  evidence  involved  any
      material error of law.

  11. In her submissions, Miss Everitt  argued  that  the  Judge  had  given
      cogent reasons for not accepting the evidence of Dr Persaud, but  said
      that it was arguable that the Judge had not given adequate reasons for
      rejecting the depression diagnosis, but argued that that  would  be  a
      peculiar finding in isolation.  She argued that Dr Persaud's reasoning
      linked both the causation and the diagnosis, and  that  therefore  the
      Judge's reasonings for rejecting the medical evidence were sufficient.
       She did quite properly concede that the Judge appeared to  have  done
      his own research regarding the Commonwealth Health Online organisation
      and the evidence from that organisation  as  to  the  availability  of
      mental health treatment in Sri Lanka, and quite properly conceded that
      the Judge had not carried out a full analysis of paragraphs 454 to 456
      of GJ and Others regarding the availability of mental health treatment
      in Sri Lanka, although the Judge referred to those paragraphs at  [51]
      of his Judgment, but had not gone on to consider  the  import  of  the
      same.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  12. In his findings at [40] First-tier Tribunal Judge  Butler  found  that
      the report of Dr Raj Persaud, in terms of the initial report dated the
      19th February 2015 which was updated by way of an addendum  report  on
      the 26th April 2016, was woefully inadequate in that  Dr  Persaud  had
      said that he had seen the Appellant and read the documents in the Home
      Office asylum interview, but the doctor  had  not  said  that  he  had
      referred  to  anything  else  and  there  was  no  reference  to   the
      Appellant's GP notes.  It is said that  Dr  Persaud  referred  to  the
      Appellant as being very withdrawn and that it had  been  difficult  to
      elicit signs and symptoms and that the  diagnosis  was  only  elicited
      with help from the gentleman who had accompanied him, who appeared  to
      be a family friend, who helped translate.  But  then  Dr  Persaud  had
      given a diagnosis of a serious psychiatric  disorder  including  major
      depression that was probably secondary to the traumas that the  client
      claims he had undergone and that the vividness of his descriptions  of
      past traumas in terms of his emergent reactions led to Dr  Persaud  to
      believe it was highly unlikely that core parts of his account had been
      fabricated or exaggerated.

  13. However, Judge Butler  criticised  the  fact  that  there  was  little
      history recounted by Dr Persaud regarding the Appellant's  history  in
      Sri Lanka and it was  unclear  whether  the  Appellant  gave  his  own
      personal account of those events or whether Dr Persaud had  read  them
      in the asylum interview and there was also a  question  regarding  the
      identity of the man who accompanied him.

  14. Judge Butler went on to consider the further  report  dated  the  12th
      December 2016 contained within the supplemental bundle and  said  that
      was predicated largely upon a report  from  an  unnamed  psychotherapy
      service, which had not been produced and where it was not clear of the
      circumstances in which that report  had  been  compiled  and  that  Dr
      Persaud appears to place reliance upon that report and that Dr Persaud
      had relied upon that report to reinforce his own previous  assessment.
      Judge Butler again mentioned that Dr Persaud  had  given  no  hint  of
      having read the refusal letter, which would  have  been  available  to
      him, which the Judge found were  contrary  to  the  principles  in  JL
      (Medical Reports - Credibility) China [2013] UKUT 145 and therefore he
      found that little weight should be  attached  to  the  reports  of  Dr
      Persaud.

  15. However, in all three of his  reports,  Dr  Persaud  had  given  clear
      diagnosis of the Appellant suffering from both clinical depression and
      PTSD and how  the  Appellant  had  been  prescribed  by  his  GP  with
      antidepressants, initially in the form of amitriptyline, and then onto
      sertraline with the dose being  increased  over  time  to  100mgs  and
      stated specifically that the length  of  time  that  he  had  been  on
      antidepressants was a measure of the seriousness  of  his  psychiatric
      disorder.

  16. Certainly as far as Dr  Persaud  not  having  considered  the  refusal
      letter, although I note that that post-dated the initial report of  Dr
      Persaud, no reference was made to it in  subsequent  reports,  and  in
      that regard the causation of any psychiatric symptoms can properly  be
      criticised by the  Judge  in  that  regard,  as  Dr  Persaud  has  not
      considered the reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's  credibility  by
      the Secretary of State, and dismissing the asylum claim.

  17.  However,  it  is  perfectly  feasible  for  people  to  suffer   from
      psychiatric conditions, especially such as depression, which  are  not
      based upon any particular history being accepted either by  the  Judge
      or either the psychologist.  In my judgement First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Butler has not properly explained whether or not he accepts  that  the
      Appellant does suffer from PTSD or depression, or whether he is simply
      suffering from anxiety. If he is rejecting the evidence of Dr  Persaud
      in  respect  of  the  diagnosis,  as  opposed  to  causation  of   the
      psychiatric symptoms, he has not adequately explained the  reason  for
      rejecting the diagnosis of an extremely renowned psychiatrist in  that
      regard.

  18.  The reasoning given regarding the fact that Dr Persaud had  not  seen
      the refusal letter and that in respect of his second  report,  he  had
      not seen the report from the unnamed  psychological  service  had  not
      been produced, do in themselves not explain why Dr Persaud's  opinion,
      even in the very first medical report that the Appellant was suffering
      from depression and PTSD was rejected.   There  may  have  been  other
      traumatic events, which would explain the PTSD, even if it was not the
      account given by the Appellant, and certainly  insofar  as  depression
      was concerned, that did not necessarily depend upon the account  given
      by the Appellant being accepted.

  19.   Indeed,  in  his  latest  report,  Dr  Persaud  indicated  that  the
      Appellant's depression was such that the  Appellant  was  said  by  Dr
      Persaud to be having depressed mood for most of the day  nearly  every
      day for longer than 2 weeks, and feelings of  worthlessness,  insomnia
      every  day,  diminished  ability  to  think   or   concentrate,   and,
      particularly  noteworthy,  recurrent  thoughts  of   death   including
      recurrent suicidal ideation.

  20. The reasoning given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler  is  therefore
      inadequate regarding whether or not he is just rejecting the causation
      arguments in Dr  Persaud's  evidence  or  in  addition,  the  clinical
      diagnosis, and if he is rejecting also  the  clinical  diagnosis,  the
      reasoning is inadequate in order to explain to the losing party why he
      has  rejected  that  diagnosis,  rather  than  simply  rejecting   the
      causation for the diagnosis of depression. If the  Appellant  does  in
      fact suffer from PTSD and/or depression that may well possibly  affect
      his ability  to  be  returned,  which  the  Judge  has  not  seemingly
      adequately dealt with. I do find that this is a material error of law,
      in that I cannot say that the Judge would necessarily have come to the
      same conclusion, had that error not been made.

  21. Indeed, in fact if  the  Appellant  does  suffer  from  post-traumatic
      stress disorder and depression as indicated by Dr Persaud, then  there
      is a further error committed by the Judge in terms of  doing  his  own
      research post-hearing in respect of the availability of  treatment  in
      Sri Lanka from the Commonwealth Health Online, in circumstances  where
      the parties were not given any opportunity to comment upon  the  same,
      and which the Judge did take account of as being significant  evidence
      regarding the availability of treatment for psychiatric conditions  in
      Sri Lanka. The Judge has not actually considered  the  evidence  given
      within the Country Guidance  case  of  GJ  and  Others  regarding  the
      availability of psychiatric treatment in Sri Lanka at paragraphs  [454
      to 456]  of  the  Judgment.   Those  paragraphs  clearly  referred  at
      paragraph [454] to there being only 25 working  psychiatrists  in  the
      whole of Sri Lanka, at [455] to the  UKBA  country  of  origin  report
      regarding there being no psychologists working in  the  public  sector
      and there being only 55 psychiatrists  attached  to  the  Ministry  of
      Health and working across the country.  Further at paragraph [456] the
      Upper Tribunal in the  Country  Guidance  found  that  in  respect  of
      someone who was a suicide risk that the resources  in  Sri  Lanka  are
      sparse and limited to the cities and in that case found that in  light
      of  the  Appellant's  own  evidence  that  on  her  OGN  that  medical
      facilities were only in the cities and they do  not  provide  adequate
      care for mentally ill people and in that case given  the  severity  of
      that Appellant's mental illness, the Upper Tribunal were not satisfied
      that on the particular facts of the appeal that returning him  to  Sri
      Lanka complied with the United Kingdom's obligations under Article  3.
      Judge Butler's reference therefore that he  did  not  understand  that
      those paragraphs  related  to  returning  mental  health  patients  as
      opposed to those in opposition to  a  single  state,  was  clearly  in
      error.

  22. I find that the Judge conducting his own research without  giving  the
      parties the opportunity to comment upon the same, not referring to the
      evidence given in the Country Guidance case  to  the  availability  of
      mental health treatment and the number of psychiatrists in Sri  Lanka,
      does also amount to a material error of law,  in  the  fact  that  the
      availability of such treatment has to be considered, in a  case  where
      the Appellant says that he is suffering from PTSD, depression and  the
      depression is of such severity that he is said to be  having  suicidal
      ideation.

  23. In such circumstances I  do  find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Butler does contain material errors of law  and  should
      be set aside.  I therefore remit  the  case  back  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for re-hearing before any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other
      than First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside.

I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing  before  any
First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Butler.

Anonymity

In light of the circumstances of this case, it is appropriate for  there  to
be an anonymity direction.  Unless and until the Tribunal or  Court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of Court proceedings.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 2nd March 2018


