
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04746/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th September 2015                        |On 22nd October 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     yM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Spiers, Katani & Co, Solicitors, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr Mullen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Gambia  born  on  25th  July  1988.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  5th  March  2015
    refusing to grant her asylum or other protection in the United Kingdom.
     Her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  McGrade  on
    20th May 2015.  The appeal was dismissed and his  decision  promulgated
    on 22nd June 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Simpson on 17th July  2015.
    The grounds of application are (First), that the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach when assessing  the  appeal  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    (Second), that the judge failed to undertake a careful  examination  of
    all relevant factors  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  children  and
    (Third), that the judge erred in his assessment of credibility.

 3. As observed in the grant of permission the judge did  not  believe  the
    Appellant's evidence about her marriages to WHM or PAJ and  as  he  did
    not accept the forced marriage to the latter, he did  not  accept  that
    the Appellant's daughters were at risk  of  FGM  from  family  members.
    Although noting that there  is  nothing  in  the  medical  evidence  to
    suggest that the Appellant's health issues come within  the  guidelines
    in N [2005] UKHC 31, the grant concludes that it is arguable  that  the
    judge did not sufficiently consider the best interests of the  children
    in light of the recent case law although it is silent as  to  the  case
    law in mind.

 4. There is a Rule 24 response from the Respondent stating that the  judge
    directed himself appropriately  and  adequately  dealt  with  the  best
    interests of the children, twins, who at the date of the hearing were 1
    year old.  The judge notes that they have lived with their  mother  and
    will return to Gambia with their mother and will not be jeopardised  if
    they return.  The judge does not require to list the latest case law in
    relation to the children's best interests, given  their  ages  and  the
    circumstances and paragraph 41 of the decision deals sufficiently  with
    the children's best interests. The judge  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    completely incredible in her evidence  and  the  response  states  that
    there is no risk of  child  trafficking,  no  issues  relating  to  the
    Appellant's health and no reason to find she would  be  stigmatised  on
    return or  that  any  of  these  matters  would  adversely  affect  the
    children.

The Hearing

 5. With regard to the first ground of appeal,  we  asked  the  Appellant's
    representative what the judge did not  consider  that  he  should  have
    considered and if there is any way the application could have succeeded
    under paragraph 276ADE.  She accepted that the  application  could  not
    meet the terms of that paragraph.

 6. We  asked  if  there  are  any  factors  which  are  not  captured  for
    consideration by the Rules and we  were  referred  to  the  Appellant's
    medical condition and her inability to get employment on return because
    of this.  We were referred to the psychological report on file.  It was
    submitted that the Appellant would be unable to support her children in
    Gambia and we were referred to the Appellant's bundle and the essential
    passages relevant to  the  Appellant  being  a  single  woman  with  no
    support.  We reminded the representative of the  unchallenged  evidence
    that the Appellant is still in touch with her mother in the Gambia.

 7. With regard to the second ground of application and the best  interests
    of the children, the representative submitted that she had referred the
    First-tier judge to the essential passages  in  the  country  evidence.
    This Appellant will return with two very young  children  and  will  be
    discriminated  against  because  of  her  single  status  and  will  be
    stigmatised because of her health issues.  We asked where the  risk  of
    trafficking had come about, as there is no reference  to  this  in  the
    Appellant's statement and the Appellant was not trafficked and does not
    state that she fears trafficking.  The  representative  submitted  that
    this  is  a  general  matter  which   has   to   be   considered.   The
    representative's reasons for the claim  being  considered  outside  the
    Rules are, a risk of trafficking, the Appellant  having  no  access  to
    employment  or  support  because  of  her  medical  condition  and  the
    Appellant facing discrimination.

 8. We pointed out that this Appellant was employed when she was in  Gambia
    as a waitress. That is how she states she met her first  husband.   Her
    representative submitted that the medical evidence postdates this.  The
    Appellant  has  PTSD.   (This  is  not  mentioned  in  the  grounds  of
    challenge.)

 9.  The  representative  referred  to  the  psychological  assessment   at
    paragraphs 81 to 84 which states  that  if  the  Appellant  returns  to
    Gambia her fear of being reunited with  PAJ  will  have  a  substantial
    negative impact on her and her fear of being a single woman, alone with
    two small children, coupled with her previous experience in Gambia will
    mean that she will be unable  to  cope,  particularly  because  of  her
    mental health problems.  We referred her to paragraphs 78 to 80 of  the
    report which indicate that her uncertain immigration status is what  is
    causing her mental health problems. The  judge  finds  the  trauma  the
    Appellant refers to is unlikely to have taken place.   With  regard  to
    the  Appellant  being  reunited  with  PAJ,  the  judge   rejects   the
    Appellant's evidence about this marriage, finding that it did not  take
    place.  The judge also rejected  her  evidence  about  her  stepfather,
    finding it not to be credible.  The judge in his decision  states  that
    the concerns of  Dr  Tagg,  the  psychologist,  are  not  well-founded.
    Paragraph 85 of the psychological report states that the Appellant is a
    woman on her own with small children and nobody to help her,  but  that
    is not the reality.  The factual matrix is different.

10. The representative submitted that all the relevant factors relating  to
    the best interests of the children and the  Appellant's  health  issues
    were not considered.

11. The representative conceded Ground 3.

12.  The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  based  on  the  grounds  of
    application only  the  best  interests  of  the  children  need  to  be
    considered at  this  hearing.   That  is  not  the  case.   Nothing  is
    particularly excluded and all the grounds require to be considered.

13. He referred to the slip in the decision at paragraph 41  in  which  the
    judge states that he  does  not  consider  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances that require  him  to  consider  the  Appellant's  appeal
    outwith Article 8.  This should read outwith the Rules.  This is not  a
    material error.

14. The Presenting Officer referred to paragraphs 30,  40  and  41  of  the
    decision and submitted that the  judge  dealt  with  all  the  relevant
    factors in his  Article  8  assessment.   He  submitted  that  no  good
    arguable case  has  been  put  forward  for  having  to  consider  this
    Appellant's Article 8 claim outside the Rules.

15. With regard to internal relocation and excessive hardship he  submitted
    that these are bound up with the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
    children.  Healthcare is  available  in  the  Gambia.   This  Appellant
    worked when she was in her own country and can work when  she  returns.
    He submitted that the best interests of the children must be to be with
    their mother so her claim cannot succeed on this basis and the  judge's
    assessment of Article 8 has been properly carried out.

16. The Appellant's representative then referred  to  paragraph  84  of  Dr
    Tagg's report which states that the Appellant's mental health  problems
    undermine her capacity to make informed judgments or  to  form/maintain
    open and trust  based  relationships.   Dr  Tagg  also  refers  to  the
    Appellant having PTSD, finding that this Appellant is evidencing, at  a
    clinically significant level.

17. We reserved our decision.

18. We begin with ground one.  The Appellant's representative has  accepted
    that the terms of the Immigration Rules cannot be  satisfied.   Nothing
    has been put to us today to  show  that  the  judge  did  not  consider
    anything which he should have or which was not covered  by  the  Rules.
    The judge gave reasons open to him on the evidence  for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's mental health issues  and  for  rejecting  her  account  of
    trauma because of hostility from her stepfather and  her  inability  to
    live with PAJ.  He did not believe she had a forced  marriage  and  did
    not find that her children were  at  risk  of  FGM  because  of  tribal
    membership in the Gambia. In any case the Appellant's tribe  and  PAJ's
    tribe do not practice FGM.

19.  The  psychologist  based  her  assessment  on  an  acceptance  of  the
    Appellant's account. When Dr Tagg refers to the Appellant  having  PTSD
    at a clinically significant level it is not clear  what  level  she  is
    referring to. There is no indicator in the report. The  judge  properly
    considered the Appellant's medical condition  and  the  fact  that  she
    worked before she left the Gambia. It is clear from the  decision  that
    the judge did not find that the Appellant's  health  is  a  barrier  to
    removal. There is nothing to indicate that this will stop her getting a
    job on return. The judge finds there to be a total lack of  credibility
    throughout the Appellant's evidence. It is also clear that  her  mother
    is in touch with her and will support her on return. There is no  error
    by the judge on the first ground. It is  no  more  than  an  evidential
    disagreement.

20. With regard to the best interests of the children, at paragraph 2(i) of
    the grounds the risk of trafficking is referred to but this is merely a
    general assertion.  The Appellant was not trafficked and does not state
    that she fears trafficking.  She has family to return to.

21. Ground 2 is tied to Ground 1.  The judge accepts that the children  are
    very young and  deals  with  their  welfare  at  paragraph  41  of  the
    decision.  They have been with their mother since they  were  born  and
    will return to the Gambia with her.  The judge at paragraph  41  states
    that he has rejected the Appellant's version of events  upon  which  Dr
    Tagg reached her conclusion.  He does  not  find  that  the  children's
    welfare will be jeopardised if they return to  the  Gambia.   He  found
    there to be no compelling circumstances for considering the Appellant's
    appeal outside the Rules.  The diagnosis in the  psychologist's  report
    at paragraph 84, which refers  to  the  Appellant's  capacity  to  make
    informed judgments, is again based on the Appellant's account which  is
    rejected by the judge.

22. With regard to the best interests of the children, the judge has  dealt
    properly with this at paragraph 41 of the decision.  The  situation  is
    not as stated by the Appellant  to  Dr  Tagg.   The  children  will  be
    returned to the Gambia with their mother.  This will be in  their  best
    interests.

23. The representative conceded ground 3.

Decision

24. There is no material error of law in the First-tier  Judge's  decision.
    His decision, promulgated on 22nd June 2015, must stand.

25. Anonymity has been directed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray






