


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA042762015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 23 May 2016                           |On: 26 May 2016                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     N J
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr M Schwenk, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant, a citizen of Libya born on [ ] 1985, arrived  in  the  United
Kingdom on 1 December 2013 and claimed asylum. His claim was refused  on  20
February 2015. He appealed against that decision and, on 1  June  2015,  his
appeal was dismissed in the First-tier Tribunal. Permission was  granted  on
3 July 2015 to appeal that decision. At an error of law hearing on 31  March
2016, I found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made errors of  law  in
his decision in his findings on risk on return and  that,  to  that  extent,
the decision had to be set aside and re-made by the Upper Tribunal.

The Appellant's claim

The appellant claims to be an Amazegh tribe member, born in  Al  Jamil  near
the Tunisian border. His family moved to Tripoli when he  was  6  months  of
age. From March 2011 he worked for the  internal  security  in  Libya  under
Colonel Gaddafi. He claims that his situation became  very  dangerous  after
the Gaddafi regime was overthrown. The rebels had entered Tripoli in  August
2011 and he was threatened by members of his own  tribe  who  were  fighting
against the government. He claims that his tribal members went to  his  home
on 24 August 2011 and enquired about his whereabouts and the whereabouts  of
his brother Tariq who worked in the army. His family then left  Tripoli  and
travelled to Al Jamil where they were protected.  His  brother  H,  who  was
working for a sports TV channel in Tripoli, was captured by a rebel  faction
and handed over to the Jadu  tribe  and  his  family  learned  that  he  was
detained, tortured and killed on 28 February 2012. The appellant then  tried
to leave Libya but was refused a visa and eventually  used  false  documents
to leave. He came to the UK and claimed asylum in December  2013.  In  March
2014 his family told him that their tribal leaders had reached an  agreement
with the Jadu and that they were able to return to Tripoli. He then  applied
for an assisted voluntary return to return to Libya. However 20  days  later
his home in Tripoli was attacked by militia, his  brother  T  was  kidnapped
from the family home, his family were kicked out of  their  home  and  their
home was burned down.  He  then  cancelled  his  application  for  voluntary
return. He feared being killed by the militia if he returned to Libya.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was from the Amazigh tribe and did not accept that he  had  worked  for  the
internal security department in Libya. His account of the kidnapping of  one
brother and the death of the other brother was not accepted. The  respondent
considered that the appellant could in any event relocate  to  another  part
of Libya. It was not accepted that he was at risk on return.

The appellant appealed against that decision and the appeal was heard on  12
May 2015 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Atkinson.  Judge  Atkinson  rejected
submissions made on behalf of the appellant that the country guidance in  AT
and Others (Article 15c; risk categories) (CG) [2014] UKUT 318  was  out  of
date in so far as it related to Article 15(c)  and  indiscriminate  violence
and did not accept that the appellant was entitled to subsidiary  protection
under Article 15(c). Whilst he accepted that Tripoli  international  airport
was closed, he noted that there were limited commercial departures and  that
other airports remained open and he found that the appellant did not face  a
serious risk of harm  if  returned  to  Libya  through  Tripoli.  The  judge
accepted the appellant's account of his tribe and his claim as credible  but
did not accept that he was at risk of persecution. He  considered  that  the
majority of the population in Libya  had  worked  for,  or  been  associated
with, the Gaddafi regime and that he was not at risk on  the  basis  of  his
and his brother's work for the regime.  He  found  that  the  appellant  had
failed to adduce specific evidence relating to his individual  circumstances
showing that he was at risk of persecution. He did  not  consider  that  the
evidence relating to his brother's death in 2014 was a sufficient basis  for
concluding that he was at risk, since his brother was taken  in  the  course
of a general attack by the militia  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  the
family was specifically targeted. Accordingly he  dismissed  the  appeal  on
all grounds.

Permission was sought by the respondent  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on the grounds that: the judge's finding as to the safety  of
the proposed method and route of return to Libya was not  supported  by  the
evidence; and that the judge had conflated the appellant's accounts  of  his
two brothers and had failed to deal with the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
brother Tariq's kidnapping.


Permission was granted on both grounds on 3 July 2015.

At the error of law hearing I heard submissions from both  parties  and  was
advised by Mr Schwenk that the appellant's brother T had since been  killed.
I  found  the  judge's  determination  to  be  materially  flawed,  for  the
following reasons:


    "9.  It is clear from his findings at [47] that the judge confused  the
    evidence of the appellant's two brothers,  dealing  with  them  as  one
    person who had died in 2014. It seems that, at [47],  whilst  referring
    to the relevant year as 2014 rather than 2012, he was  considering  the
    position of H since it was that brother whom he  recorded  at  [17]  as
    having been taken by rebel forces and subsequently killed. On the basis
    of his finding that H was taken in the course of a  general  attack  by
    militias, the judge concluded that the appellant  had  failed  to  show
    that the family had been specifically targeted. However the judge  does
    not appear to have considered the position  of  the  appellant's  other
    brother T, whom he had stated had been kidnapped in  2014.  Given  that
    the appellant's claim was that the militia were specifically interested
    in him and his brother T as a result of  their  work  for  the  Gaddafi
    regime, and that the militia had previously visited their  family  home
    seeking them both, such an omission was material, in light of the  risk
    factors in AT and on that basis alone the judge's conclusion on risk on
    return cannot stand.


    10.  I also find an error of law lies in the judge's findings  at  [35]
    in regard the returnability of the appellant through  Tripoli  airport.
    It seems to me that the judge's findings in regard to  the  appellant's
    ability safely to return to Libya are cursory and  do  not  include  an
    adequate consideration of the background information,  particularly  as
    reliance is placed on the  evidence  of  limited  departures  from  the
    airport but without any consideration given as to how that  applies  to
    non-commercial arrivals.


    11.  Accordingly, for the reasons given above, I find  that  errors  of
    law have been established in the Tribunal's decision and that  it  must
    be set aside and re-made. There is no challenge to the judge's positive
    credibility findings and the re-making of the decision  will  therefore
    be with respect to the question of risk on return. Both parties wish to
    adduce further evidence in regard to the current situation in Libya and
    further evidence is to be adduced with respect  to  the  death  of  the
    appellant's brother T. The appeal will  accordingly  be  listed  for  a
    resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal."


Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came  before  me  on  23  May  2016.  A  further  bundle  of
evidence, including the death certificate of the appellant's brother T,  had
been produced by the appellant but there was no further  evidence  from  the
respondent. Mr Harrison advised me that enforced returns to Libya  were  not
taking place owing to security concerns for British escorts.

It was agreed by both parties that the only issue was  risk  on  return  and
that the appellant's account had otherwise been accepted by  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge,  with  no  challenge  by  the  respondent  to  the  positive
credibility findings made by the judge. It was  agreed  that,  whilst  Judge
Atkinson had been found to have erred by failing to  consider  the  position
of the appellant's second brother T,  that  was  only  with  regard  to  the
question of risk on return and there was no dispute about the claim  that  T
had been kidnapped.


I summarised the relevant facts as follows: the  appellant  had  worked  for
the  internal  security  in  Libya  under  Colonel  Gaddafi;  he  had   been
threatened by members of his own tribe who were opposed to Gaddafi  and  was
thus seen as a traitor by his own tribe; his tribe members  formed  part  of
the militia currently in control  in  Libya;  his  brother  T  had  been  in
Gaddafi's army; in August 2011 members of his tribe in the militia  came  to
his house looking for him and his brother T and  were  therefore  interested
in both of them; T was kidnapped from the family home  in  March/April  2014
and the family home was burned down; T has since been  killed,  in  November
2015; there are no enforced returns to Libya due to  security  concerns  for
escorts; the main international airport in Tripoli is closed.  Both  parties
agreed that those were the unchallenged facts.

I asked Mr Harrison, in light of those facts, and given that AT  and  Others
(Article  15c;  risk  categories)  (CG)  [2014]   UKUT   318   allowed   for
consideration of individual circumstances, what submissions  he  would  wish
to make as why the appeal should not simply be allowed.  He advised me  that
he had no submissions to make. I accordingly allowed the appeal.

Consideration and findings

In light of the developments in the proceedings as stated above,  I  do  not
consider it necessary to provide lengthy findings, but conclude as follows.

 In dismissing the appellant's appeal, Judge Atkinson  considered  that  the
appellant had failed to adduce specific evidence relating to his  individual
circumstances showing that he was at  risk  of  persecution.  He  considered
that his brother H's demise occurred in the course of a  general  attack  by
militias and that that did not, therefore, provide  any  basis  for  finding
that the appellant would be at risk himself. However Judge Atkinson did  not
consider the position of the appellant's other brother T.


I therefore consider the appellant's  circumstances  in  the  light  of  the
position of his brother T. It is accepted that the militia  include  members
of the appellant's own tribe who perceived him  and  his  brother  T  to  be
traitors because of their work within the Gaddafi  regime.  It  is  accepted
that the militia came looking for the appellant and T owing to  their  roles
within the Gaddafi army and internal security and that T  was  kidnapped  by
the militia. The appellant's claim that his brother T has  since  been  shot
and killed is not challenged.

Although the country guidance in AT refers to those  at  risk  being  former
high ranking officials within  the  intelligence  services  of  the  Gaddafi
regime and those with an association at senior level with that  regime,  and
in certain circumstances to family members of those at such  a  high  level,
it seems to me that it does not necessarily preclude those at a lower  level
of association  who  could  nevertheless  establish  that  their  individual
circumstances  would  lead  to  an  adverse  risk,  particularly  given  the
deterioration in the security situation in Libya since the country  guidance
was issued. It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  someone  who  had  already
attracted the adverse attention of the militia and who was considered to  be
a traitor to their own  tribe,  whose  tribe  formed  part  of  the  militia
groups, and whose brother had been killed under  such  circumstances,  would
reasonably  likely  be  at  risk  of  suffering  the  same  fate.   In   the
circumstances, it seems to me that there is clearly reason to  believe  that
the appellant would still be of adverse interest to the  militia  and  would
be at risk on that basis if he were returned to Libya.

In  the  circumstances  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  been   able   to
demonstrate, to the lower standard of proof, that he would  be  at  risk  of
persecution if returned to Libya and his appeal is  accordingly  allowed  on
asylum grounds and under Article 3 of the ECHR. As such he is  not  entitled
to humanitarian protection.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
human rights grounds.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  I continue that order
    (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008).


                               Signed                 Date 26 May 2016


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
