
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04866/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th November 2014                        |On 19th December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Miss F P A
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ogunnubi, instructed by TM Legal Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department but nonetheless hereafter I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    that is Miss F P A as the appellant and the Secretary of State  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 10th October 1994 and she
    appealed against the respondent's decision of 1st July 2014  to  refuse
    to vary leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  and  to  remove
    her from the United Kingdom.

 3. The appellant's claim  for  asylum  and  international  protection  was
    rejected by First-tier Tribunal Judge Coleman but Judge Coleman allowed
    the appeal in respect of Article 8.

 4. The application  for  permission  to  appeal  made  by  the  respondent
    submitted that the judge had misdirected  herself  in  respect  of  the
    finding that Appendix FM did not apply to the appellant's case  as  the
    application was made prior to 9th July 2012.  The  Secretary  of  State
    relied on the Court of Appeal's decision in Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ
    558 paragraphs 25 and 41.  In effect Haleemudeen found that further  to
    Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 25 the
    material date was the date of the decision.  Further, paragraph  41  of
    Haleemudeen identified that the First-tier Tribunal Judge in that  case
    had not either expressly or implicitly referred to paragraph 276ADE  of
    the  Rules  or  to  Appendix  FM  and  that  none  of  the   new   more
    particularised features of the policy were identified or even  referred
    to in general terms.

 5. It was submitted that the judge should have followed  the  decision  in
    Haleemudeen rather than Edgehill & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 402 and it  was
    submitted that this case was limited in scope to long  residence  cases
    where  an  appellant  had  acquired  fourteen  years'  residence.    As
    paragraphs 2 and 33 of Edgehill stated:

         "The principal issue in these appeals is whether the Upper Tribunal
         correctly applied  the  transitional  provisions  set  out  in  the
         Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules promulgated on 13th  June
         2012.   Those changes in the Immigration Rules came into effect  on
         9th July 2012."

    This acknowledged that "the  decision  only  becomes  unlawful  if  the
    decision-maker  relies  upon  Rule  276ADE(iii)  as   a   consideration
    materially affecting the decision."

 6. It was also submitted in the application for permission to appeal  that
    the judge had not followed Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) whereby only if there may  be  arguably
    good grounds for granting leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  was  it
    necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on and  consider  whether  there
    were compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

 7. Ms Isherwood  submitted  that  the  point  was  that  in  view  of  the
    administrative decisions the conclusion in Edgehill would be the  same.
    The transitional provisions suggest that with any application  the  new
    Rules would be considered and the judge did not  do  that.   The  Rules
    must be gone through  in  order  that  a  complete  assessment  of  the
    proportionality should be undertaken. MM (Lebanon) did not just look at
    the compelling circumstances but also considered the Immigration Rules.
     There was no consideration in the Secretary  of  State's  decision  or
    case law setting out the compelling circumstances.

 8. The appellant's representative submitted that  the  decision  of  Judge
    Coleman was thorough and decisive.  At paragraph 9 of the determination
    the judge did consider the Immigration Rules and there was no  need  to
    go further.

 9. There were two Court of Appeal decisions which were  contradictory  and
    the reliable and clear authority was that of Huang.

10. Mr Ogunnubi relied on his skeleton argument.

11. The Immigration Rules which came into force on 9th July 2012 sought  to
    codify within the Rules the question of whether  Article  8  under  the
    European Convention on Human Rights would be  breached  by  a  person's
    removal from the UK.

12. Not only is Edgehill & Anor a Court of Appeal decision  which  predates
    Haleemudeen but as cited the Rules as at the date of decision apply  in
    the absence of any statements to  the  contrary  (Odelola).   It  would
    appear that there are two decisions in conflict. However the  rules  as
    at the date of the decision is applicable unless there are transitional
    provisions to the contrary.   I am assisted not only by the  view  that
    the prior decision should take precedence but also Singh, R v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  [2014]  EWHC  2330  at  paragraph  12
    adopted the approach most favourable to the appellant but  stated  that
    the appellant could not succeed if the decision inevitably  would  have
    been the same even if the Secretary of State had paid no  attention  to
    the criteria in the Rules.  That is not the position in this case.

13. I find that the judge did indeed make some reference to the Immigration
    Rules at paragraph 9 of the determination but she considers  that  they
    did not apply.  In view of the decision in Singh it is not  clear  that
    the decision in  Edgehill  should  be  confined  to  considerations  of
    fourteen years' long residence.  It was clear that this appellant  made
    an application prior to 9th July 2012  which  is  acknowledged  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter.  I make a further point.  It is clear  that
    the judge noted that the Secretary of  State  had  refused  the  matter
    under the new Immigration Rules, those post-9th July 2012 and  that  it
    was accepted that the appellant could not succeed under the Immigration
    Rules either pre or post-July 2012.

14. Although the judge did not refer to the  Immigration  Rules  themselves
    and Ms Isherwood states that this is an error the judge made  a  series
    of findings as to the acceptance of the  appellant's  credibility,  her
    young age and the fact that she had  no  opportunity  to  make  earlier
    disclosures in relation to a prompt application for asylum (24).

15. The judge identified the exceptional features of this case although she
    did not identify them as such and stated at (30):

         "I should note that she was still a  minor  when  she  applied  for
         further leave.  Had the application been  dealt  with  swiftly  she
         would have had some further leave.  There was an  unacceptable  and
         unreasonable delay of some years and that had a profound effect  on
         her.  It was not true that her relationship with her father was one
         of an adult child with a parent.  The evidence  clearly  showed  an
         interdependence."

16. Clearly the judge found that there was a family  life  which  she  took
    into account and  that  there  were  closer  ties  which  indicated  "a
    relationship with a high degree of interdependence  which  goes  beyond
    ties of normal kinship".  This was not a matter that the respondent had
    taken  into  account  and  bearing  in   mind   the   judge's   overall
    considerations that the appellant had been sexually abused in Nigeria I
    find that even if she should have applied the Immigration Rules she was
    aware that the appellant had not fulfilled them and she set out reasons
    as to why there was an arguably good  ground  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules themselves on the basis of the "classic" Article 8.

17. I make a further point that MM (Lebanon) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985
    refers to the need to consider the Immigration  Rules  specifically  in
    relation to the public interest and this  is  now  a  matter  which  is
    statutorily set out at Section 117B of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 but this the judge identified at  paragraph  36.   She  identified
    that there was a public  interest  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    control and she noted that the father is not Nigerian and had no  right
    to live in Nigeria.  He was from Sierra  Leone  and  was  a  recognised
    refugee so he could not return to his country safely.  The  judge  took
    into account that the appellant  had  a  very  bad  upbringing  and  in
    particular since 2008 was living with an  abusive  stepfather  and  had
    been abandoned by her mother and in essence she had been seriously ill-
    treated.

18. Bearing in mind my findings in relation to  the  conflicting  cases  of
    Edgehill and Haleemudeen the judge made a full assessment under Article
    8 and I find that this was a course open to her in  the  circumstances.
    Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 is still  authoritative  in  the  following
    terms:

         'In an article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by article 8. If  the  answer  to  this
         question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  authority
         must so decide. It is not necessary that the appellate  immigration
         authority, directing itself  along  the  lines  indicated  in  this
         opinion, need ask in addition whether the  case  meets  a  test  of
         exceptionality.

    Huang was applied by the judge.

19. I therefore find that there is no error of law and the  decision  shall
    stand.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 17th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

