
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04381/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th December 2014                        |On 6th March 2015             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between


                                MR FAHIM JAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Fahim Jan, a citizen of Afghanistan born 10th July
    1995.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  made  on  7th
    May 2013 to refuse to vary his leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom
    and to remove him to Afghanistan.  The Appellant's appeal against  that
    decision was heard on 9th September 2013 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Youngerwood and was dismissed on asylum, human rights and  humanitarian
    protection grounds.

 2. On 19th February 2014 having heard submissions I found that there was a
    material error of law in the determination of Judge Youngerwood  and  I
    set his  decision  aside  insofar  as  it  related  to  Article  8  and
    humanitarian protection.  With regard to the Article 8  issue  I  found
    that Judge Youngerwood had  failed  to  take  account  of  the  medical
    evidence,  in particular a medical report from Dr Perrin, a  Consultant
    Clinical Psychologist who found the Appellant to be suffering from post-
    traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) the approximate cause of which was the
    murder of his parents in Afghanistan.

 3. I have a statement from the Appellant which  is  undated  but  which  I
    believe was prepared for the hearing before Judge Youngerwood.  Much of
    this statement is in relation to the Appellant's asylum claim which  is
    not an issue before me.  The Appellant states the  following.   He  was
    the oldest child in the family and was very close to  his  mother.   He
    lived in Seghani village.  He points  out  that  there  are  a  lot  of
    differences between Afghanistan and the UK such as the fact that  there
    are postcodes here and everyone knows where everywhere is.  That is not
    the case in Afghanistan.  Also he did not know when he was  growing  up
    that Afghanistan was at war.  He just  thought  it  was  what  happened
    there.  It was only after he came to the UK when  he  was  13  that  he
    realised that we refer to the situation there as "a war".  He describes
    what would happen near his village on a day-to-day basis.  The American
    Army was in Baghram and would send the army to  different  towns  where
    there was violence.  Afghanis like him knew there  were  French  people
    there too but they only knew they were French because their cars were a
    different colour from the cars belonging to the American soldiers.   He
    would see  helicopters  flying  over  the  mountains  and  planes.   He
    remembers someone having their  hands  cut  off  for  working  for  the
    Americans.  His father went to work for the Americans but  he  did  not
    really know anything about what his father did.  He  knew  the  Taliban
    were bad but he did not know much else about them.  He knew they  liked
    killing people.  He was at his grandma's when his uncle told  him  that
    his family had been killed by a bomb.

 4. At the time the Appellant prepared that statement he was living with  a
    carer called Trina.  He calls her "mum".  He understood that  he  would
    be there at least until he turned 18 but could stay until  he  was  21.
    Trina is very important to him.   He  misses  his  family.   He  has  a
    girlfriend Laura who he met about three years prior to the  preparation
    of the statement.  They met at school.  They were in  the  same  class.
    She has helped him with his English.  It  is  a  serious  relationship.
    They have made plans for everything.  As soon as  he  can  travel  they
    will go on holiday.  They will then get engaged.  He  wants  to  be  an
    interpreter.

 5. The Appellant provided an updated statement for the hearing  before  me
    in which he states that he felt hopeless when  his  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal was dismissed.  He went to  Laura.   He  talked  to
    Trina as well and to Laura's mum.  When he was 18 he had to move out of
    Trina's house although he did not want to.  Trina also  wanted  him  to
    remain but Social Services would not allow it.  Since then he has moved
    four times.  He was sent to Dover  initially  and  was  really  unhappy
    because he has family in Margate.  That is where he has  grown  up  and
    the place that is home for  him.   They  eventually  did  move  him  to
    Margate but the place they housed him was awful.  It was like a rubbish
    tip.  He stopped eating.  He had no energy.  He could  not  sleep.   He
    could not wash his clothes.  He felt like finishing with life.  He felt
    as if no-one cared about him.  He started to hear voices.   He  thought
    about hanging himself or taking poison.  He discussed this  with  Laura
    and she told him not to be stupid.  They had moved him back to Dover  a
    few weeks previously but he hates being separated from his  family  and
    so has been spending nights in Margate instead.  He sees Trina once  or
    twice a week and speaks to her a lot.  He still thinks of  her  as  his
    mum more than his carer.  His relationship with Laura has  become  more
    serious.

 6. I have two statements from Katrina Etheridge (Trina).  She  states  the
    following.  She is a foster carer and has been for about fifteen years.
     The Appellant came to live with her in August 2013.  He is a good  boy
    and respectful.  When he first arrived he was difficult.  He was  rude.
    He always seemed like he was carrying the world on his  shoulders.   He
    says he cannot go back to Afghanistan because it is not safe  for  him.
    He needs someone to look after him.  He is not  just  your  average  17
    year old boy.  He is not in contact with anyone in Afghanistan and  has
    no-one there.  She was told this by his social worker.  The loss of his
    family has definitely affected him though he does not openly  show  it.
    She is very close to him.  His girlfriend Laura has a  good  effect  on
    him.  She is a lovely girl.  He received a letter from Afghanistan that
    came to his previous carer Vicki.  It was a letter from his uncle about
    the Taliban.  His uncle had told him he was leaving the country because
    it was so dangerous.  The Appellant cannot understand  how  he  can  go
    back when he has no family there.  He is settled in  the  UK.   He  has
    always called her mum from when he first arrived.  They have their  ups
    and downs like all parents do.  He is very very worried  and  concerned
    about going back to Afghanistan.  He does not know what would happen to
    him.  It is very hard for him.  He has been having bad dreams.

 7. In her updated  statement  she  says  that  she  has  been  seeing  the
    Appellant regularly over the last year, maybe every week and they speak
    on the phone.  She sees him with Laura.  When you see one you  see  the
    other.  They seem happy and he treats Laura  well.   His  mind  however
    always seems to be elsewhere like he has a  weight  on  his  shoulders.
    She wants to be there for him.  She is due  to  go  into  hospital  for
    surgery and the Appellant is very worried about her.  He  is  panicking
    about it.

 8. I have two statements from Laura Garratt who was born on  25th  October
    1995.  She is a British citizen and lives in Ramsgate.  She is doing  a
    hair and beauty GCSE at East  Kent  College  -  a  one  year  full-time
    course.  She was planning to do Art and Design level 2 then  A  levels.
    She met the Appellant at school.  They have discussed getting  married.
    They want to wait until they have lived together and have the money  to
    afford it.  They learn a lot from each other.  He is different.  He  is
    fun to be around.  At the beginning of their relationship  it  did  not
    occur to her that the fact that he was  from  Afghanistan  would  be  a
    problem.  By the time his application was  refused  their  relationship
    had become really serious and she does not know what she would do if he
    got sent back.  She cannot move to Afghanistan.  She is still young and
    needs an education.  All her family  are  in  the  UK.   She  does  not
    understand the culture of Afghanistan.  Sometimes the Appellant  phones
    her in the middle of the night because he cannot sleep and  is  worried
    about everything.

 9. I have two statements from Kim Kirby who was the first person who cared
    for the Appellant on his arrival in the UK on 1st July 2009.  She  says
    he was very very quiet and very scared.  He was totally bewildered.  He
    did not understand that he was in England until the interpreter made it
    clear to him.  He told them about his journey and that his  family  had
    been killed in an attack on their car.  He should have been in the  car
    that day and the only reason he was not was because he went to see  his
    grandma.  Ms Kirby says she and her husband were  due  to  go  away  on
    holiday on 31st July 2009.  The holiday was paid for.   They  tried  to
    explain to the Appellant that they were having  to  go  and  that  they
    would take him and another boy who was staying  with  them  to  respite
    care but the Appellant would not accept that.  He was adamant  that  he
    would run away as soon as they left him.   He  called  them  every  day
    while they were in Italy and kept complaining and saying he  would  not
    stay.  He was very unhappy.  He obviously felt left out.  They spoke to
    him as much as they could while they were away and after they came back
    he settled down fine.  She gives details of other difficulties that the
    Appellant had.  He would talk sometimes about having lost  his  family.
    He left her home in November that year but has stayed in  touch  since,
    popping round whenever he fancies.  He has improved a lot since he  met
    Laura.  He has grown up a lot.  He was angry when he was with  them  at
    the fact that he had lost his family and struggled a  lot.   He  always
    wanted to fight with other boys.  He would  trash  his  room  or  break
    things but is very different now.  He attends lots of family  occasions
    with them.  He has learned a  lot.   He  understands  that  he  behaved
    badly.  He knows that her family are all there for him.  He  has  grown
    up into a lovely young man.  He does comment on the fact  that  he  has
    had nine different foster families since he left her care.   He  speaks
    of the mistakes he made and how stupid he was.  She understands however
    that he was very young, in strange surroundings and without his family.
     He was very confused.  He is more independent and does not really  mix
    with the other Afghani boys in the area.

10. In her updated  statement  she  says  that  she  has  been  seeing  the
    Appellant over the last year.  He was indeed coming round the night she
    prepared the statement.  She still  does  fostering.   It  has  been  a
    difficult year because he does not know what is happening with his case
    and was unhappy about being moved to Dover away from everyone he  knew,
    but she and her husband will always support him.

11. The final statement is from Ms Anna-Maria Victoria  Bernadette  Andrews
    who was the Appellant's foster carer for  over  a  year  from  February
    2010.  Their  relationship  ended  after  her  husband  had  a  serious
    argument  with  the  Appellant.   He  could  no  longer  tolerate   the
    Appellant's behaviour and they felt  they  had  to  let  him  go.   The
    Appellant was very very upset about that.  He  was  traumatised.   They
    felt he had mental health problems and they spoke to the social  worker
    about it.  He once punched a door so hard that he broke it.  He did not
    want to go to the  counselling  sessions.   After  he  moved  out  they
    received a couple of things in the post for him.  There  was  a  letter
    from Afghanistan.  He picked it up and  was  excited  about  it.   They
    stayed in touch but do not talk very often.  She has a lot of  sympathy
    for his situation.  He is terrified about  going  back.   He  has  been
    ruined for his own society and she cannot see how he would  fit  in  in
    Afghanistan.   He  would  not  understand  the  rules  there  and   his
    aggression could get him into a very difficult situation.

12. I have a  report  from  Dr  Rachel  C  Thomas,  a  Consultant  Clinical
    Psychologist, which was prepared following a meeting and  an  interview
    with the Appellant on 10th July 2014.  She sets out the documents  that
    were before her and the questions that she was asked by the Appellant's
    solicitors who instructed the report.  These included a request for her
    view of his prognosis and what the effect would be on him of return  to
    Afghanistan.   The  report  is  very  comprehensive  and  thorough  and
    contains comments on his capacity to give evidence.  She describes  the
    Appellant as a "significantly psychiatrically unwell young  man".   She
    gives recommendations for procedures to be adopted at  the  hearing  in
    order to make things easier for him.  She recommends treatment for him.



13. Her conclusion is that the Appellant is:

          "A highly traumatised and psychiatrically ill young man, currently
         suffering  from  moderate-severe  symptoms  of   major   Depressive
         Disorder with additional symptoms of PTSD  following  a  series  of
         reportedly cumulatively traumatic life events as  described  above.
         His recent deterioration has been prompted by problems  with  where
         he is living as well as fears regarding his  future.   However  the
         objective symptoms I observed when  we  met  as  well  as  what  he
         recounted to  me  gave  me  reason  to  believe  that  his  current
         situation is  exacerbating  a  previous  condition  caused  by  the
         traumatic life event of the deaths of his immediate family  members
         as reported.  The severity of his mental condition is  not  what  I
         would expect from the effects of exile, separation from family  and
         uncertainty alone."

    She says  that  if  he  is  returned  to  Afghanistan  in  his  current
    psychiatric condition the prognosis for psychiatric  recovery  will  be
    extremely  poor.   He  is  indeed  likely  to  suffer   a   significant
    psychiatric deterioration.  She anticipates that he his  likely  either
    to commit suicide or to require long term in-patient psychiatric  care.
    In the UK he will have the benefit of feeling safe and of being able to
    receive the psychotherapeutic and medical help that he clearly urgently
    requires for the treatment of his psychiatric symptoms.

14. There is also a report from Dr Sean Perrin, also a Consultant  Clinical
    Psychologist, who met with the Appellant on 27th August 2013.   He  too
    lists the documents he had before him.  He noted that the Appellant was
    complaining of symptoms of anxiety and depression consistent  with  him
    having been exposed to a traumatic event in Afghanistan  and  having  a
    genuine fear of further traumatic exposure/harm should he  be  returned
    there.  He describes  these  symptoms  in  detail.  He  says  that  the
    intrusive thoughts that  the  Appellant  has  and  his  nightmares  are
    specifically about the traumatic loss of his parents.  The  doctor  did
    consider  whether  any  other  incident  could  have  caused  this  but
    considered not.   He  suggests  treatment  by  way  of  trauma-focussed
    cognitive behavioural therapy.  He too  says  that  deportation  before
    treatment has been completed successfully would significantly  increase
    the Appellant's risk of  a  suicide  attempt,  particularly  given  his
    propensity to become angry.

15. I have an expert report from Dr Antonio Giustozzi which  I  have  taken
    into account. His view is that the Appellant would be  likely  to  find
    earning a living challenging and that it would be hard for him  to  get
    accommodation in Kabul.

Evidence at the hearing

16. I heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant.  In  the  course  of  cross
    examination he said that he sees his girlfriend two or  three  times  a
    week. They spend as much time together as possible. She is at  college.
    I heard evidence too from Laura Garrett, who said she had  never  heard
    the Appellant talk to anyone in Afghanistan on the phone  and  believes
    that he has no family there. Their plan is to save money, work  towards
    being able  to  live  together  and  eventually  marry.  She  does  not
    understand Afghani culture and feels it is a dangerous country. Katrina
    Etheridge confirmed her close relationship with the  Appellant,  saying
    he is constantly there for her and always will be. She  needs  him  and
    wants him to stay in the UK.

17. I have a skeleton argument  from  the  Appellant's  representatives  in
    which it is submitted that without family support  in  Afghanistan  the
    Appellant is at real risk of serious harm.  He  will  be  homeless  and
    destitute. His health is a relevant factor. He would  not  be  able  to
    access treatment in Afghanistan.

18.  In  oral  submissions  Mr  Tufan  accepted  that  the  Appellant   has
    psychiatric problems but relied on paragraph 20 of AK  (Article  15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 in which it is said that  60%  of  the
    Afghani population suffer from mental health problems. He relied to  on
    the following comments made by the Tribunal in AK -

         i) there is little evidence of significant  numbers  of  the  urban
         poor and IDP  population  suffering  destitution  or  inability  to
         survive at subsistence levels.

         ii) there are reintegration packages available for returnees

         iii) it is likely that shared accommodation would be available   in
         Kabul to a young single man  with no family support who  could live
         there in safety and without undue hardship.

         iv) there is a significant level of support available from domestic
         and international aid and humanitarian organisations.

19. Mr Tufan also relied on KH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  1354C
    in  which the  Court of Appeal considered the return to Afghanistan  of
    a young man with psychological problems including symptoms of PTSD. The
    Court of Appeal found that the Appellant's case was not  one  of  those
    'very exceptional cases' envisaged in the applicable caselaw. Mr  Tufan
    relied on paragraph 33 in which the Court said that the truth  is  that
    the presence of mental  illness  among  failed  asylum  seekers  cannot
    really be regarded as exceptional. Mr Tufan  concluded  that  the  only
    door open to the Appellant is Article 8 ECHR and that must fail.  There
    is nothing exceptional either in his relationship with Laura Garrett or
    that with Ms Etheridge.

20. In response Mr Bandegani submitted that it  is  the  substance  of  the
    Appellant's relationships that is important. He has  a  genuine  family
    relationship with both Ms Garrett and Ms Etheridge. He  submitted  that
    KH has no application to the Appellant's case.  He  asked  me  to  take
    account of the fact that the Appellant has been in the UK since he  was
    13 years old. It has been accepted by the Secretary of State  that  the
    situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated. The  conditions  are  really
    bad. The  Appellant  will  return  to  destitution.  The  Appellant  is
    integrated into the British way of life. He is  not  a  Muslim.  He  is
    failing to remember his own  language.  The  facts  of  this  case  are
    unique.

My findings

21. I have given very careful consideration to all the evidence put  before
    me in this case.

22. I accept that the Appellant's parents were killed  in  Afghanistan  and
    that it is more likely than not that he has no  family  there.  I  have
    evidence from three of his foster carers and  there  is  no  suggestion
    from any of them of any contact with Afghanistan  apart  from  the  one
    letter from his uncle who I accept is no longer there.  I  accept  that
    the death of his parents is to  a  large  extent  responsible  for  his
    current psychological problems. I give particular weight to the  report
    by Dr Thomas. Her  diagnosis  of  the  Appellant's  condition  and  the
    reasons for it are very clear. I also take account of  her  opinion  on
    the difficulties he would face on return to Afghanistan.

23. This is an unusual case in  that  a  very  detailed  insight  into  the
    Appellant's arrival in the UK and how it affected him. A great deal  of
    information has been provided by his three foster mothers, all of  whom
    it seems have been candid about  how  difficult  he  was  and  how  his
    behaviour and attitude have changed. All of them paint a picture  of  a
    rather lost young man desperate for a mother figure and  for  security.
    Clearly he requires and relies on a lot of support from at least two of
    his previous foster parents and moving him away from  his  friends  and
    family in the UK affected him badly.

24. I accept that the Appellant can be said to be a young man who  has  had
    the benefit of an education n the  UK.  He  is  physically  healthy.  I
    accept that he would only be one of many in Afghanistan suffering  from
    psychological problems in Afghanistan, given the state of war that  has
    been ongoing and the vast number of lives lost.

25. On the issue of Humanitarian Protection Mr Bandegani submitted that  AK
    can be distinguished as the situation in Afghanistan is worse  than  it
    was in 2012 and it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant to  have  to
    return to Kabul as he has no family there.

26. The current reports  on  Afghanistan  say  that  there  were  increased
    numbers of civilian casualties in Afghanistan  in  the  first  half  of
    2014.  There is reference to more  civilians  having  been  killed  and
    injured in ground engagements  and  crossfire  between  anti-government
    elements and Afghan national security forces.  The  majority  of  these
    incidents involved improvised explosive devices.   A  17%  increase  in
    civilian deaths and 28% increase in injuries were recorded.   A  report
    in May 2014 by the International Crisis Group  refers  to  the  overall
    trend being one of escalating violence and insurgent attacks.

27. So far as Humanitarian Protection is concerned the Upper Tribunal  said
    the following in AG :

         (ii) Despite a rise in the number of civilian deaths and casualties
         and (particularly in the 2010-2011  period)  an  expansion  of  the
         geographical scope of the armed conflict in Afghanistan, the  level
         of indiscriminate violence in that country taken as a whole is  not
         at such a high level as to mean that, within the meaning of Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive, a civilian, solely  by  being
         present in the country, faces a real risk which threatens his  life
         or person.

         (iii) Nor is the level of  indiscriminate  violence,  even  in  the
         provinces worst affected by the violence (which may now be taken to
         include Ghazni but not to include Kabul), at such a level.

28. Although the background information  states  that  there  has  been  an
    increase in civilian deaths and injuries the figures do not in my  view
    justify a departure from the conclusions reached by the Upper  Tribunal
    in 2012 and taking into account the submissions of  Mr  Tufan,  I  find
    that  the  Appellant  has  not  established  a  right  to  Humanitarian
    Protection in the UK.

29. I turn now to Article 8 ECHR.

30. In Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27 (17 June 2004) the court said that there  are
    5 questions that must be asked in considering the question of a  breach
    of Article 8,

         (1)  Is there an interference with the right to respect for private
         life (which includes the right to respect for  physical  and  moral
         integrity) and family life?

         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

         (3)  Is that interference in accordance with the law?

         (4)  Does that interference have a legitimate aim?

         (5)  Is the interference proportionate in a democratic  society  to
         the legitimate aim to be achieved.

31. I have considered whether the Appellant has a family life in the UK.

32. In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA  Civ  31,  a  case  which  concerned  an
    adult's relationship with his mother and adult siblings, the  Court  of
    Appeal thought that the following passage in S v United Kingdom  [1984]
    40 DR 196 was still relevant:

         "... generally, the protection  of  family  life  under  Article  8
         involves cohabiting dependants, such as parents and their dependent
         minor children.  Whether it extends to other relationships  depends
         on the circumstances of the particular case.  Relationships between
         adults ... would not necessarily acquire the protection of  Article
         8 of  the  Convention  without  evidence  of  further  elements  of
         dependency, involving more than the normal emotional ties."

33. However, the Court of Appeal considered that  the  further  element  of
    dependency did not have to be economic.  Accordingly, in  the  case  of
    the "other relationships" referred to, it will  be  necessary  to  show
    that ties of support, either emotional or economic,  are  in  existence
    and go beyond the ordinary and natural ties  of  affection  that  would
    accompany a relationship of that kind. I accept that the Appellant  has
    a family life of sorts with Ms Etheridge but find  that  it  is  not  a
    relationship  that  engages  Article  8.  I  accept  that  he   has   a
    relationship with Ms Garrett but  they  are  not  living  together  and
    although their relationship may be emotionally close I find it  is  not
    one that engages Article 8.

34. I accept that the Appellant has developed a private life in the UK. His
    relationships with his former foster parents, and  his  girlfriend  and
    her family are part of that as are the other social connections he  has
    made and the support he is getting for his psychological problems.

35. The starting point so far as the Appellant's private life is  concerned
    is paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. This states,

         PARA 276ADE
         that at the date of the application the applicant
         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section
         S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and
         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
         least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
         (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
         to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

36. The Appellant does not meet any of these criteria apart  from  arguably
    para (vi). I cite the original version of this paragraph as that is the
    one in force at the date of the application and  indeed  the  decision.
    The new version requires there to  be  'significant  obstacles  to  the
    Appellant's reintegration' into Afghanistan. Although I accept that the
    Appellant has no family in Afghanistan I do not accept that he has lost
    his cultural ties to the country in which he was brought  up  until  he
    was 13 years old. I believe that he would  eventually  be  able  to  re
    adapt to life there.

37. I do think however that there are factors in this case that  give  rise
    to doubts about the proportionality of the removal of the Appellant.

38. In MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8; private life) Zimbabwe  [2009]  UKAIT  00037,
    the Tribunal summarise the higher courts'  indication  of  the  process
    that  the  Tribunal  must  undertake  in  making  the   proportionality
    assessment as follows (at [66]):

         "...each case must necessarily depend upon its specific  facts  and
         it is essential that a judicial decision  is  reached  applying  an
         'even-handed  application  of  the   proportionality   tests'   (WB
         (Pakistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ  215  at  [16]  per  Sedley  LJ).
         There can be no  a  priori  conclusion  or  presumption  about  the
         outcome based, for example, upon the premise that successful  cases
         will be rare or exceptional (WB (Pakistan) at [16] per Sedley  LJ).
         What has been described  as  the  'difficult  evaluative  exercise'
         entailed in the proportionality test must always be undertaken  (EB
         (Kosovo) v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41  at  [12]  per  Lord  Bingham  of
         Cornhill)."

39. I  therefore  now  proceed  to  consider  the  proportionality  of  the
    Appellant's removal.

40.  I must  take account of paragraph  117B  of  the  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  which  sets  out   the   following
    considerations of the public interest  to  be  taken  into  account  in
    considering whether to grant leave to remain  under  Article  8.  These
    considerations are,
         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
    public interest.
         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-
             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b) are better able to integrate into society.
         (4)Little weight should be given to-
             (a) a private life, or
             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
             that is established by a person at a time when the person is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.
         (6)In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom

41. The Appellant speaks English and I have no doubt that he would  try  to
    get a  job  if  he  were  allowed  to  work  here.   He  has  formed  a
    relationship in the UK with a British citizen but he  did  that  whilst
    still at school and while he had discretionary leave to remain here.  I
    accept that he has integrated into the British way of life and has  not
    remained within the Afghan community. I must accept that it is  in  the
    public  interest  that  minors  from  Afghanistan  who  are  given  the
    protection  of  the  UK  as  children  should   in  general  return  to
    Afghanistan when they are adults and able to look after  themselves.  I
    have had some difficulty with this case because it is  clear  from  the
    evidence that I have that the effect of removal on the Appellant  would
    be considerable. I accept that it would be unreasonable  to  expect  Ms
    Garrett to go with him to Afghanistan. I accept that  he  could  return
    and make an application to return here as a fianc� but I have  concerns
    about his ability to do that even with the support of  friends  in  the
    UK, given the situation in Afghanistan and there  would  of  course  be
    cost implications. The fact of the matter is that  the  Appellant  came
    here when he was 13 having lost both his parents. He had no idea  where
    he was. He was clearly immature, frightened and confused.  He was cared
    for by strangers who worked very hard to help him settle.  He has  been
    passed from pillar to post and sent to live far from the people he  has
    come to rely on in the UK. It seems clear that  depriving  him  of  the
    little security he  has  would  affect  him  badly.   Apart  from  that
    accepted above there  is  no  public  interest  in  his  removal.   His
    psychological issues are unchallenged and  accepted  to  have  emanated
    from events in Afghanistan. The report of Dr Tomas is clear.  It  seems
    to me that in all the circumstances, the interference with his  private
    life that would be inevitable if he had to return alone to  Afghanistan
    would be disproportionate to the need for effective immigration control
    in the UK.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date: 27th February 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



