
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04249/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 24 August 2015                    |On 1 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             MINO JAVAKHISHVILI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by P G Farrell,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Georgia, born on 15 December  1978.   She
    appeals against the determination by First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Doyle,
    promulgated on 27 May 2015, dismissing her appeal  against  refusal  of
    recognition as a refugee.

 2. The appellant's grounds are these:-

          1) The Appellant was a member of the UNM Party in  Georgia.   She
             had  a  position  as  an  Electoral  Officer  for  the  Party.
             Following the defeat of the Party, she had lost her Government
             job.  Her husband had been forced out of his businesses.   Her
             husband had been attacked.  Her  son  had  been  attacked  and
             robbed.  Her son, despite being a top player, had been told to
             leave his Football Club, Dynamo Tblisi.  The FTT proceeded  on
             the basis that her account was credible.  It  did  not  accept
             however,  that  these  events  had  occurred  because  of  her
             political affiliation.  The appeal was refused.

          2) The Appellant had lodged  objective  evidence  by  way  of  an
             annual report for  2014  called  "State  of  Human  Rights  in
             Georgia"  prepared  by  the  Human  Rights   Information   and
             Documentation Centre in Tblisi.  This Report  confirmed  inter
             alia at page 28  that  political  dismissals  from  work  were
             frequent  during  the  2013-2014   years.    Dismissed   local
             Government officials were subject to pressure and threats  and
             attributed their dismissal  to  their  political  views.   The
             example was given of  one  dismissed  employee  who  had  been
             involved in the District Election Commission from  the  United
             National Movement, the same Party as the Appellant.  The  same
             Report also indicated at page  30  that  in  the  pre-election
             period of 2014 local  Government  elections,  oppression  over
             candidates who participated in the local elections represented
             a significant problem.  Again an example was given relating to
             the UNM.

          3) ...

          4) The Appellant submits that there have been several  errors  in
             law.  The first of these is the failure of the FTT to refer to
             the above mentioned Human Rights Report and in  particular  to
             fail to take cognisance of the aspects relating  to  the  UNM,
             their difficulties  in  state  employment  and  in  the  local
             elections.  The Appellant had complained  that  she  had  been
             made aware by her employer, following the election,  that  she
             should change her political views.  If she did not there would
             be difficulties.  The Appellant was subsequently sacked.   The
             objective evidence provided corroboration to  this  course  of
             conduct taking place in Georgia.  The FTT appears to have made
             no specific finding on this and appears to  have  ignored  the
             objective evidence in this regard.  Had they  considered  this
             evidence and indeed made a specific  finding,  they  may  well
             have concluded that the entire course of events which  led  to
             the Appellant leaving Georgia may well have been connected  to
             her political affiliation.  This objective evidence in  effect
             could have been viewed as providing causal  link  between  her
             political activities and the persecution  she  suffered.   The
             failure of the FTT to  consider  the  objective  evidence  and
             indeed to make a specific finding regarding termination of her
             employment constitutes a material error in law.  It  may  well
             have been viewed that the tax [attacks?]on  her  son  and  her
             husband, and her husband's loss of 2 businesses, and her son's
             dismissal from  his  football  team  and  her  dismissal  from
             employment were not purely coincidental.

          5) The second error in law relates to the failure of the  FTT  to
             consider the son's dismissal  from  the  football  team.   The
             Appellant's evidence was that her son had been doing very well
             in the football team and that no  explanation  whatsoever  was
             given by the team for his dismissal.  They had  not  indicated
             that it was for matters connected to football.  The  FTT  have
             failed to make any finding in this regard.   Had  this  matter
             been adequately considered, it may well have had a bearing  on
             their overall view of the evidence.

          6) The Appellant had complained that not  only  was  she  removed
             from her employment but that her husband had had 2  businesses
             taken away from him ...  such  action  may  be  sufficient  to
             constitute persecution.  The FTT  have  failed  to  give  this
             matter adequate consideration.  Had they done so they may well
             have concluded that the Appellant  was  the  victim  of  state
             sponsored persecution.

          7) The Appellant had indicated that her husband had his  business
             taken away from him.  The FTT proceeded on the basis that this
             was indeed correct.  The FTT however concluded that  this  was
             purely as a result of criminal activity.  In doing so the  FTT
             appears  to  have  overlooked  the  fact  that  the  Appellant
             indicated that the beneficiaries from her husband's misfortune
             were  members  of  the  Political  party  which  she  had  and
             continues  to  oppose.   Had  this  matter   been   considered
             adequately it may well have  concluded  that  this  strand  of
             evidence tended to indicate that she was not simply the victim
             of criminals but that her misfortunes were indeed connected to
             her political activity.

 3. Under Rule 24 the Secretary of State responded as follows:-

         3. The judge acknowledged the  Human  Rights  report  submitted  on
             behalf  of  the  appellant,  but  found  that  there  was   no
             indication that membership of UNM leads  to  persecution,  nor
             that the Georgian government intimidates political  opponents.
             The judge has explained the findings over several  paragraphs,
             and was entitled to decide the weight to be  attached  to  the
             evidence.  It was open to the judge to conclude that there  is
             a lack of evidence to support the appellant's claims, and that
             the appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof upon
             her.  Whilst the appellant may disagree with the findings, the
             respondent will submit that there is no material error of  law
             in the determination.

         4. In  essence,  the  ground  relating  to  the  appellant's  son's
             dismissal from the football club is based on the premise  that
             no explanation was given for the dismissal.  In the absence of
             evidence to indicate that the event is linked to  the  reasons
             for the appellant's claim, the respondent will submit that the
             judge cannot be said to have materially erred in  law  in  not
             making a specific finding on this point.

Submissions for appellant.

 4. Mr Devlin referred firstly to case law, in particular Bugdacay [1987] 1
    AC 513 at 531 F- G and  537G-H  on  the  need  for  the  most  rigorous
    examination of a decision to ensure  that  it  is  in  no  way  flawed,
    according to the gravity of the issue,  and,  where  fundamental  human
    rights are concerned, the need  for  the  most  anxious  scrutiny,  and
    Karanakaran [2000] Imm AR 271  per Lord Justice Sedley at page  304  on
    the need to take everything  material  into  account,  continuing,  "No
    probabilistic cut-off operates here:  everything capable  of  having  a
    bearing has to be given the weight, great or little, due to it".

 5. Decisions which fail  to  reach  those  standards  cannot  stand.   Any
    failure of anxious scrutiny is bound to lead to a reduction or reversal
    of the decision challenged.

 6. Turning to the adequacy of this decision, the appellant said more about
    the political background to  her  husband's  removal  from  his  garage
    business than was acknowledged by the Judge in the  effective  part  of
    his decision.  The Judge failed to have regard to the  full  extent  of
    the appellant's explanation and failed to cite passages of her evidence
    which clearly bore on the outcome of  the  case,  especially  when  the
    Judge had not doubted her overall credibility.  He did not mention  the
    background evidence that supporters of the UNM were forced out of their
    employment due to their political allegiance.  There had been  evidence
    of like instances, in particular in the report "State of  Human  Rights
    in Georgia".  The Judge failed to deal with the central planks  of  the
    claim.

 7. Regarding the dismissal of the appellant's son from his football  club,
    while there had been no direct evidence that this  was  linked  to  her
    political victimisation,  the  determination  failed  to  indicate  the
    surrounding circumstances  and  the  chronology.   There  was  a  nexus
    between on the  one  hand  all  the  adverse  events  suffered  by  the
    appellant, her husband, and her son and  on  the  other  the  electoral
    process and political timing.  The Judge ignored the  fact  that  those
    who threatened the appellant's husband had  significant  links  to  the
    police and to the Prime Minister.  This  was  a  good  deal  more  than
    intimidation and beating by persons unknown.

 8. There was a further point to be developed, although  not  contained  in
    the grounds.  At paragraph 15(n) the Judge failed to make clear what he
    meant by saying he took the claim "at highest".  Did he mean  accepting
    all that the appellant said, but  not  inferring  that  the  agents  of
    persecution were the government?  He should  have  taken  the  case  as
    highest on the latter basis, and should therefore not have gone  on  to
    find that it would be defeated on grounds  of  internal  relocation  or
    sufficiency of protection.

 9. At 15(l) the Judge observed that it  was  not  the  appellant  but  her
    husband and son, who had not been UNM members, who had  been  targeted.
    Although that was an accurate record of her claim if it was intended as
    an adverse finding it was odd, because it is well known that it is  not
    unusual for persecutors to target someone through their family members.
     If it was intended to imply that the experiences of the  rest  of  the
    family had nothing to do with the UNM connection, that was ill-founded.



10. The internal relocation and sufficiency of  protection  findings  could
    not stand once it was understood that the government is the persecutor.
     A finding of a functioning police force was beside the point when  the
    state is the persecutor and the police are an arm of  the  state.   The
    determination could not be saved by alternative  findings  on  internal
    relocation  and  sufficiency  of  protection,  which  were   also   not
    adequately explained.

11. The case required a fresh hearing.

Submissions for respondent.

12. Ms Aitken relied on the Rule 24 response.  She said that the Judge  had
    not ignored the Human Rights report, but specifically  noted  at  15(g)
    the great emphasis  which  the  appellant  sought  to  place  upon  it.
    Against that background, the findings on  the  case  "at  highest"  did
    understand the case correctly.  The Judge based those findings on there
    being no programme of intimidation of political opponents, on the basis
    of evidence provided by the appellant.  At paragraphs 15(k) and (j) the
    Judge clearly had taken account  of  the  appellant's  version  in  her
    witness statement.  That had not been ignored.   The  appellant  simply
    disagreed with the Judge's finding that there was no link  between  any
    family misfortunes and her involvement in the UNM.  The Judge  properly
    understood the case before him and was entitled to resolve it as he did
    for the reasons given.

Response for appellant.

13. Mr Devlin in response agreed that  the  Human  Rights  report  did  not
    establish systematic persecution of all members of the  UNM.   He  said
    the significant point was that the appellant was not simply a member of
    the UNM but a former electoral commissioner who  had  directly  accused
    the party in  government  of  electoral  fraud.   That  put  her  in  a
    different category.  She did  not  rely  on  establishing  a  wholesale
    campaign against UNM  members.   The  Judge's  findings  did  not  take
    account of her position.  Her findings that her husband  did  not  have
    security of tenure in the business premises from which he  was  ejected
    missed the point, which was the underlying reason for the persecution.

Discussion and conclusions.

14. Notwithstanding what  has  been  said  about  the  concept  of  anxious
    scrutiny and the need to consider every  factor  which  might  tell  in
    favour of an appellant, a Judge does not have to analyse every dot  and
    comma of written evidence or every word uttered in oral evidence.   The
    degree of particularity required varies according  to  the  case.   The
    concepts on which Mr Devlin relied should not be used to dress up  what
    are in truth challenges to findings of fact  under  headings  of  legal
    error.

15. The fundamental finding by the adjudicator is at 15(i),  "There  is  no
    causal link between the misfortunes which have befallen  the  appellant
    and her family since the end of 2012 and the Georgian Dream Coalition".
     He gives sensible, detailed, fact-based reasons for finding  that  her
    husband's loss of his business was not for any such cause.

16. The suggestion that the appellant's son was dropped from  his  football
    team for political reasons is particularly egregious.   He  was  not  a
    "top player" for Dynamo Tblisi, a  well  known  first  rank  club.   He
    played at some level well below their first team.  There is nothing  to
    suggest that he played in Georgia at any higher a level than he does in
    Scotland, for Maryhill Juniors - a respectable but  not  top  level  of
    football, in the junior not senior  leagues.   The  great  majority  of
    teenagers who play  at  the  lower  levels  of  famous  football  clubs
    eventually face the disappointment of progressing no further.

17. The Judge acknowledged the appellant's position that she was an  office
    bearing political activist.  He was not required to set out  her  claim
    in any more specific  detail  than  he  did.   The  reasons  given  for
    dismissing it have not  been  shown  to  be  legally  inadequate.   The
    challenge is essentially of a factual rather than a legal nature.

18. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




                           [pic]
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                           28 August 2015
