
[pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04460/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th  March 2016                           |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Pickup, Counsel, instructed by B.H.T.
Immigration Services

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Hodgkinson)  allowing  an  appeal  by  the
    applicant  on  both  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds  against   the
    respondent's decision made on 24 January 2014 to issue  directions  for
    his removal following the refusal of his application  for  asylum.   In
    this decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, the applicant as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan whose date of birth has  been
    treated as 1 September 1991.  He claims that  he  left  Afghanistan  in
    2008 travelling to Iran and Greece and then on to the UK arriving on 23
    July 2008.  He claimed asylum on arrival saying that  he  was  born  in
    1993.  However, his age was disputed and following an age assessment by
    West Sussex Social Services the respondent accepted that the  appellant
    was a 17 year old minor with an estimated date of birth as 1  September
    1991, a date not accepted by the appellant but at  the  hearing  before
    the judge it was agreed by Ms Pickup that it was no longer  significant
    as he was now an adult in his twenties.

3.   In 2009 the respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  should  not  be
    transferred under the Dublin  Regulations  to  Greece  but  erroneously
    treated him as having absconded.  His claim was finally  refused  on  4
    July 2011, nearly three years after  he  claimed  asylum.  He  appealed
    against this decision but at the appeal hearing in September  2011  the
    respondent agreed to reconsider  his  asylum  claim  in  the  light  of
    medical evidence produced at a late stage  in  a  psychological  report
    from Professor Yule.  Some nine months after the hearing was  adjourned
    the respondent again refused  the  claim  and  the  appellant  appealed
    against the decision. That appeal was allowed on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent had failed to comply  with  her  tracing  duties,  it  being
    accepted that the appellant should have been treated as a minor when he
    arrived in the UK.  After  a  further  reconsideration  the  respondent
    issued a fresh decision in January 2014, the decision  currently  under
    appeal.

4.   The judge summarised the basis of  the  appellant's  claim  in  [16]  -
    [26].  He claimed that  he  came  from  a  small  village  in  Panjshir
    Province.  His father had converted to Christianity  whilst  living  in
    Europe and when he returned to Afghanistan the whole  family  converted
    when the appellant was a young child.  When he was still  a  child  his
    parents were  killed  whilst  travelling  to  Kabul  to  try  and  make
    arrangements for the family to travel to Europe.

5.   He went to live with  his  paternal  aunt,  although  her  husband  was
    deeply  opposed  to  the  family's  conversion  to  Christianity.   The
    appellant also claimed that he was targeted because of his  conversion.
    He was unable to learn anything about  Christianity  as  there  was  no
    church in his village and no one to tell him about it but  he  did  not
    want to be associated with or practise Islam because Muslims had killed
    his parents and later his two sisters who had  refused  to  attend  the
    mosque.

6.   Shortly before he left Afghanistan, a female cousin had come  into  his
    room completely naked.  He was  shocked  and  did  not  know  what  she
    wanted. Her father came into the room and the appellant was scared.  He
    escaped through a window and fled to the home of a maternal uncle.   He
    hid the  appellant  and  then  made  arrangements  for  him  to   leave
    Afghanistan. The appellant later heard that his cousin had been  killed
    by her father and that he had been sent to prison for this.

7.   The judge recorded that the appellant had a learning disability in  the
    moderate range having been assessed as having an IQ of 50 and  that  he
    suffered from chronic and severe post traumatic  stress  disorder  with
    high levels of anxiety, depression and suicidal behaviour [25]. He  had
    taken an overdose of paracetamol in December 2013 and had been taken to
    hospital by ambulance after his housemates had found   him.   In  April
    2014 he had contacted  police  as  he  was  feeling  suicidal  and  was
    detained under the provisions  of  the  Mental  Health  Act  1983.   In
    November 2013 the appellant  was  convicted  of  a  sexual  assault  by
    touching and sentenced  to  a  twelve  month  community  order  with  a
    supervision requirement.  A further concurrent period was imposed as  a
    result of a conviction in July 2014 of threatening behaviour against  a
    former girlfriend. The core of the appellant's claim was that he feared
    removal on account of his conversion to Christianity but he also feared
    members of his cousin's family because of what had happened  before  he
    left Afghanistan.

8.   The respondent's case set out in the decision letter accepted that  the
    appellant was an Afghan national but disputed his  date  of  birth.  It
    acknowledged that the claim to  be  a  Christian  engaged  the  Refugee
    Convention but not his claim  to  fear  removal  due  to  the  incident
    involving his cousin.  His claim to have converted to Christianity  and
    his account of the  events  about  his  cousin  were  rejected  due  to
    inconsistencies in his evidence and other issues of  concern.   It  was
    considered that there was sufficiency of protection  available  to  the
    appellant in Afghanistan as was the option of internal relocation.

9.   At [36] the  judge  said  that  there  were  a  number  of  significant
    inconsistencies  revealed  in  the  appellant's  evidence,  which  were
    referred to in detail in the first decision letter. These were relevant
    to  his  credibility  in  terms  of  his  core  account  of  events  in
    Afghanistan  and  with  reference  to   his   claimed   conversion   to
    Christianity. Ms Pickup acknowledged that the  appellant's  account  of
    events about his cousin did not reveal a Refugee Convention reason  and
    on  that  issue   that   she   would   be   relying   on   humanitarian
    protection/Article 3.  The Presenting Officer accepted  that  were  the
    judge to find that the appellant was a genuine  Christian  convert,  he
    would be at risk  of  persecution  in  the  event  of  his  removal  to
    Afghanistan, bearing in  mind  the  country  guidance  decision  in  NM
    (Christian converts) Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00045.

10.  The judge then referred to the inconsistencies  in  [38]  -  [55].   In
    [56] he said that it was clear from  what  he  had  set  out  in  these
    paragraphs that there were material discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence, which with other material and relevant issues raised  concern
    about the credibility of his  account  of  his  claimed  conversion  to
    Christianity and of fearing his paternal uncle because of the  incident
    with his cousin. The judge then said that it was  worthwhile  to  point
    out that the  appellant's  inability  to  provide  answers  to  certain
    questions referred to in paragraph 38 of the decision letter  was  also
    relevant  to  the  question  of  his  understanding  and  comprehension
    abilities bearing in mind that the answers to  some  of  the  questions
    were not of direct relevance to the core of his account,  for  example,
    how far Panjshir was from Kabul and the year he left Afghanistan.   His
    inability to answer certain of these questions did not reflect upon his
    credibility but upon his level of functioning.

11.  The judge then went on to  consider  the  wealth  of  medical  evidence
    relating to the appellant as it  was  essentially  his  case  that  his
    mental capacity and mental health were such that his  ability  to  give
    cogent and accurate evidence was arguably impaired to the  extent  that
    discrepancies in his evidence, some of which would arguably be  damning
    in the case of a person of normal capability and mental health,  should
    be disregarded or at least be regarded with circumspection  [58].   The
    judge went on to  consider  the  medical  and  related  evidence  which
    included evidence from the appellant's GP, two reports  from  Professor
    Yule dated 11 November 2009 and 8 August 2011, a letter dated 1  August
    2012 from the appellant's then social worker, a psychiatric report from
    Professor Katona dated 24 September 2012 prepared under the auspices of
    the Helen Bamber Foundation, a letter from  Dr  Mohandas,  a  qualified
    psychiatrist dated 13 February 2013, a letter from Ms Wood,  a  primary
    mental health worker for unaccompanied asylum seeking  children,  dated
    23 September 2009 and a further lengthy letter from her  referring  the
    appellant to Worthing Child and Adolescence Mental  Health  Service,  a
    letter dated 24 July 2009 from Dr Matthew Davies  in  response  to  the
    referral, reports  from  Dr  Claridge,  a  chartered  psychologist  and
    education and child psychologist, dated 11 February 2014, 13 April 2014
    and 2 September 2015, and a report  from  Dr  Heverin,  acting  as  the
    appellant's professional intermediary rather than as an expert witness,
    dated 15 July 2015.

12.  The judge  also  had  evidence  relating  to  the  appellant's  claimed
    conversion to Christianity including a statement from  a  clergyman  in
    Brighton. There was also evidence  from  a  police  officer  about  the
    appellant working at a kebab and burger bar and further police evidence
    focusing on concerns about his associations with criminal  elements  in
    the Afghan community. The judge's summary of this evidence is  set  out
    from [58] - [109].

13.  The judge set out his conclusions at [110] - [114].  He  accepted  that
    the  appellant's  evidence  contained  material  discrepancies  in  his
    account of the various events he claimed occurred in Afghanistan and of
    his claimed conversion  to  Christianity.  He  noted  that  there  were
    differences of opinion by various experts about the appellant's  mental
    health but the judge  found  that  Dr  Claridge,  who  had  given  oral
    evidence, had greatly assisted in clarifying  them  and  he  found  his
    evidence to be more cogent and persuasive  than  the  evidence  of  any
    other  medical  professional  [110].   The  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant was indeed a vulnerable young  man  with  significant  mental
    health issues, even if they fell short of a  recognised  mental  health
    illness, and had been a vulnerable minor on arrival in the  UK  and  at
    the time of his screening interview.

14.  The judge then said that, having taken into  account  the  totality  of
    the available evidence, the salient elements of which he  had  referred
    to in his decision, and also having had the opportunity of  seeing  and
    observing the appellant giving oral evidence, he had concluded applying
    the lower standard of proof that the discrepancies taking into  account
    all of the above, were not discrepancies on which, unusually,  reliance
    could safely be  placed  on  in  terms  of  assessing  the  appellant's
    credibility.  Assessing the evidence in the context of  what  might  be
    termed the appellant's  disabilities  and  his  evident  difficulty  in
    providing consistent evidence for the reasons explained by Dr Claridge,
    the judge found that he was a genuine Christian convert  and  that  his
    entire relevant account of events in Afghanistan was truthful.  He said
    that apart from the appellant acknowledging that he was  untruthful  in
    his screening interview, his account of his and his family's  Christian
    conversion had been broadly consistent since then, which was arguably a
    remarkable feat, bearing in mind his disabilities if his account was in
    fact fabricated. For identical reasons he concluded that his account of
    what occurred with his cousin was truthful but  effectively  otiose  in
    assessing risk, bearing in mind his conclusion that the appellant was a
    genuine Christian convert.   Accordingly,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant  would  be  at  real  risk  of  persecution  on  removal   to
    Afghanistan and throughout that country.  There would be no sufficiency
    of protection for him anywhere in Afghanistan.

Grounds and Submissions

15.  In the grounds of appeal it is argued firstly, that the judge erred  in
    law by failing to give reasons or  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
    material matters and in particular why the  appellant  was  a  credible
    witness.  The Tribunal had ignored the fact that the expert reports had
    been based on the appellant's own self-serving evidence in which he had
    not disclosed the true facts of  his  present  circumstances.   He  had
    failed to disclose his work at a kebab and burger bar where he had been
    seen sitting in  the  public  area  and  behind  the  counter  flipping
    burgers.  The grounds submit that this behaviour was not the type to be
    expected of someone with the appellant's claimed mental health problems
    and vulnerability.  If those assessing his mental health had been aware
    of this, they might have made entirely different conclusions.  The fact
    that the appellant concealed this work  demonstrated,  so  the  grounds
    argue, his cynical and manipulative approach to those assisting him.

16.  The grounds  further  contend  that  this  manipulative  behaviour  was
    confirmed by the evidence of the appellant's house parent at  [77]  and
    that she saw a completely behaviour from  that  on  which  the  medical
    experts had based their opinions.  At [78] an assessment by  a  primary
    mental health worker was that the appellant could be  manipulating  and
    demanding.   The Tribunal had failed to give adequate reasons why these
    pieces of evidence did not suggest that he was not credible.

17.  The grounds also point out that,  given  that  there  were  assessments
    noted at  [71-  74]  by  qualified  psychiatrists  that  the  appellant
    displayed no evidence of any major mental health illness in 2009,  2010
    and 2013, this suggested  that  his  mental  health  might  not  be  as
    claimed. It is further argued that the Tribunal failed to give adequate
    reasons why his claim was credible, especially as the  judge  found  at
    [36] that there were a number of  significant  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence.  The  appellant  had  also  failed  to  claim  at  the  first
    available opportunity when he was in a safe country  and  when  he  was
    fingerprinted in Greece in  May  2008.   The  Tribunal  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons why the appellant was found to be a  Christian
    convert particularly as he had said in his screening interview  on  the
    day of his arrival that he was a Sunni Muslim, failing to  provide  any
    adequate explanation why he did so.  If he was scared to  disclose  his
    religion at first because of his friends in  the  UK,  this  conflicted
    with his response in his asylum interview at paragraph 41 that  he  met
    an Afghan male on arrival who noticed that he was  wearing  a  necklace
    with  a  cross  on  it.   The  appellant  had  also  claimed  that  any
    inconsistencies at interview were due to difficulties  with  his  Farsi
    interpreter but no such objections were raised at the time.

18.  It is further submitted that someone who  claimed  to  be  a  Christian
    convert would practise their religion yet the appellant did not  attend
    any church until 3-4 days before his asylum interview  in  March  2011,
    nearly three years after his arrival.  He  had  failed  to  provide  an
    explanation as to why he did not do so and the timing of his attendance
    at church suggested it was done merely to bolster his  claim.   He  had
    also been  unable accurately to name the church or the minister and his
    lack of knowledge about his practice of  Christianity  clearly  led  to
    serious doubts that he was a genuine convert. The  appellant  had  also
    been  inconsistent  about  his  family  in  Afghanistan   without   any
    reasonable explanation and there was evidence to raise doubts about the
    Tribunal's findings as to why there were inconsistencies in the  claim.
     The appellant had given vastly different details about the fate of his
    family, whether they had been murdered prior to his birth or  later  by
    the Taliban.

19.  The second ground argues that the judge failed to provide  any  reasons
    or  consideration  in  regard  to  the  findings  at  [116]  that   the
    appellant's physical and mortal  integrity  would  be  breached  if  he
    returned to Afghanistan.

20.  Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal for the following reasons:

         "... Whilst it may ultimately be the  case  that  the  grounds  are
         simply  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's  positive   credibility
         findings, I find that there is some arguable merit in the assertion
         that the judge arguably failed to take  account  of  some  relevant
         matters in attaching the weight that he did to the  expert  reports
         as an answer to the significant  discrepancies  identified  in  the
         appellant's evidence."

21.  In her submissions Ms Isherwood argued that the  judge  had  failed  to
    deal adequately  with  the  many  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence relating in particular to how  he  claimed  asylum,  what  had
    happened to family in Afghanistan and when he had attended church.  The
    fact that the appellant had been untruthful in his screening  interview
    [44] and gave conflicting evidence about how  he  claimed  asylum  [46]
    were all matters to be weighed  in  the  balance  as  were  the  issues
    relating to whether there had been a change of interpreter [48] and who
    had decided he should come to the UK [50].

22.   There  had  been  a  wealth  of  medical  evidence  but   there   were
    contradictions within that evidence.  By way of  example,  Dr  Mohandas
    indicated that he could not find  any  evidence  of  any  major  mental
    health illness and Ms Wood at [77] referred to  the  appellant's  house
    parent as keeping himself busy, being in and out of the house  to  meet
    friends and to the key worker confirming that the appellant  socialised
    and was able to show interests.  She had observed the  appellant  being
    manipulative and demanding and presenting himself as a victim [78].  Ms
    Isherwood submitted that these factors had not been properly taken into
    account, neither had the evidence that the appellant  had  associations
    with certain criminal elements  in  the  Afghan  community  [104],  his
    conviction of a sexual assault [106] and the evidence about his limited
    attendance at church and limited knowledge of his Christian faith.   In
    summary, she submitted that a number of relevant matters had  not  been
    properly factored into the judge's assessment of credibility.

23.  Ms Pickup adopted her Rule 24 response  dated  5  February  2016.   She
    submitted that there was no error of law and that  the  judge  had  had
    been  entitled to reach his conclusions that the appellant had given  a
    credible account.  He was under no obligation to deal with every single
    piece of evidence.  He had set out  his  conclusions  with  care  in  a
    thorough and clear determination.  He had considered all  the  evidence
    and had been entitled to attach particular weight to the evidence of Dr
    Claridge, the only expert called to give oral evidence.  There  was  no
    evidence that the appellant was employed.  The appellant had been  seen
    flipping burgers at a kebab and burger bar on a few  occasions  and  he
    had accepted that he helped out in exchange for meals.  In  any  event,
    there was no inherent inconsistency between the appellant's actions and
    the evidence as to his mental health problems and learning disability.

24.  She submitted that when assessing the evidence,  the  judge  had  taken
    full account of all the medical evidence and Dr Claridge's evidence was
    consistent with other recent medical evidence including the reports  of
    Professor Yule, Professor Katona and Dr Heverin. The  judge  had  taken
    account of all the issues raised by the respondent and  had  reached  a
    decision properly  open  to  him.  The  respondent's  grounds,  so  she
    submitted, were simply a disagreement with  the  judge's  findings  and
    conclusions.

Assessment of whether there is an Error of Law

25.  The issue for me is whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in  law  such
    that its  decision  should  be  set  aside.    The  main  challenge  is
    expressed as a  reasons  challenge,  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for his finding that  the  appellant  was  a  credible
    witness and in particular that he failed to give adequate  reasons  why
    the inconsistencies in the evidence were explained by  the  appellant's
    mental health issues.  There is no doubt that the judge was fully aware
    of the discrepancies in the evidence.  At [56]  he  said  that  it  was
    clear from his  previous  summary  of  the  evidence  that  there  were
    material discrepancies together with other matters and relevant  issues
    of  concern  regarding  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claimed
    conversion to Christianity and his  account  of  fearing  his  paternal
    uncle because of the incident with his cousin.  The judge also made  it
    clear at [111] that this was a case where, unusually, the discrepancies
    were not such that reliance could be safely placed on them in terms  of
    assessing  the  appellant's  credibility.  The  judge  was,  therefore,
    clearly aware not only that he needed  to  consider  the  discrepancies
    with care and in the light of the evidence as a whole but also that  in
    the light of that evidence this  was  an  unusual  case.   The  medical
    evidence,  including  in  particular  the  evidence  of  Dr   Claridge,
    satisfied the judge that the appellant had a  learning  disability  and
    suffered from significant mental health difficulties.

26.  I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to find that  Dr  Claridge's
    evidence was more cogent and persuasive that the evidence of the  other
    medical professional.  When that evidence is read as  a  whole,  it  is
    clear, in any event, that Dr Claridge's  evidence  was  consistent  not
    only with that of the appellant's GP, Dr Barrow, who took the view that
    the appellant did suffer from PTSD relating to the  extreme  trauma  he
    suffered whilst in Afghanistan [110]  but  also  with  the  reports  of
    Professor Yule, Professor Katona and Dr Heverin.  There is no reason to
    believe that the judge did not take into account the medical  evidence,
    which had reached a different conclusion.  By way of  example  at  [71]
    the judge commented in respect of Dr Mohandas' evidence that it did not
    appear to be based on any formal testing of the appellant  and  it  was
    unclear precisely why he had reached his conclusions: see  also  [72  -
    73].  The judge also accepted that there was a  material  contradiction
    between the evidence of Professor Katona and the evidence  set  out  in
    the letter from Ms Wood and it was because of those conflicts  that  Ms
    Wood had deemed referral to be appropriate [79]. In summary, so far  as
    the medical evidence is concerned, I am satisfied that the  judge  took
    all relevant matters into account and reached a decision properly  open
    to him.

27.  It is further argued that the medical witnesses and  the  judge  failed
    to give proper weight to the evidence on issues  such  as  whether  the
    appellant was working at a kebab and burger bar. The judge was  clearly
    aware of this issue [72].  He also took into account the evidence  from
    the police about whether the appellant had associations  with  criminal
    elements in the Afghan  community  and  the  concerns  about  extremist
    Muslim material being in a room where the appellant was present but the
    judge found the explanation he gave to  be  entirely  plausible  [104].
    There is also no reason to believe that there were any issues of  which
    the medical witnesses were unaware which would have led them  to  reach
    different conclusions but, in any event, these issues were aired before
    the judge and he took them  into  account  in  his  assessment  of  the
    medical evidence.

28.  The judge was also aware  that  the  appellant  had  a  conviction  for
    sexual assault [106] and of  the  evidence  about  the  extent  of  the
    appellant's attendance at church and  his  knowledge  of  Christianity.
    There was a written statement from the  clergyman  at  the  church  the
    appellant claimed that he attended and the judge was entitled  to  take
    into account the fact that the clergyman said that he had no doubt that
    the appellant's Christian faith was genuine although there  was  little
    explanation why he had reached that view,  the  judge  noting  on  this
    issue the letter from the appellant's probation officer which  referred
    to the appellant going to the church and  reiterating  his  account  of
    events in Afghanistan in terms of  his  family's  Christian  conversion
    [109].

29.  The judge also  considered  at  some  length  the  evidence  about  the
    appellant's failure to raise at the screening interview his claim  that
    he would be at risk as a Christian, on the contrary identifying himself
    as a Sunni Muslim.  He took into account the fact  that  the  appellant
    had essentially  acknowledged  that  he  had  been  untruthful  at  the
    screening interview [44].  His  analysis  not  only  of  the  screening
    interview but also of the asylum interview led  to  him  identifying  a
    number  of  issues  which  were  arguably  at  least  relevant  to  the
    appellant's overall level of comprehension: see for example at [46] how
    the appellant had  gone  to  the  Home  Office,  whether  helped  by  a
    Pakistani or an Afghani man or  whether  he  was  taken  there  by  the
    police.  The judge was entitled to comment that either the  appellant's
    evidence was not recorded correctly or he was thoroughly confused which
    was arguably a factor relevant to his overall level  of  comprehension.
    Similarly, the judge dealt with the issues relating  to  whether  there
    had been a second interpreter and was entitled to find  that  this  was
    some  indication  of  the  appellant's  level  of   understanding   and
    comprehension and as such was relevant to his credibility [48].

30.  In summary, I am satisfied that the issues that  the  respondent  seeks
    to rely on as not properly explained by or,  perhaps  more  accurately,
    not taken into account by the judge when assessing credibility were all
    matters which he considered and assessed in the light of  the  evidence
    as a whole. This was a case where the  outcome  turned  on  the  judge'
    findings of fact.  When the decision is read as a  whole  it  is  clear
    that the judge was fully aware of the issues,  carefully  analysed  the
    evidence and I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  reached  findings  and
    conclusions properly  open  to  him  for  the  reasons  he  gave.   The
    respondent's grounds are in substance an attempt  to  re-open  and  re-
    argue issues of fact.  They do not satisfy me that the judge  erred  in
    law

31.  In these circumstances  I  need  only  deal  briefly  with  the  second
    ground, which seeks to challenge the judge's assessment of whether  the
    appellant's physical and  moral  integrity  would  be  breached  if  he
    returned to Afghanistan.  In the light of his findings on the issue  of
    asylum, there was no need for the judge to consider article  8  but  in
    any event his findings of  fact  would  support  his  conclusion  under
    article 8.

Decision

32.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  err  in  law.   It  follows  that  its
    decision stands.

33.  No application has been made to vary or discharge the  anonymity  order
    made by the First-tier Tribunal and that remains in force until further
    order.


Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 26 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
