

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04481/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8th December 2014                          |on 9th December 2014         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                             ZORAN EAZADEN KHTO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Sarwar instructed by Immigration Advisory Service
(UK) Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Heynes promulgated following a hearing at Manchester  on  the
        31st July 2014.


     2. The Judge records the outcome of an application to adjourn made  by
        the Appellant's representatives  at  paragraphs  7  to  11  of  the
        determination. This was a renewal of an  application  made  on  the
        papers on the 28th July  2014  following  the  Appellants  previous
        representative having to withdraw as a result of  a  conflict  that
        had arisen, the nature of which was not explained.


     3. The basis of the adjournment  was  that  the  new  representatives,
        Immigration Advisory Services (UK) Ltd, had only been instructed on
        the 23rd July 2014. Instructions had been taken from the  Appellant
        but it was said that there was insufficient time to prepare for the
        hearing. A Mr Ahmed of that firm attended but when the  adjournment
        request was refused he withdrew his representation.


     4. The grounds of challenge assert, inter alia, that  the  adjournment
        should have been granted as the  Appellant  was  at  a  substantial
        disadvantage in presenting her case as she did not have the benefit
        of legal representation, including her  file  of  papers  from  her
        previous representatives. It is said the Judge erred as  he  failed
        to  consider  whether  there  may  be   additional   documents   or
        information in that file.



Discussion



     5. I accept that an incorrect refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment  can
        amount to an error of law. In R(on the application of AM (Cameroon)
        v AIT [2007] EWCA Civ 131 the Court  of  Appeal  said  that  unfair
        decisions on interlocutory matters, such  as  adjournments  or  the
        admission of evidence, can amount to errors of law.  Such decisions
        will have to  be  grounds  for  arguing  that  they  display  gross
        procedural unfairness or a complete denial of natural justice.


     6. The 2014 Procedure Rules Rule, 4(3)(h), empowers  the  Tribunal  to
        adjourn a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding objectives  under
        the Rules which the Tribunal "must seek to  give  effect  to"  when
        exercising any power under the Rules. It follows that they are  the
        issues to be considered on an adjournment application as well.  The
        overriding objective is to deal with cases fairly and justly.  This
        is defined as including  "(a) dealing with the case in  ways  which
        are proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity  if
        the issues, the anticipated costs and the resources of the  parties
        and of the Tribunal; (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking
        flexibility  in  the  proceedings;  (c)  ensuring,  so  far  as  is
        practicable, that the parties are able to participate fully in  the
        proceedings; (d)  using  any  special  expertise  of  the  Tribunal
        effectively; (e) avoiding delay so far as  compatible  with  proper
        consideration of the issues".


     7.  The  issue,  in  effect,  comes  down  to  fairness.  In   Nwaigwe
        (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) it was held that if
        a Tribunal refuses  to  accede  to  an  adjournment  request,  such
        decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
        respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
        considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
        denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
        correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
        the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
        party of his right to a fair hearing.


     8. Thus, where  an  adjournment  refusal  is  challenged  on  fairness
        grounds it is important to recognise  that  the  question  for  the
        Upper  Tribunal  is  not  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted
        reasonably but that of fairness.  Was there any deprivation of  the
        affected party's right to a fair hearing?


     9. The absence of a representative is not of itself determinative.  In
        DMK, Petition for Judicial Review of a decision by the Secretary of
        State for the Home Department  [2012]  CSOH  25  the  IAS  withdrew
        representation one week before the hearing because  of  differences
        in the Appellant's account. The Claimant asked for  an  adjournment
        because he did not have a solicitor.  The Immigration Judge refused
        as he had had sufficient time to instruct legal representation  and
        his case could be justly determined as all of  his  witnesses  were
        present. The Court held that this was not the case of a last minute
        withdrawal  or  other  failure  by  a  prior  representative.   The
        Claimant had brought his witnesses and did not suggest  that  there
        was other evidence that he needed  time  to  gather.   It  was  not
        unusual for parties to represent  themselves  before  a  specialist
        tribunal.  The provision of appropriate assistance  to  parties  in
        such circumstances was a routine part of the  work  of  a  tribunal
        judge and formed part of their judicial training.  Parties did  not
        have any absolute right to be represented at fast  track  hearings.
        The Judge had exercised her discretion in a proper judicial  manner
        and her ultimate decision was one which was  open  to  her  in  the
        circumstances (para 46).


    10. In HH (Iran) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  504  the  Immigration  Judge
        refused to adjourn to enable the Appellant to find a representative
        even where the Asylum Support and Resource Team had asked for  more
        time to review the file to decide whether to  represent  him.   The
        Court of Appeal said that it was common  enough  for  Tribunals  to
        deal with unrepresented claimants if there was no point of  law  to
        be decided.  Here the simple question was whether the Appellant had
        given a truthful account and the decision to refuse the application
        was within the discretion of the Immigration Judge.   Article 6  of
        the ECHR was not engaged.  It was  impossible  to  say  that  legal
        representation was indispensable in this case.  The state  was  not
        compelled to provide the assistance of a lawyer for  every  dispute
        involving a civil point in any event.


    11. This is not a case of an  Appellant  finding  herself  unexpectedly
        without legal representation at a hearing at which it was  apparent
        that professional representation would be of benefit.  Judge Heynes
        was of the opinion  there  was  sufficient  evidence  available  to
        enable the issues to be justly  determined  and  that  the  factual
        basis of the claim was relatively simple.  The Judge noted that the
        core element of the claim was an assertion the Appellant will be at
        risk from members of her village who were of the Yazidi faith as  a
        result of a relationship she had formed with a Muslim man in  Iraq.
        As a result the Appellant stated she was forced to flee  with  this
        man although they became separated in transit.  That is  a  factual
        and not complex legal claim. The Judge noted  the  evidence  relied
        upon and having examined the same found the Appellant had failed to
        substantiate her claim to be a follower of  the  Yazidi  faith,  to
        have been dishonest in relation to her account of how she left Iraq
        and elements of her journey to the United Kingdom, and in  relation
        to her chance encounter with a friend of her father  in  Liverpool.
        The Judge dismissed the core of the claim as lacking credibility.


    12. The Record of Proceedings notes that at the hearing, following  the
        withdrawal of Mr Ahmed, the Judge took time to explain  matters  to
        the Appellant with the assistance of the appointed interpreter.  It
        is also recorded that  appropriate  questions  were  asked  of  the
        Appellant by the Judge as a  result  of  which  she  confirmed  her
        statement dated the 21st May 2014 was true. The Appellant was cross
        examined and replied  to  the  questions  put  to  her.  Thereafter
        submissions were made by the Presenting  Officer.  The  Judge  then
        summarised the issues and provided the  Appellant  with  a  further
        opportunity to address the Tribunal in her replies, which she  did.
        The  record  indicates  the  Judge  was  aware  of  the  Appellants
        situation,  ensured  she  received  a  fair  hearing  in  that  she
        understood the relevant issues and  was  given  an  opportunity  to
        answer  questions  and  address  the  Tribunal.  The   Judge   then
        considered the evidence in its  entirety  before  setting  out  the
        findings made which are within the range of findings the Judge  was
        entitled to make on the evidence.


    13. The application made by Mr Ahmed did not refer to a wish  to  trace
        witnesses or of a witness not being available on  the  day  or  the
        need to obtain specify country  information.  The  submission  made
        today that a representative may have been able to elicit points  of
        relevance through questioning or submissions is speculative and not
        supported on the facts.


    14. No evidence has been provided today of complex  legal  issue  which
        may have required representation at the time.  In  the  intervening
        period from 23rd July 2014 to the date of the hearing Mr Sarwar was
        unable to assist with a  description  of  any  work  undertaken  by
        Immigration Advisory Services (UK) Ltd or to  confirm  whether  the
        previous representative's file of papers has now been received  and
        whether there was anything in the same of relevance.


    15. The fact Mr Ahmed withdrew is no basis for granting an  adjournment
        per se. That is a matter between him and his client and  it  cannot
        be case that the mere  fact  of  a  representative  withdrawing  is
        permitted to 'blackmail' or determine the outcome  of  proceedings.
        The assertion that if a representative had been present he  or  she
        would have assisted is  noted  but  the  fact  Mr  Ahmed  chose  to
        withdraw denied such representation.


    16. A bundle has now  been  filed  containing  a  number  of  documents
        including an unsigned and undated statement  purportedly  from  the
        Appellant, a letter from a  Mr  Alo  dated  2nd  December  2014,  a
        document described as a Statement of the affiliation to the  Yazidi
        community dated 26th November  2014  written  from  an  address  in
        Germany and referring to a detailed examination  but  providing  no
        further details, and documents from Iraq, none of which were before
        the First-tier Tribunal or even in existence at that time  and  the
        majority of which have only  come  into  existence  very  recently.
        There is the option of a fresh claim being  made  based  upon  such
        additional information if the Appellant  is  so  advised.   On  the
        facts as presented the Appellant has  failed  to  substantiate  her
        claim not to have received a fair hearing before Judge Heynes.

Decision

    17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th December 2014












