
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04842/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 August 2016                  |On 13 September 2016               |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                            JUNIOR ANTHONY BAILEY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ouattara
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Nicol  promulgated  on  21  December  2015  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to remove the
    Appellant from the UK following the decision to refuse the  Appellant's
    claim for asylum


Background


 4. The Appellant was born on 22 April 1987 and is a national of Jamaica.


 5. The Appellant came to the UK in 2000 as a visitor aged 13. Applications
    for leave were made in February  2002  and  July  2002  and  they  were
    refused. In November 2005 the Appellant was arrested as  an  overstayer
    and served with notice of liability to removal. He absconded until July
    2012 when he was arrested for a burglary for which he was sentenced  to
    a term of 10 months imprisonment.


 6. He claimed that in 2004 his mother gave evidence in  a  criminal  trial
    against members of a gang who  were  charged  with  supplying  Class  A
    Drugs. They were convicted and deported back to Jamaica. His mother was
    also sentenced to 4 years' imprisonment as a result of her role in  the
    conspiracy to supply drugs. He claimed that he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return to Jamaica from the members of the gang. He had  been  assaulted
    in the UK on two occasions as a result of his  mother  giving  evidence
    against the gang.


 7. The Appellant has a child, Jai, in  2010  by  his  then  partner  Fiona
    Brown. That relationship broke  down.  The  Appellant  then  married  a
    British citizen Nicola Bailey on 18  February  2014  and  they  have  a
    child.


 8. On 25 March 2013 the Appellant applied for asylum.


 9. On 16 March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:


      a) It was accepted that  the  Appellants  mother  had  given  evidence
         against a criminal gang.


      b) It was not accepted that the Appellant was assaulted  or  threatned
         in the UK as a result of his mother giving evidence in  a  criminal
         trial as his evidence was vague and  the  link  to  the  gangs  was
         speculation.


      c) The Appellants credibility was undermined by him delaying  6  years
         in claiming asylum.


      d) There was no evidence to support the Appellants claim that the gang
         members were located all over Jamaica or how  they  would  identify
         the Appellant.


      e) The Appellants sister lives in Jamaica and has had no problems.


      f) Given the passage of time since the Appellants mother gave evidence
         there was no reason to believe they would still  be  interested  in
         him. There is a functioning police force in Jamaica from  whom  the
         Appellant could  seek  assistance  as  his  sister  had  done  when
         unidentified men shot at her.


      g) The Appellant did not meet the requirements of leave to  remain  in
         the UK as a partner under Appendix  FM  as  his  relationship  with
         Fiona Brown had apparently broken down and the evidence in relation
         to Nicola Bailey did not support the claim that it  was  a  beguine
         and subsisting relationship.


      h) In relation to Family life as the parent of a child the evidence of
         his relationship with Jai did not suggest that he had access rights
         and was taking  and  continued  to  take  an  active  role  in  his
         upbringing.


      i) The best interests of Jai were taken into account.


      j) In  relation  to  private  life  there  were  no  very  significant
         obstacles to the Appellant integrating back into Jamaica.


      k) There was no reason for a grant of leave outside the Rules.


The Judge's Decision


10. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nicol ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision.


11. Grounds of appeal were lodged which argued:


    (a)  The Judge was not entitled to reject the asylum claim on the basis
         of the adverse credibility findings he made.


    (b)  The Judge did not give adequate reasons for rejecting the  genuine
         nature of the Appellants relationship with his wife.


    (c)  The Judge was not entitled to make any adverse credibility finding
         on the basis of his wife's entitlement to tax  credits  or  council
         tax reduction.


    (d)  The Judge applied the wrong test in relation to the relocation  of
         the Appellants British citizen wife and children.


    (e)  The Judge was not entitled to reject the Appellant and his  wife's
         evidence about their daughter and his four step children.


12. On 29 January 2016 First tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne  gave  permission
    to appeal


13. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Ouattara on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that he  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  grant  of
    permission.


14. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that :


      a) He relied on the Rule 24 notice of 5 February 2016 that this was  a
         mere disagreement with the negative outcome of the appeal.


      b) It was a detailed decsion.


      c) The Judge considered the best interests of  the  children  and  the
         findings he made were sustainable


The Law


15.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.


16. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration. In  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging
    such findings:


         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."


Finding on Material Error


17. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.


18. In a carefully written decision the Judge made a number of detailed and
    well balanced adverse credibility findings against the  Appellant  that
    were open to him  on  the  evidence  before  him.  He  noted  that  the
    Appellants mother had given evidence and served her  sentence  and  did
    not appear to have suffered any repercussions of giving  that  evidence
    and had in fact refused to participate in the witness protection scheme
    (para 47). He noted that there was  no  evidence  from  the  Appellants
    mother in support of his claim. The  Judge  note  that  the  Appellants
    evidence of the threats was vague and inconsistent  (para  48)  and  he
    noted that no incident was ever reported to the police.


19. The Judge found the Appellants credibility was also undermined  by  his
    failure to claim asylum until 2013 (paras 53 and 55).


20. The Judge carefully analysed the evidence that the  Appellant  gave  in
    his asylum  interview  and  the  application  together  with  the  oral
    evidence about his  relationships  with  Ms  Brown  and  his  wife  and
    identified  inconsistencies  at  paragraph  52  which  undermined   his
    credibility.


21. In the light of these findings it was a matter for the Judge as to  the
    weight he attached to each of them and therefore open to him to  reject
    the Appellants claims that he was at risk on return to Jamaica.


22. In relation to the Appellants Article 8 claim whether under  the  Rules
    or outside the Rules the Judge made a detailed analysis  at  paragraphs
    60-65. The Judge had already indicated in general terms that he did not
    find that the Appellant was a reliable and credible witness and he  was
    entitled to take that into account in determining whether he found  his
    evidence to be reliable as to whether he had a family life with  either
    Ms Brown or Nicola Bailey.  He  found  that  inconsistencies  in  their
    evidence undermined  the  claim  of  family  life  and  set  out  those
    inconsistencies (para 60)


23.  The Judge made  clear  that  he  was  taking  into  account  the  best
    interests of the children at paragraph 61. He found that the Appellants
    evidence as to his relationship with Fiona Brown and the contact he had
    with their child was unreliable. Indeed he found  that  the  Appellants
    evidence was that he needed a court order to see this child and had not
    attempted to obtain one and that the child lived with his mother.


24. He had concerns about the reliability of the  Appellants  claims  about
    his relationship with his wife given his general  credibility  findings
    but noted that it would be open to them if the relationship was genuine
    to return to Jamaica and make an application to return as the spouse of
    Mrs Bailey which was I am satisfied a finding that was open to him.  He
    also noted that Mrs Bailey and her children  could  ,  if  they  chose,
    return to Jamaica with the Appellant and while he stated they would not
    face any threat I am satisfied that he was simply stating that this was
    a  choice  that  was  open  to  them  and  there  was  nothing  in  the
    circumstances as he had found them to be that made that an unreasonable
    option. He concluded that the best interests of the children would  not
    be harmed by the Appellant returning to Jamaica and I am  satisfied  on
    the evidence this was a finding open to him.


25. The Judge also took into  account  those  factors  he  was  obliged  to
    consider under paragraph 117B(6) given that


26. I remind myself of what was said in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) about the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to  be  given  in  a  decision  in  headnote  (1)  :
    "Although there is a legal duty to give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."


27. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.


CONCLUSION


28. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.


DECISION


29. The appeal is dismissed.





Signed                                                                  Date
11.9.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


