
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04122/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 August 2013                             |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                             sopithan sathasivam

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Sowerby of Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born on 2 November 1990  and  is  a  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.

2.   The appellant left Sri Lanka on 2 October 2010 upon  his  own  passport
    endorsed with a Tier 4 student visa.  On 12 March  2012  the  appellant
    claimed asylum.

3.   The respondent  refused  to  grant  the  relief  sought  and  issued  a
    decision to that effect on 11 April 2012.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin on 23 May 2012.  His  claim
    was found to lack credibility and the appeal dismissed in all respects.



5.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that decision  and  permission
    to appeal was granted.  Thus, the matter comes before me  in  pursuance
    of that leave.

6.   Mr Sowerby, who represents the appellant, invited my attention  to  the
    written grounds of appeal and sought to amplify them in his submissions
    to me.

7.   Ground 1 relates to the standard and burden of proof which, submits  Mr
    Sowerby, the judge had both misunderstood and misapplied.

8.   In paragraph 22 of the determination the judge set out as follows:-

         "In deciding any issue of credibility, I am mindful that the burden
         of proof is upon the appellant and the standard of  proof  required
         is the lower standard  of  'reasonable  likelihood'  and  that  the
         question that I have  to  ask  myself  in  deciding  any  issue  of
         credibility is:-


              'is what the appellant claims  more  likely  than  not  to  be
             true'.


         I am also mindful that in reaching my decision, I  am  required  to
         look at the evidence 'in the round' and to take  into  account  the
         fact that those claiming asylum have an incentive to embellish  and
         exaggerate their case."


9.   The criticism that  is  offered  of  that  definition  is  that  it  is
    confused and that the  phrase  "more  likely  than  not"  suggests  the
    balance of probabilities rather than the lower standard that is  to  be
    applied.  Furthermore, it is  suggested  that  starting  off  from  the
    position that those claiming asylum have an incentive to embellish  and
    exaggerate their case, suggests a starting point  of  belief  this  has
    taken place.

10.  Mr Sowerby recognises that part of the credibility findings  that  were
    made by the judge relate to the inconsistencies of evidence  that  were
    found.  He accepts that the judge was entitled in  those  circumstances
    to make adverse credibility findings.  The difficulty  however  in  the
    case was to determine how the judge approached matters of  evidence  if
    such  inconsistencies  were  not  apparent.   By  way  of  example,  my
    attention was drawn to paragraph 32 of the determination.

11.  It was the appellant's case that  he  was  arrested  by  plain  clothed
    police officers in Colombo on 10 March 2010 because when they looked at
    his mobile phone they discovered photographs of  his  brother  in  LTTE
    uniform.  In his witness statement the appellant had indicated that  he
    had moved to Colombo because his life was in danger in his  home  town.
    The judge found, therefore, that his claim that he had brought with him
    to Colombo his mobile phone which contained photographs of his  brother
    wearing an LTTE uniform to be inconsistent with his claim that  he  was
    forced to leave his home area.  The judge did not find it credible that
    the appellant would, in the circumstances that he has described,  leave
    photographs of his brother on his mobile phone thereby exposing him  to
    the risk of arrest.

12.  The explanation  which  the  appellant  had  offered  to  explain  that
    situation was simply that he had not paid attention to the  phone.   Mr
    Sowerby submits that there was no reason at all why  the  judge  should
    have rejected that explanation.  In any event, it  is  not  clear  what
    standard of  proof  was  being  applied  to  the  finding  of  lack  of
    credibility.

13.  Similarly, in paragraph 36, it was said by the appellant  that  he  had
    been arrested on suspicion of being an LTTE supporter and  of  planning
    to plant a bomb in Colombo, the judge did not find it credible that the
    appellant would not have been required to surrender his passport  as  a
    condition of his bail.  The Judge went on to find that the claim of the
    appellant that he was  granted  bail  by  a  court  upon  a  charge  of
    terrorism to be  inconsistent  with  the  background  information.   Mr
    Sowerby once again invites me to find that there  was  really  no  good
    reason why the judge should have rejected the explanation given by  the
    appellant and in so doing it is far from clear what standard or  burden
    was to be applied.

14.  I was invited to find that the whole determination was tainted  by  the
    direction as to standard and burden of proof.

15.  Mr Wilding, who represents the respondent, accepted  that  perhaps  the
    standard could have been better expressed but it  was  clear  that  the
    judge was  mindful  of  the  proper  burden  of  proof  being  that  of
    "reasonable likelihood".  He invites  me  to  find  that  although  the
    phrase "more likely than not" does  not  entirely  reflect  "reasonable
    likelihood" it represents a similar approach in commonsense.

16.  What was  important  he  submits  is  that  the  judge  considered  the
    evidence in the round and therefore was in a better  position  to  make
    proper judgments as to credibility rather  than  dealing  with  various
    aspects of evidence piecemeal.  There was no  suggestion,  he  submits,
    that the judge had formed an adverse impression of the appellant before
    embarking upon the determination.  Many distinct issues are  considered
    and findings made upon them but  within  the  overall  context  of  the
    claim.

17.  It is perhaps helpful when considering that matter to note the  overall
    structure and framework of the determination.  The appellant's case  is
    set out in considerable detail as is that presented by the  respondent.
    The submissions of the parties are noted.  The  respondent  highlighted
    numerous inconsistencies and discrepancies in the  appellant's  account
    and invited the judge to find that the claim  was  not  credible.   The
    appellant's Counsel on the other hand invited the judge  to  find  that
    the appellant  was  a  credible  witness  who  had  generally  given  a
    consistent account of events.

18.  The  judge  recognised  in  paragraph  21  that  essentially  the  case
    revolved upon credibility and the findings of fact that  needed  to  be
    made.

19.  In paragraph 23 the judge accepts what the appellant had to say  as  to
    his  helping  decorate  the  streets  for  the  LTTE  celebrations  and
    providing information upon troop movements  to  the  LTTE.   Thus,  the
    judge did not start  from  the  perspective  of  disbelief  but  rather
    accepted that which was said.

20.  When considering, however, the account of the appellant as it  unfolded
    the judge noted at paragraph 25 certain discrepancies in the  evidence.
    The omission of the appellant to mention the activities of his  brother
    was regarded by the judge as a significant  feature.   Given  that  the
    starting point of the appellant's case was that he was asked to deliver
    packages and letters for the LTTE  which  in  turn  led  to  his  being
    detained and ill-treated, it was important  at  paragraph  47  for  the
    judge to note certain inconsistencies in  relation  to  those  matters.
    There were also some inconsistencies as to the number of times that  he
    had been arrested and the length of those detentions.

21.  The judge noted the circumstances in which the appellant  claimed  that
    he came to the attention of the authorities in Colombo because  of  the
    mobile telephone and did not accept that account.   Inconsistencies  as
    to the length of that detention were noted as were  inconsistencies  as
    to what it was that he was charged with.

22.  The judge had regard to the background material, particularly  relating
    to  those  arrested  on  terrorist  charges.   Given  that   background
    information the judge did not accept the account of the appellant  that
    he was released on bail with his passport not surrendered.   The  judge
    went on to consider the evidence  from  the  lawyer  about  the  police
    procedures and for various reasons did not find that much weight  could
    be attached to those letters.  Further documents were  also  considered
    in the  overall  nature  of  the  claim  and  found  to  be  of  little
    reliability.  Other matters relating to the time taken to claim  asylum
    and the circumstances in which asylum  was  claimed  were  also  noted.
    Thus, it was a structured approach, not  focusing  on  one  matter  but
    looking at the claim as a whole.

23.  In that connection I note the case of Mukarkar  v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 in which Carnwath  LJ  (as
    he then was) said:-

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis."


24.  There were many inconsistencies identified and the judge, having  heard
    the evidence of the appellant, did not  accept  the  explanations  that
    were made.  The incident  with  the  mobile  phone  drew  sharply  into
    question whether it was reasonably likely that the  appellant,  seeking
    to escape persecution, would have such a photograph on his  phone.   It
    is of course possible to argue  that  he  could  have  overlooked  that
    photograph.  That explanation does not stand  in  isolation  from  many
    other matters surrounding the matrix of the claim.  In that  connection
    I note also what was said by the Supreme Court in B  (a  child)  [2013]
    UKSC 33.  Quoting from the case of Piglowska v  Piglowski  [1999]  1WLR
    1360 Lord Hoffmann said at page 1372 of the judgment as follows:

         "The need for appellate caution in reversing,  the  trial  judge's
        evaluation of the facts is based upon much more solid grounds  than
        professional courtesy. It is because  specific  findings  of  fact,
        even by the most meticulous judge,  are  inherently  an  incomplete
        statement of the impression which was made upon him by the  primary
        evidence.  His  expressed  findings  are  always  surrounded  by  a
        penumbra of imprecision as  to  emphasis,  relative  weight,  minor
        qualification and nuance. . . of which time  and  language  do  not
        permit exact expression, but which may play an  important  part  in
        the judge's overall evaluation."


25.  Read as a whole, I do not detect that the judge was implying an  unduly
    high standard of proof in the approach  that  was  taken.   There  were
    matters found in favour of the appellant  and  matters  found  against.
    Overall, I find that it was a balanced approach and not  one  that  was
    eloquent of bias or of undue severity.

26.  The second criticism is to the effect that the judge failed to  make  a
    finding on the appellant's claim that unknown men came to his  home  in
    2007 enquiring about his brother and accusing him of helping the  LTTE.
    Mr Sowerby submits that that was fundamental to the claim as presented,
    as being the introduction to the events which  led  eventually  to  the
    appellant's detention.

27.  The judge noted at paragraph 24 that central to the  appellant's  claim
    was his being at risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  for  having
    skipped bail upon terrorist-related charges.  The judge considered that
    it was the events of 2008 onwards that were material to the claim.

28.  Once again it has been emphasised on many  occasions  that  it  is  not
    reasonably to be expected of a judge that he or she  make  findings  on
    every matter that is raised in the appeal but rather on  those  central
    matters upon which the outcome of the appeal depends.

29.  Mr Wilding invites me to find that was precisely  what  the  judge  was
    saying in paragraph 24.  The  judge  was  very  focused  upon  the  key
    issues,  particularly  those  relating  to  the  risk  on   return   as
    highlighted in LP and set out in some detail in paragraph  50.   Rather
    than missing key evidence he invites me to find that it was  a  focused
    determination.  With that submission I agree.

30.  Ground 4 makes complaint that undue weight was  given  to  the  matters
    set out in the screening interview.  It was made clear to the appellant
    that he would be given the opportunity of giving further  details.   In
    those circumstances it was unfair of the judge to hold the appellant to
    account.

31.  Mr Wilding submits that  it  was  central  to  the  claim  whether  the
    appellant was detained for six days or three months.  The judge did not
    accept the explanation and discrepancy.   It  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the appellant, having been detained,  to  at  least  state  with
    accuracy the central matters of his claim.

32.  The appellant, on three separate occasions in the  screening  interview
    states that he was arrested by the authorities, detained  and  tortured
    from 10 March 2010 to 15 March 2010.  He said he was not sure  that  he
    was subject to an arrest warrant  or  wanted  by  any  law  enforcement
    authority for the offence.

33.  That is contrasted with the account of the appellant in  his  interview
    and witness statement that he was  detained  on  10  March  2010  until
    granted bail on 15 June 2010.

34.  Mr Sowerby points out quite rightly  that  the  appellant  himself  had
    sought to correct what he had said in the screening interview, being  a
    mistake as to the month.  The judge noted that matter  specifically  at
    paragraph 34.  He did not accept that there was a mistake in  what  the
    appellant had said bearing in  mind  the  frequency  in  which  it  was
    stated.  Once again that is a matter properly open to the judge to take
    into account.  The fact that an appellant gives an explanation does not
    of itself oblige the judge to accept it.  Clearly care must be taken in
    the approach to screening  interviews,  bearing  in  mind  the  limited
    application that they have for  evidence  gathering.   However,  if  an
    appellant has made a misstatement on a core and crucial aspect  of  his
    claim it is not to be ignored.

35.  It was said that the judge misdirected himself as to  the  approach  in
    the evidence of the lawyer.  There was a letter  from  the  lawyer,  Mr
    Perera confirming his role in acting for the appellant and securing his
    release on bail.  Mr Sowerby submits that that was a letter capable  of
    being given weight to because it  was  obtained  independently  of  the
    appellant through his representatives  contacting  the  lawyer  in  Sri
    Lanka.

36.  The judge considered it, significant, in evaluating  that  letter  that
    the relevant bail documents and court documents and charge  sheet  were
    not enclosed with it.  It was regarded as significant that  the  lawyer
    in the letter of 17 May refers to having sent  such  documents.   There
    were no documents apparently enclosed with the letter of 15 April.   In
    any event those documents were not before the Tribunal at  the  hearing
    and that was a significant omission in the eyes of the judge.

37.  It is clear that the judge had paid careful regard to the  letter  but,
    for the reasons as set out,  particularly  in  paragraphs  39  and  40,
    placed little weight upon it.  It is also to be noted that  the  judge,
    in coming to that conclusion, had regard also to the  COIS  Report  and
    the ease with which  false  documents  can  be  obtained.   Mr  Wilding
    invites me to find that the approach to those  documents  was  entirely
    proper.  If the lawyer had been acting as claimed it is  reasonable  to
    expect  the  relevant  documents  to  have  been  supplied  given   the
    contention that they had been sent.

38.  I asked Mr Sowerby whether those documents had yet  been  obtained  and
    he indicated that to his knowledge they had not.

39.  Criticism is also made as  to  the  approach  taken  to  the  diagnosis
    ticket relating to the injuries suffered by the appellant's father.  It
    was submitted that that was part of the appellant's overall account and
    should have been considered more  fully.   Once  again,  the  judge  at
    paragraph 43 noted certain omissions in the account  of  the  appellant
    which were regarded as significant to the relevance of those tickets.

40.  The judge had made the  self-direction  that  the  evidence  should  be
    looked at "in the round", that matters were  found  in  favour  of  the
    appellant and certain matters against.  To understand  the  weight  and
    relevance to be given to a particular factor it  is  necessary  to  put
    that factor within its proper context.  Looking at the determination as
    a whole, I find that that is what the judge attempted to do.  I do  not
    find that the judge started  from  a  pre-condition  of  disbelief  but
    rather upon  anxious  scrutiny  on  all  matters.   The  findings  were
    properly open to be made and within the reasonable  ambit  of  judicial
    discretion.  The judge had the  advantage  of  hearing  the  appellant,
    weighing the evidence in the light  of  the  arguments  then  advanced.
    Reasons were given for  rejecting  credibility.   The  judge  can  only
    evaluate that evidence which was presented.  I find that that has  been
    done.

41.  In the circumstances therefore I find that the grounds  of  appeal  are
    more weighted towards  merits  argument  rather  than  identifying  any
    material error of law.  Looked at  through  the  prism  of  "reasonable
    likelihood" as opposed to "more likely than not"  it  is  difficult  to
    detect that there would have been any practical difference of  approach
    or analysis.

42.  In the circumstances therefore the  appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed.
    The decision of Judge Levin shall stand, namely  that  the  appellant's
    asylum appeal is dismissed and that relating to humanitarian protection
    is  dismissed.   The  appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  is   also
    dismissed.





Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

