
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04441/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    X I C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, instructed by Tamil
                    Welfare Association (Romford Road)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Khawar (the judge), promulgated on 2 November  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal arose from the  decision  of  the  Respondent,  dated  24
    February 2015, refusing the asylum and human rights claims  and  giving
    directions to remove  the  Appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. In essence the Appellant's protection  claim  was  based  on  perceived
    assistance for the LTTE and adverse consequences  resulting  therefrom.
    It was said  that  the  Appellant  had  experienced  some  difficulties
    between the years 2000 and 2004.  He came to this country in  2007  and
    then returned to Sri Lanka.  It was also  said  that  in  2013  he  was
    arrested by the Sri Lankan authorities, accused of helping the LTTE and
    then released with reporting conditions.  The Appellant claimed that he
    left the country in breach of those conditions and that subsequently an
    arrest warrant had been issued against  him.   As  a  result  of  these
    matters he claimed to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

The decision of the Judge

 3. In a concise decision the judge rejected all material elements  of  the
    Appellant's claim.  He made a number of  adverse  credibility  findings
    relating  to  inconsistencies,  a  lack  of  detail,  the  absence   of
    supporting evidence and implausibilities.  In respect of  the  risk  on
    return the judge held that in any event, having regard to  the  country
    guidance case of GJ & Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC), this particular Appellant would not be  at  risk
    on return.  He dealt with Article 8 briefly and found that there  would
    be no breach.

Grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal, relying upon six grounds all
    of which attacked various elements of the judge's credibility findings.
     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 26 November 2015.

The hearing before me

 5. Mr Paramjorthy, in his customary fair and  realistic  manner,  accepted
    that some aspects of the grounds of appeal were stronger  than  others.
    In essence, he sought to rely primarily on  grounds  1,  2  and  3  and
    accepted that grounds 5 and 6 lacked real merit.  Mr Kotas urged me  to
    look at the decision of the judge as a whole and  also  relied  on  the
    alternative  finding  at  paragraph  44.   In  reply   Mr   Paramjorthy
    acknowledged that there was perhaps less evidence before the judge than
    might otherwise have been the case but nonetheless the judge had failed
    to engage properly with the evidence before him.  There had been a lack
    of anxious scrutiny and on balance there were material errors of law.

My error of law decision

 6. At the hearing I announced to the parties that I found there to  be  no
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.  I now give my  reasons
    for this conclusion.

 7. Although the grounds take issue with particular findings, I  must,  and
    indeed do, consider the judge's decision as a  whole.   In  respect  of
    paragraph 33 it is true that the judge did not  specifically  refer  to
    the relevant part of the asylum interview which has been replicated  in
    the grounds of appeal.  However it is clear  to  me  that  he  had  the
    interview in mind given that it was the core item of  evidence  in  the
    appeal (there being no witness statement from the  Appellant).   Having
    looked at the relevant part of the asylum interview myself, it is right
    that some information was provided by the Appellant but taking  matters
    as a  whole  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  there  were
    insufficient particulars in respect of the claimed events.  Even if the
    judge had erred in a failure to  specifically  refer  to  the  relevant
    evidence, in my view this error was clearly not material.

 8. Still on paragraph 33, the judge referred to an  inconsistency  in  the
    Appellant's evidence, referring to questions 123 and 139 of the  asylum
    interview.  The grounds allege that the judge failed  to  look  at  the
    Appellant's answer at question 140.  It is right that  the  judge  does
    not refer to that  particular  answer.  However,  upon  inspection  the
    answer given at question 140 in fact only goes to further undermine the
    Appellant's evidence and it is manifestly clear to  me  the  judge  was
    entitled to hold the point against the Appellant in respect of what was
    in fact a material inconsistency.  It is perhaps unfortunate that later
    on in the same paragraph the judge failed to set out all of  the  other
    apparent examples of inconsistencies in the evidence.  Nonetheless this
    does not constitute any error, or any material error, of law.

 9. Paragraph 35 of the determination is not in fact challenged at  all  in
    the grounds of appeal.  I find that it was entirely open to  the  judge
    to reach the adverse findings contained therein.

10. In respect of paragraph 36, as Mr Paramjorthy implicitly  acknowledged,
    the complaint contained within the grounds of appeal amounts to nothing
    more than a simple disagreement, and the finding within that  paragraph
    was once again open to the judge.

11. The adverse finding in paragraph 37 has  not  been  challenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal and was open to him in any event.

12. The judge was also entitled to find in paragraph 38  that  the  claimed
    movements  of  the  Appellant  within  Colombo  did  not  constitute  a
    concerted attempt to move from place to place in order to avoid a  risk
    from the authorities.

13. Ground 6 of the grounds, as acknowledged by Mr Paramjorthy, lacks merit
    and amounts to nothing more than another disagreement.

14. The findings in  paragraph  39  relating  to  the  wife's  injury  were
    entirely open to the judge, as were the findings in paragraphs  40,  41
    and 42.

15. In paragraph 43 the judge states that he took account of the cumulative
    effect of all of  his  previous  adverse  findings  when  reaching  the
    ultimate conclusion that the claim put forward was not a true one.   On
    that basis the appeal was bound to fail and it was entirely open to the
    judge to conclude that that was in fact the case.

16. In addition, on the alternative finding at paragraph 44, the judge  was
    entitled to find that there would be no risk in light  of  the  country
    guidance in GJ. The Article 8 conclusions have not been challenged.

17. In light of the above there are mo  material  errors  of  law  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

18. Although no direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal judge,  I  do
    make one in the circumstances of this case. I note that a direction was
    made at the pre-hearing review stage of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Anonymity Direction

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure  to  comply
with this direction could give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.  This
direction has been made in order  to  protect  the  Appellant  from  serious
harm, having regard to  the  interests  of  justice  and  the  principle  of
proportionality.


Signed   Date: 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

