
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/04247/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bahja, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent on 10 March 2015 to refuse his asylum claim.
    His appeal against that refusal was dismissed by  Designated  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Manuell ("the DFTTJ") in a decision promulgated
    on 15 September 2015 following a hearing on 8 September 2015.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier  Tribunal  but  given
    that the appellant will be returned to  Pakistan  as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker,  I  consider  that  he  is  entitled  to  anonymity  in   these
    proceedings. I make a direction accordingly.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on
    6 October 2015 as follows:

         "1.      ...

         2. The grounds submit that the  judge  erred  in  not  granting  an
             adjournment and also implicitly, that the judge erred  in  his
             approach to the evidence relating to substantive matters given
             the available medical evidence.

         3. The grounds are right to point to the determining  factor  being
             fairness, although the judge has a wide discretion. However if
             there was medical evidence pointing  to  the  Appellant  being
             unfit to give evidence it is arguable  that  the  judge  ought
             either  to  have  adjourned  or  had  regard  to   the   Joint
             Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and  the  guidance  in
             the UNHCR Handbook at paragraphs 206-212."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Bahja, for the appellant, relied  on  his  skeleton  argument  which
    states that the sole issue for me to decide is  whether  the  "decision
    dated 15th September to refuse to grant the  appellant  an  adjournment
    constitutes a material error of law". Mr Bahja identified the  guidance
    in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC). He noted that
    the appellant had asserted on the day of the hearing that he was unwell
    and unable to take part in the proceedings or to  answer  questions  in
    cross-examination. He was said to be struggling  with  various  medical
    difficulties,  unable  to  concentrate  and  unable   to   follow   the
    proceedings.  He submitted that the appellant had been deprived of  his
    right to a fair hearing as a result of his inability to participate  in
    it. He submitted that the  appellant  ought  to  have  been  given  the
    benefit of the doubt. He asserted that, had the  appellant  "taken  the
    stand and given evidence in support of his case, the outcome, at  least
    in theory, could have  been  different."  It  was  submitted  that  the
    appellant's credibility was crucial  and  that  the  Judge's  findings,
    following the failure to grant an adjournment, were open to  challenge.
    Mr Bahja referred me in particular to page 6 of his  skeleton  argument
    prepared in the First-tier Tribunal to the effect that the claimed risk
    on return was supported by the background material  but  accepted  that
    the grounds of appeal to this tribunal were limited  to  the  issue  of
    whether or not there had been procedural unfairness  arising  from  the
    failure to adjourn.

 6. Mr Walker, for the Secretary of State  relied  on  the  R24  reply  and
    asserted that the  DFTTJ  had  made  a  fair  decision  to  refuse  the
    application  to  adjourn.  He  had  considered  all  aspects   of   the
    appellant's claim that he could not give evidence due to  illness,  had
    noted the vagueness of the request and the  appellant's  reluctance  to
    take part in the asylum process. He submitted that, even if there  were
    an error of law, it was not material, the DFTTJ having made a  decision
    on the evidence of the appellant at its highest.

Discussion

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal and his counsel's  skeleton  argument
    prepared for the hearing before me, make it clear (notwithstanding  the
    comments of the FTTJ who granted permission to appeal)  that  the  sole
    basis for this appeal is the claim that the decision by  the  DFTTJ  to
    refuse an adjournment was procedurally unfair and therefore a  material
    error of law.   Whilst  Mr  Bahja  submitted  that,  the  DFTTJ  having
    unfairly failed to adjourn the hearing, the  subsequent  findings  were
    open to challenge, he did accept that there was  no  challenge  to  the
    findings of the DFTTJ in his  paragraphs  27  and  28  with  regard  to
    sufficiency of protection and the reasonableness of  relocation  within
    Pakistan.

 8. I made it clear to the parties at the hearing that my principal concern
    was the materiality of any potential error of law. This is because  the
    DFTTJ,  notwithstanding  his  adverse  findings   on   the   issue   of
    credibility, had made clear and unchallenged findings on  the  risk  on
    return on the basis of the appellant's claims.

 9. Mr Bahja told me that the sole basis for the claimed risk on return was
    the appellant's conversion from Sunni to  Shia.   In  his  decision  at
    paragraph 28 the DFTTJ states with regard to  the  appellant's  claimed
    conversion (albeit he found it lacked credibility):

         "The objective evidence nevertheless shows that there are estimated
         to be between 16 and 34 million Shia Muslims in Pakistan. There are
         no discriminatory laws against Shia Muslims. Even if  the  tribunal
         were  mistaken  not  to  accept  the  Appellant's  conversion,  the
         tribunal finds that the Appellant is able to relocate to a majority
         Shia district of a large town or city in Pakistan  and  that  as  a
         single man without ties it is reasonable to expect him  to  do  so.
         This will at the same time deal with any additional risk  he  might
         face as a convert."

10. The appellant refers in his witness statement (prepared the day  before
    the hearing) to having been a supporter of the Muttahida Quami Movement
    (MQM) resulting in his being beaten and tortured by supporters  of  the
    Pakistan Peoples' Party (PPP)  on  4  occasions  in  2010.   The  DFTTJ
    addresses this claim in his paragraph 27 where he notes that  "the  PPP
    is not currently in power in Pakistan and so is not in  a  position  of
    relative strength. The tribunal finds that there is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection  available  to  supporters  of  the  main  lawful  political
    parties, according to the Horvath [2000[ UKHL 37 principles".  Mr Bahja
    confirmed to me that the findings in this paragraph were not challenged
    before me.

11.  The  DFTTJ  also  addressed  the  risk  on  return  arising  from  the
    appellant's medical condition, as set out in the medical evidence.   He
    notes that the appellant's "condition of depression can  be  controlled
    by standard issue medicines. There was no evidence that such  medicines
    or their equivalents would not be available in Pakistan.  The Appellant
    has managed without counselling for some  three  years.  There  was  no
    evidence that he would not be able  to  access  suitable  treatment  in
    Pakistan if it were needed: see GS (India) and Others [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    40. He can be monitored during the removal process  and  he  has  close
    family in Pakistan".  Again, this finding is not challenged before me.

12. The net effect of the appellant's lack of participation in the  hearing
    is that the DFTTJ took  into  account  the  appellant's  own  evidence,
    including his witness statement (signed and dated the  day  before  the
    hearing) and other evidence and background  material.  The  appellant's
    statement included his response to the reasons for refusal.   Thus  the
    appellant was not disadvantaged by his lack  of  participation  in  the
    hearing: there is no suggestion, for example, that he would have  given
    additional evidence in chief had he been  able  to  do  so.   The  only
    submission is that he was unable to participate in the hearing  and  to
    respond to  cross-examination.  This  is  despite  his  being  able  to
    instruct his counsel at the hearing. The disadvantage, if any,  arising
    from the lack of an adjournment was to the respondent who was unable to
    challenge the evidence of the appellant by way of cross-examination.

13. I take into account that the DFTTJ makes no reference to  applying  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 and the guidance  in  the
    UNHCR Handbook at paragraphs  206-212.   However,  this  is  immaterial
    because the DFTTJ made unchallenged findings on risk on return  on  the
    basis of the appellant's claims at their highest.

14. The DFTTJ made reasoned decisions on the risk on return (which are  not
    challenged by  the  appellant)  on  the  appellant's  claims  at  their
    highest. I conclude therefore that, even if the failure to adjourn were
    an error of law, it was not material to the outcome of the hearing. The
    DFTTJ found, on the appellant's evidence, that there was sufficiency of
    protection for him on return and, alternatively, that he could relocate
    to a Shia area in Pakistan.  The  appeal  was  bound  to  fail  on  all
    issues, on the appellant's own evidence and  the  background  material,
    even if the hearing had been adjourned to enable the appellant to  give
    oral evidence.

Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

16. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed      A M Black  Date 5 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black







Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      A M Black  Date 5 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
