
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04510/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 January 2014                   |On 3 February 2014                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                          DESIGNATED JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                                Issa Abuissa
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Issa Abuissa, was born on 18 July 1970  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Palestine (Occupied Territories).  He had  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  10
    December 2010 to remove him from  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  illegal
    entrant under paragraphs 9 - 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.
     The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kanagaratnam),  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 24  May  2011,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant
    appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. By a decision dated 18 June 2012, Designated Judge  McClure  set  aside
    the First-tier Tribunal determination giving his reasons as follows:

          REASONS FOR THE DECISION THAT THERE IS AN  ERROR  OF  LAW  IN  THE
          DETERMINATION:

       1. The grounds of appeal raise two issues. The first relates  to  the
          factual findings made by the judge. Central to a consideration  of
          the appellant's claim to  asylum  is  the  assessment  as  to  the
          circumstances and reasons why the  appellant  left  Palestine  and
          specifically the Gaza Strip.

       2. At paragraph 12 of the determination the judge at  several  points
          makes reference to the fact that the appellant had not spoken of a
          confession prior to the latter stages of  the  processing  of  his
          claim to asylum and his later statements. The judge  has  in  part
          based his assessment of the credibility of the appellant's account
          on the fact that the appellant had failed  to  mention  previously
          anything relating to a confession or anything arising therefrom.

       3. It is clear however at the respondent's bundle screening interview
          part 4.2 that the  appellant  has  mentioned  being  tortured  and
          signing blank sheets of paper which would  be  filled  in  with  a
          confession. Whilst it is correct to say that  the  appellant  does
          not mention anything otherwise arising therefrom  it  does  appear
          that he refers to a confession.

       4. As the assessment of credibility is based in part on the fact that
          the appellant had not mentioned a confession  previously,  in  the
          light of the evidence set out the assessment  of  credibility  and
          the adverse findings of fact will have to be looked at  again  and
          the whole of the appellant's account considered again.

       5. The second issue raised by appellant's representative is the  fact
          that no consideration has been given to article 1D and  the  cases
          of Nawras Bolbol v Hungary 2010 EUECJ C-31-09 and  El-Ali  v  SSHD
          [2002] EWCA Civ 1103.

       6. There is documentation that indicates that the appellant was being
          provided protection and was registered as refugee with  UNWRA.  It
          is asserted  that  in  the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  the
          provisions of Article 1D are engaged and that the appellant should
          automatically be recognised as a refugee.

       7. Whilst that issue was not raised before the judge  and  the  judge
          cannot be criticised for not having dealt with it, it  is  clearly
          an issue that  arises  on  the  papers  as  the  documentation  to
          substantiate that the appellant had been registered with UNWRA had
          been included in the original bundle.

       8. There is clearly an issue of the law as to  whether  and  not  the
          protection provided by UNWRA had ceased and whether it has  ceased
          by the appellant having to leave the area where the protection was
          provided by reason of the risk of persecution or the risk of  harm
          or whether the  appellant  had  voluntarily  left  the  protection
          provided. In the latter circumstances the argument being that  the
          protection provided had not ceased but  rather  the  appellant  no
          longer wished to avail himself of the protection.  In  the  former
          however there is clearly an argument as  to  whether  in  all  the
          circumstances the risk of  persecution  arising  within  the  area
          where the protection is provided in the appellant is excluded from
          being a refugee by Article 1D or whether consistent with the  case
          law cited the appellant  is  automatically  to  be  recognised  as
          refugee.

       9.  Accordingly  there  are  arguable  errors  of  law   within   the
          determination and the matter will have to be heard afresh.

          Decision

      10. The Tribunal therefore conclude that, given the material error  of
          law described above, the matter will be reheard.

 3. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of proof is whether there is a real risk  the  appellant  will  suffer,
    respectively,  persecution  or  treatment  contrary  to  the  ECHR  (in
    particular, Articles 2 and 3) if he is returned to Palestine  (Occupied
    Territories).

 4. The appellant gave oral evidence before the Upper Tribunal adopting his
    witness statement and supplementary witness statements as his evidence-
    in-chief.  The appellant claims that in 1990 he  was  arrested  by  the
    Israeli forces for an act of violence against a  military  vehicle  and
    that he was sentenced to two months' imprisonment at the Negev  Prison.
    During that time, he claims that  he  was  tortured  but  when  he  was
    released he left Gaza in 1990 and has not returned.   He  has  spent  a
    number of years living in the Philippines where members  of  his  close
    family continue to reside.  He travelled to the United Kingdom in  2009
    and claims that he cannot be safely readmitted to  Palestine  (Occupied
    Territories) because he will be identified  as  an  individual  with  a
    criminal record and will  suffer  ill-treatment  in  consequence.   The
    appellant  claims  that  he  obtained  a  passport  in  2009  with  the
    assistance of a cousin in Palestine but he has  denied  that  it  is  a
    valid Palestinian passport (he claims to have bribed  his  cousin,  who
    worked at the Palestinian Department  of  the  Interior,  which  issued
    passports, in order to acquire it) and he also maintains  that  the  ID
    card which he brought with him to the United Kingdom is not valid  [see
    supplementary statement of 17 October 2013, paragraph 19].

 5. The respondent's refusal letter is dated 10 December 2010.  The  letter
    records the documents before the author of the letter  at  [8].   Those
    documents included a  witness  statement  of  the  appellant  dated  29
    November 2010 which Mr McVeety, for the respondent, told  us  has  been
    lost.  We understand from  the  appellant  that  he  had  drafted  this
    statement himself without the assistance  of  lawyers.   At  [18],  the
    respondent "accepted that [the appellant] was detained for  two  months
    in Gaza Strip along with thousands of other  civilians."   Beyond  that
    concession, the respondent did not accept any part of  the  appellant's
    claim.  The appellant claims that, upon being released by  Israelis  in
    1990, he was forced to sign a blank document and to agree to  work  for
    the Israelis as a spy.  The appellant "did not wish to  betray  my  own
    people and bring shame to my family" so he made arrangements  with  his
    father to leave Gaza.  It was the appellant's contention that "in order
    to require a passport legally, the requirements are a valid ID card and
    no criminal record on file."  It is on this basis  that  the  appellant
    asserts that the passport which he used to enter the United Kingdom was
    not validly issued to him.

 6. The hearing of the Upper Tribunal was primarily concerned with evidence
    surrounding the issue to the appellant of a passport and his subsequent
    dealings, both directly and through third parties, with the Palestinian
    authority as represented in  the  United  Kingdom.   These  issues  had
    arisen following the hearing in the Upper Tribunal in Manchester on  23
    October when we issued the following directions:

         "The parties shall, no later than 4.00 pm on 30 October 2013,  file
         at the Upper Tribunal and serve upon  each  other  a  consent  form
         signed by the  appellant  which  shall  permit  the  respondent  to
         contact the Palestinian Authority regarding  the  validity  of  the
         appellant's passport; his attempts to  obtain  a  passport  in  the
         past; the existence of any bar which would  prevent  the  appellant
         obtaining a passport; the existence of any record of the  appellant
         at the Palestinian Population Registry.

         The appellant shall, no later than 4.00pm on 30 October 2013,  file
         at the Upper Tribunal  and  serve  on  the  respondent  a  detailed
         witness statement in which he shall explain  how  he  obtained  his
         passport and giving details of any attempts he may have made in the
         past to obtain a passport.

         The appellant shall, no later than 4.00pm on 30 October 2013,  file
         at the Upper Tribunal and serve on the respondent (i) statements of
         witnesses and (ii) any other documentary evidence which may explain
         how the letter of  the  Palestinian  Diplomatic  Mission  dated  17
         October 2013 came into the possession of the appellant.

         The respondent shall, no later than 4.00pm  on  27  November  2013,
         file  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the  appellant  any
         documentary evidence upon which she may seek to rely  arising  from
         any enquiries she may make of the  Palestinian  Diplomatic  Mission
         and the Palestinian Authority.

         The respondent shall, no later than 4.00pm  on  27  November  2013,
         notify  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  appellant's  representative
         whether she wishes the witnesses referred to in paragraph (3) above
         to attend the final hearing to be cross examined.

         The appellant shall, no later than 4.00pm on 18 December 2013, file
         at the Upper Tribunal and  serve  on  the  respondent  any  further
         written evidence upon which he seeks to rely.

         Both parties shall, no later than 4.00pm on 30 December 2013,  file
         at the Upper Tribunal and serve on each other consolidated  bundles
         of documents.

         The appeals shall be listed before Upper Tribunal Judge Clive  Lane
         and Designated Judge McClure at Manchester on 23  January  2014  at
         10.00am (4 hours allowed)."

 7. The appellant's passport was issued by the Palestinian  authorities  on
    23 July 2009 and will expire  on  22  July  2014.   The  appellant  has
    produced in evidence two letters concerning the  passport.   The  first
    letter from the Palestinian Diplomatic Mission is dated 17 October 2013
    and is addressed to "to whom it may  concern".   The  letter  reads  as
    follows:

         'The Palestinian Mission on behalf of the Palestinian authority has
         conducted a search of our records of Palestinian passport holders.

         We can find no record of a passport issued  in  the  name  of  Issa
         Abuissa, the passport  number  2424831  is  not  a  valid  passport
         number, it is not in our records.

         We  hope  this  answers  your  enquiry.   If  you  require  further
         information please do not hesitate to contact us.'

 8. The letter is signed "Ahmed  Al-Mussa,  Consular  Section."   We  shall
    refer to this letter as the "17 October letter".

 9. The second letter, dated 23 October 2013, also has the  letter  heading
    of the State of  Palestine  (Palestinian  Mission  to  the  UK).   Both
    letters bear the address 5 Galena Road, Hammersmith, London W6 0LT.  We
    shall refer to the second letter hereafter as the "23 October  letter."
    The text of the 23 October letter is also very brief:

         'This is to confirm that according to Oslo Agreement between Israel
         and PLO, the Palestinian passport that you  are  holding  does  not
         entitle you to have free entry to the Palestinian  territories,  as
         you are not a resident neither in Gaza Strip nor in West  Bank  and
         do not possess the new resident Palestinian ID card (sic)'

    The letter is signed "Ahmed Mansur, Consular Department".

10. We have seen copies of a series  of  emails  dated  December  2013  and
    January 2014 that passed between the Palestinian Mission in the UK  and
    Ms Sarah Marsh, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer in  Manchester.
    The contents of the mails may be  summarised  as  follows:  (i)     The
    Palestinian Mission confirmed unequivocally that the  17  October  2013
    letter is not genuine and  was  not  written  by  any  officer  of  the
    Palestinian authorities in the United Kingdom.   (ii)  The  23  October
    letter is genuine and was written  by  Mr  Mansur  of  the  Palestinian
    Mission.  (iii) The 23 October letter was issued on the  basis  of  the
    details of the passport  which  the  appellant  had  presented  to  the
    Palestinian authority.  However, those details are not the same as  the
    passport details subsequently sent to the authority by the  respondent.
    (iv)   When checks were made by the Palestinian authority regarding the
    passport details forwarded by the respondent it was revealed  that  the
    appellant's passport "is an authentic Palestinian  passport  which  was
    registered in the Palestinian authority database" [see email  to  Sarah
    Marsh, 10 January 2013].

11. The appellant claims that the 17 October letter was not obtained by him
    but was provided to a Mr X with the assistance  of  a  Mr  Y,  who  the
    appellant claims is the  president  of  the  Palestinian  community  in
    [redacted].  The appellant claims that he used the assistance of  these
    individuals  to  obtain  information  from  the  Palestinian  authority
    because he was "too afraid of making any contact with  the  Palestinian
    authorities myself." [Supplementary witness statement 17 January  2014,
    paragraph 3].  The appellant  has  produced  copies  of  text  messages
    between himself and Mr Y.  Neither Mr X nor Mr Y  attended  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to be cross-examined.  The appellant told us  that  both
    these individuals no longer wish to be involved in  any  way  with  his
    appeal.

12. Following an anxious and careful examination of all the evidence, we do
    not find that the appellant is a witness of  truth.   We  have  reached
    that conclusion for the following reasons.  First, we are not satisfied
    that the account which he has given concerning the acquisition  of  his
    passport and his subsequent dealings both directly  and  through  third
    parties with the  Palestinian  authority  is  true  or  accurate.   The
    appellant has sought to rely  on  the  17  October  letter  which  both
    parties now agree is a forgery.  He has sought to distance himself from
    that letter by claiming that Mr X and Mr Y,  rather  than  he  himself,
    were responsible for obtaining it.  There is a brief witness  statement
    and an email from Mr X which is dated 10 January 2014  and  appears  to
    have been sent in response  to  an  enquiry  made  by  the  appellant's
    solicitor.  The enquiry sought to ascertain how Mr X had  obtained  the
    17 October letter.  The response is not exactly clear:

         As far as I know I have had no contact with the  PA.   As  an  Arts
         Professional I have had and expect still to  have  contact  with  a
         Palestinian Mission to the United Kingdom on a number  of  cultural
         projects that have been held in [redacted] as part  of  the  annual
         [redacted] Festival and the Biennial, I can list them if needed.  I
         have also been involved with the  Mission  and  Labour  Friends  of
         Palestine when the ambassador spoke in  [redacted]  at  the  labour
         conference and the launch of the Jack Jones Trust at the  House  of
         Commons.  I receive from time  to  time  emails  from  the  embassy
         usually  press  releases  or  information  about  events.   When  I
         received the email in question I printed it out  realising  it  was
         for Issa and brought it to your office as you are his solicitor.  I
         did not keep it, I have a backlog of 12,000 emails so  delete  them
         in bulk, sorry.  As for 23 January, unfortunately I am working on a
         three day shoot so I can't make it.

13. We are left entirely in the dark by this email and  the  brief  witness
    statement as to how or why Mr X may have sought or  obtained  a  letter
    which is now known to be a forgery.  There was no written  evidence  at
    all from Mr Y.  All that we do know is that the letter is a forgery and
    that the appellant sought to rely  upon  it.  In  the  absence  of  any
    satisfactory explanation from the appellant himself  or  two  witnesses
    who have not been submitted for cross examination,  we  have  no  doubt
    that the  appellant  himself  knew  that  the  document  which  he  has
    attempted to use in support of his appeal is  a  forged  document.   We
    find that to be an act which very severely diminishes  the  appellant's
    credibility as a witness.  We find  that  his  credibility  is  further
    damaged by the readiness with which he abandoned his apparent  scruples
    as regards making direct contact with the  Palestinian  authorities  in
    the United Kingdom; indeed, we find that he showed so little reluctance
    in agreeing for the respondent to make enquiries (including  disclosing
    his home address) because he  never  had  any  genuine  fear  of  those
    authorities.

14. Secondly, we have considered the 23 October letter.  We know that  that
    letter is genuine but we also know that the passport details  given  to
    its author, Mr Mansur, and upon which he  based  the  contents  of  his
    letter were not  accurate.   In  the  absence  of  any  other  credible
    explanation, we find that those details were provided to Mr  Mansur  by
    the appellant.  It is clear to us that the  appellant  has  been  faced
    with the problem  of  attempting  to  show  to  the  Tribunal  that  he
    possesses a false passport when, in fact, his passport is genuine.   In
    that  context,  we  have  no  doubt  at  all  that  the  appellant  has
    deliberately sought to mislead Mr Mansur by providing false details  to
    him.  When the appellant's actual passport details were provided to the
    Palestinian Mission it did not hesitate in confirming that the passport
    is genuine.

15. We  find  that  the  appellant's  conduct  in  his  dealings  with  the
    Palestinian authority in the United Kingdom are such that we are unable
    to consider any part of his account as  reliable.   We  find  that  the
    appellant did not obtain his passport by way of bribery.   We  find  in
    consequence that any record of the appellant's detention  in  1990  was
    either not present on the databases consulted by the issuing  authority
    or had never been or was no longer considered to be of such  importance
    as to  justify  denying  the  appellant  a  passport.   We  reject  the
    appellant's claim that, upon release from detention, he was  forced  to
    sign a blank confession or that any attempt was made to recruit him  as
    an Israeli spy.  In the light of the fact  that  a  passport  has  been
    issued to  the  appellant  relatively  recently,  we  do  not  find  it
    reasonably likely that the appellant's detention in 1990 would come  to
    the attention of Israeli or Palestinian officials at the borders of the
    Occupied  Territories,  or,  if  the  information  is  known  to  those
    officials,  it  would  frustrate  the  appellant's  entry  into   those
    territories; we emphasise that, if the fact of the detention  had  ever
    been a serious problem for the appellant, then we find  that  he  would
    never have been issued with a genuine passport in the first instance.

16. Bringing together those findings in order to create  a  factual  matrix
    upon which to base our analysis, we find that this appellant  is  a  43
    year old Palestinian male who was arrested and briefly detained in 1990
    in Gaza.  We find that no attempt was made to force him to sign a blank
    confession or to compel him to work for the Israelis as a spy.  He will
    present to the border authorities in Palestine as an individual holding
    a genuine and extant Palestinian passport and who has  no  criminal  or
    other security record which would give rise to any suspicion that he is
    anything other than a law abiding, expatriate Palestinian returning  to
    his homeland.

17. We  have  to  consider  whether  such  an  individual,  displaying  the
    characteristics which we  find  he  possesses,  may  safely  return  to
    Palestine (Occupied Territories) at the present time.  As at  the  date
    of the Upper Tribunal hearing, he  has  a  genuine  passport.   The  23
    October letter, although genuine, is  of  limited  use  in  determining
    whether the appellant would be admitted  to  the  Occupied  Territories
    because it is, as the author, Mr Mansur, has  stated,  based  on  false
    details.   In  order  to  determine  whether  the  appellant  could  be
    readmitted to the Occupied Territories, we have had regard  to  country
    guidance and other jurisprudence together with the background  material
    provided to us.  In HS  (Palestinian  -  return  to  Gaza)  Palestinian
    territories CG [2011] UKUT 124 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal found that:

         Palestinians from Gaza with passports  (expired  passports  can  be
         renewed via a straightforward procedure) are unlikely to experience
         problems in obtaining and,  if  necessary  getting  extensions  of,
         visas from the Egyptian authorities to enter Egypt and  cross  into
         Gaza via the Rafah Crossing.

    We note also the observations of the court in El Kott and Others [2012]
    EUECJ C-364/11 [77]:

         It should be added that Article 11(f) of Directive 2004/83, read in
         conjunction with Article 14(1)  thereof,  must  be  interpreted  as
         meaning that the person concerned ceases to be a refugee if  he  is
         able to return to the UNRWA area of  operations  in  which  he  was
         formerly habitually resident because the circumstances which led to
         that person qualifying as a refugee no longer exist.

18. The appellant told us that he had made enquires about obtaining  a  new
    ID card which he claims he would need in addition to  his  passport  in
    order to gain admission to the Occupied  Territories.   Given  that  we
    find that this appellant has very little credibility, we do not  accept
    that he has made any such enquiries.  We find that  the  appellant  has
    failed to discharge the burden of proving that he would  be  unable  to
    obtain an ID card or any other documentation which he  may  require  in
    addition to his passport in order to pass into the Occupied Territories
    through Egypt.  In the light of HS, we find that this  appellant  would
    be able to return to the Occupied Territories without facing any facing
    any risk of persecution or ill-treatment.  It follows that  his  asylum
    Article 3 ECHR appeals must be dismissed. Having regard to same factual
    matrix which we have described above, we find also that  the  appellant
    is not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

19. Ms Faryl submitted that the appellant should also be entitled to remain
    in the United Kingdom under Article 8 ECHR (private  life).   We  have,
    however, been given no evidence whatever as to the nature  and  quality
    of the private life which the appellant enjoys in  the  United  Kingdom
    although we accept he may have developed some private life here  during
    the four years of his residence.  However, we find that the appellant's
    removal in pursuit of the legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  immigration
    control would  not  cause  a  disproportionate  interference  with  his
    private life, the essentials elements of which he may seek to establish
    elsewhere.  We note also that his close  family  members  live  in  the
    Philippines. The Article 8 ECHR appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

20. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside,  we
    have remade the decision.  This appeal is dismissed on asylum  grounds.
    This appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.   This  appellant  is
    not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.



Signed        Date 24 January 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

