
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04583/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th March 2016                            |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                          jeganathan saravanamuthu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Mahmood, Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  [  ]  1983.   He
    first arrived in the UK on 10th September 2013 when having been refused
    leave to enter he claimed asylum.  That application was refused for the
    reasons set out in the Respondent's letter of 19th February 2015.   The
    Appellant appealed, and his appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hussain (the Judge) sitting at Birmingham on 18th June 2015.   He
    decided to dismiss the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection,  and
    human rights grounds for the reasons given in his Decision  dated  23rd
    June 2015.  The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on
    28th August 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At  the  hearing,  the  Judge  first  refused  an  application  for  an
    adjournment made on behalf of the Appellant.  His reasons for so  doing
    are given at paragraphs 3 to 11 inclusive of the Decision.  In refusing
    the application, the Judge stated that he had taken  into  account  the
    overriding objective given in Rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-
    tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.

 4. The Judge went on to dismiss the appeal for the following reasons.  The
    Judge found the evidence of the Appellant to be lacking in  credibility
    and rejected his account that he was a member of  a  family  associated
    with the LTTE.  The Appellant had worked for a company called  Nek  Tek
    owned by the LTTE.  He had been detained by the Sri  Lankan  Army.   He
    had been  beaten  and  otherwise  abused  which  had  resulted  in  the
    Appellant suffering a broken left arm.  The Judge took into account the
    fact that the Appellant had delayed  in  applying  for  asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom and found his credibility to be damaged  accordingly  in
    accordance  with  Section  8  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment   of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  The Judge  considered  a  report  from  the
    Appellant's GP, Dr Malik, to which the Judge attached little weight  as
    it was not in compliance with the Istanbul Protocol.   The  Judge  also
    took account of the fact that the Appellant had lived in Malaysia for a
    period of five years, but did not accept that the  Appellant  had  been
    recognised as a refugee there.  The Judge also took  into  account  the
    fact that the Appellant  had  returned  voluntarily  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    September 2012, and later had been able to leave that  country  without
    difficulty.  Otherwise, in deciding credibility, the Judge identified a
    number of inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence which  the  Judge
    described as unreliable.  The Judge also identified  various  parts  of
    the Appellant's  evidence  as  being  improbable.   Finally  the  Judge
    decided that even if it was the case that the Appellant had had  a  low
    level of involvement with the LTTE, he did not come within any  of  the
    risk categories identified in GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Mahmood argued that the Judge had erred in
    law in reaching these conclusions.  In particular, the Judge had  erred
    in  law  by  refusing  the  application  for   an   adjournment.    The
    Respondent's Bundle had been served  upon  the  Appellant's  solicitors
    only two days prior to the hearing, and the Appellant should have  been
    given  the  opportunity  to  produce  a  proper  medical  report.   The
    Appellant should not be made to suffer the consequences of the  failure
    of his previous representatives to prepare his case properly.

 6. Mr Mahmood went on to argue that the Judge's assessment of  credibility
    was flawed.  Following the decision in JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA
    Civ 878, the Judge should not have taken the provisions of Section 8 of
    the 2004 Act as his starting point in assessing credibility.   Further,
    it should not have been held against the Appellant  that  his  previous
    representatives had failed to supply a proper medical report.  Finally,
    Mr Mahmood argued  that  the  Judge  had  erred  by  making  inadequate
    findings.  For example, he had made no findings in respect of the claim
    that members of the Appellant's family had been persecuted  as  members
    of the LTTE.

 7. In response, Mr Whitwell referred to his Rule 24  response  and  argued
    that there had been no such errors of law.  The Judge had  decided  the
    adjournment application in accordance with the  Procedure  Rules.   The
    Judge had been correct to find that refusing the application would  not
    have resulted in prejudice to the Appellant particularly as the  delays
    in the case had been the fault of the Appellant.   There  had  been  no
    mention of any further medical evidence at the Case Management  Review.



 8. Mr Whitwell went on to submit that when assessing credibility the Judge
    had not given undue weight to the Appellant's  delay  in  applying  for
    asylum.  This had been no more than a factor  amongst  many  which  the
    Judge had considered.  Finally, Mr Whitwell argued that  in  any  event
    any error of law was not material.  Taking the Appellant's case at  its
    highest, the Appellant did not come within any of the  risk  categories
    identified in GJ and Others.

 9. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  therefore  I
    do not set aside.  In particular,  I  find  no  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge not to grant the  adjournment  requested  at  the
    hearing.  This is a matter within the discretion of the Judge,  and  in
    the Decision he gave sufficient and cogent reasons for his refusal.  He
    correctly took into account  the  overriding  objective  given  in  the
    Procedure Rules, and although he did  not  specifically  refer  to  the
    decision in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), he
    decided that refusing the application to adjourn  would  not  prejudice
    the Appellant and was therefore not unfair.

10. I also find no error of law in the Judge's finding as  to  credibility.
    The Judge carefully analysed all of the relevant evidence at paragraphs
    24 to 45 inclusive of the Decision and gave a number of reasons for his
    finding  which  included  examples   of   various   discrepancies   and
    implausibilities in the Appellant's evidence.   It  is  true  that  the
    Judge began his analysis by considering the Appellant's delay in  apply
    for asylum, but it is apparent from what the Judge  subsequently  wrote
    that this was just one factor amongst many which he had considered.  It
    is apparent that he gave this factor no  more  weight  than  any  other
    factor.  Finally, I find that the Judge did make  findings  as  to  the
    involvement of the Appellant's family with the  LTTE.   This  is  dealt
    with at paragraph 43 of the Decision.



11. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

