
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04895/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 November 2014                        |On 11 November 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr S Chelvan, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision by the Secretary of State to refuse  to  recognise  her  as  a
    refugee.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity  direction,  and  I
    find that it is appropriate to continue this direction for the purposes
    of these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal, given  the  nature  of  the
    issues.

 2. The claimant is a national of Albania, whose date of birth is  18  July
    1991.  She claimed asylum at ASU Croydon on 9 December 2013.  She  said
    she had left Albania on 6 September 2013 by ferry in order to travel to
    Italy.  As soon as she arrived there she got into a car  and  travelled
    to Belgium where she stayed until 2 December 2013.  She was  trafficked
    as a prostitute to Belgium.  She left Belgium on  2  December  2013  by
    lorry and arrived in the UK on 4 December 2013  at  an  unknown  place.
    She could not produce her own national passport because it was retained
    by the people in Italy after she got off the ferry.

 3. She was asked to briefly explain why she could not return to  her  home
    country.  She said if she went back to Albania, her brother would  kill
    her.  Also the traffickers if they found her  would  force  her  to  do
    prostitution again.  Her father had passed away and her mother and  two
    sisters were ill.  One of her sisters  had  mental  problems,  and  the
    other sister had sight problems and her mother had a  heart  condition.
    Her brother used her as a servant.  Her brother had become head of  the
    family after her father's death.  He abused her and beat  her  up.   He
    told her that she had to obey him.

 4. She met this guy called Kastriot with whom she fell in love and decided
    to flee Albania.  Whilst on the ferry, she telephoned her brother.  But
    he became very angry and told her that she had  brought  shame  to  the
    family, and she should not dare to come back to Albania.

 5. Kastriot had told her that he lived in Belgium, and he would take  care
    of her there.  Upon arriving in Belgium, they went to a hotel in Gwent.
    He told her to change, get freshened up and he  would  come  back  with
    some food.  About 30 minutes later an Albanian lady came  to  her  room
    with some food.  Another man came to her room and she asked  him  about
    Kastriot to which he replied "don't worry about him".  She was  slapped
    by him and fell down.  Next morning she  found  herself  naked  in  the
    room.  The Albanian lady and the man who had hit her came to  the  room
    and said that she would be working for them as a  prostitute.   If  she
    tried to escape, they would kill her.  She  stayed  in  the  hotel  for
    three months until another Albanian came and took her  away.   He  said
    that she was going to the UK, and someone else  would  be  waiting  for
    her.  She was with two other girls.  They travelled in a  lorry.   When
    they arrived some guys were waiting in a car.  They got  into  the  car
    and one of the girls became sick halfway  through  the  journey.   They
    stopped the car to deal with her, and she took the opportunity  to  run
    away from them.  She met some people and asked for help.  She then  met
    a Kosovan family who helped her.

 6. The claimant was subsequently interviewed about her asylum claim on  13
    January 2014.

 7. On 23 June 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing to
    recognise  the  claimant  as  a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise  requiring
    international  protection.   She  summarised  her  claim   as   fearing
    mistreatment on return due to her membership  of  a  particular  social
    group, namely as a former victim of human trafficking for the  purposes
    of sexual exploitation, and due to a fear of an honour killing  by  her
    brother.  She said that a referral had been made on her behalf  to  the
    National Referral Mechanism in order for a competent authority to  make
    a decision as to whether she fell within the definition of a victim  of
    trafficking as established by the Council of Europe Convention  Against
    Trafficking in Human Beings.  That part of her  claim  had  been  dealt
    with in a separate consideration.

 8. Although the competent authority had made a decision by the date of the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, and possibly by  the  date  of  the
    refusal letter, the decision of the  competent  authority  was  not  in
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  it  was  also  not  in
    evidence before me.

 9. In the refusal letter the Secretary of State analysed the  claim  under
    six headings: family  life  in  Albania;  relationship  with  Kastriot;
    flight to Belgium, escape in  the  UK;  paragraph  339L;  and  risk  on
    return.

10. With regard to the first topic, the Secretary of State did  not  accept
    the claimant's account of her family life in  Albania  because  it  was
    inconsistent with representations made by  her  brother  Ilir  when  he
    applied for a visa in  2006.   Home  Office  records  showed  that  her
    brother Ilir had entered the United Kingdom illegally in 1999  and  was
    in the UK until he was removed from the  country  in  2004.   He  later
    returned to the UK in 2005 due  to  his  relationship  with  a  British
    national.  Given that she stated she had lived with her family  members
    up until 2013, it was  considered  inconsistent  she  was  unaware  her
    brother had come to the UK and had lived in the UK for  several  years,
    particularly as he spoke English.  Also, given her  brother's  ties  to
    persons in the UK, such as his  wife/fianc�e  or  his  cousin  who  was
    resident in the UK in 2006, it was  considered  inconsistent  that  the
    appellant claimed to know no one here before coming to the UK.

11. On the second topic, her relationship with Kastriot, the  Secretary  of
    State found that her account was internally inconsistent,  but  it  was
    not externally corroborated and remained unsubstantiated.   Accordingly
    consideration would later be given as to whether  to  advance  her  the
    benefit of the doubt.

12. On the topic of events since leaving Albania and travelling to Belgium,
    the Secretary of State accepted that  the  claimant  had  been  broadly
    internally consistent in this aspect of her account, but again  it  was
    not externally corroborated and remained unsubstantiated.  Accordingly,
    consideration would later be given as to whether  to  advance  her  the
    benefit of the doubt.

13. On the topic of escape in the UK, the lack of safeguards to prevent her
    escape appeared inconsistent with her account, as did the  traffickers'
    decision to pull up in a  public  area  and  to  put  themselves  in  a
    position where matters were not fully under their control,  solely  due
    to a girl being ill in the car.  But irrespective of the above  issues,
    the claimant had been broadly consistent in this aspect of her account.
     Consideration would be given later as to whether to  advance  her  the
    benefit of the doubt.

14. On the topic of  paragraph  339L,  the  Secretary  of  State  said  the
    claimant  had  provided  a  plausible  explanation  for  her  lack   of
    documentation, stating that her  passport  had  been  taken  from  her.
    However, for the reasons given  previously,  not  all  aspects  of  her
    account had been found to be coherent and plausible.  Consideration had
    been given  to  her  general  credibility  under  Section  8.   It  was
    considered she had deliberately withheld information  relating  to  her
    family members.  As she had not met all five stages of the test set out
    in paragraph 339L, it was not compulsory to award her  the  benefit  of
    the  doubt.   When  looking  at   the   likelihood   of   her   claimed
    unsubstantiated events having occurred, it was noted  that  aspects  of
    her account had been found to be incoherent and  implausible  and  that
    there were concerns over her credibility.  As such, the reliability  of
    her verbal evidence was doubted.  Given this,  it  was  considered  the
    benefit of the doubt could not be given to her because there were  real
    concerns that she was not a person in  genuine  need  of  international
    protection.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Andonian sitting in the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Taylor House on 18  August  2014.   The  claimant  was
    represented  by  Mr  Chelvan  of  Counsel,  and  the  Home  Office  was
    represented by Mr  Panayi.   In  his  subsequent  determination,  Judge
    Andonian set  out  at  paragraphs  2  to  7  the  claim  as  originally
    presented.

16. Although it is not immediately apparent from the determination  itself,
    the judge went on to set out in  paragraphs  8  to  11  the  claimant's
    evidence by way of appeal.  She was pregnant as a result of a one-night
    stand in the United Kingdom with a man whose identity was not known  to
    her.  She came from a place where honour was protected, and  she  faced
    even more risk now because she  was  pregnant  outside  marriage.   She
    could not return to Albania with a child born out of  wedlock  with  no
    name of the father or his details.  All she knew was  that  the  father
    spoke Albanian and English.

17. She did not know anything about her brother being in the UK or  why  he
    did not mention their sister Kozeta in his visa applications.  All  she
    knew was that he had left home when she was  very  young  and  returned
    after their father died.  She was around 8 years old when  her  brother
    left home, and 13 when he returned to the family home.

18. She addressed the point raised by the Home Office in the refusal letter
    that she would not maintain a positive view of Kastriot, if it was true
    that he had trafficked her to the UK.  She said she  was  asked  during
    the substantial asylum interview what was his personality, and she  was
    describing his personality from before he trafficked her.  He was  good
    with her whilst in Albania.  He was a true gentleman whilst in Albania.
     That was what she was trying to say during the interview.  She was not
    saying he was a good person now.

19. The judge's findings begin at paragraph 12.  He said the  claimant  was
    not very intelligent, and that there was a real fear of her  being  re-
    trafficked were she to return as an attractive young 23-year-old single
    woman with no male support and with an illegitimate child.   The  judge
    observed that she was currently heavily pregnant.  The judge continued:



         She is attractive looking and has very limited education  as  well.
         She said she also feared honour killing at the hand of her  brother
         and she would be ostracised from her extended  family  in  Albania,
         and also from the community  and  honour  killings  are  not  taken
         seriously by the police as  they  are  considered  to  be  domestic
         family matters.  She also said she could not  internally  relocate,
         as Albania is a small country and she will be found out.  She is  a
         young woman with a child out of wedlock.  She said it was not  safe
         for a woman to live in Albania without  male  support  and  with  a
         child out of wedlock, she was also afraid of being found out sooner
         or later by her brother and be killed.  It was also  argued  before
         me that the appellant's brother is not a man of any credibility  as
         his claim before this Tribunal when he was in the  UK  long  before
         the appellant looking to stay proved to be lacking in  credibility,
         and it was argued that the respondent should not  accordingly  take
         any notice of what the brother said in his appeal  many  years  ago
         about his family before this Tribunal in trying to pick  faults  in
         the appellant's credibility as her  brother  was  a  person  of  no
         credibility as found by the Tribunal at the  time.   It  was  clear
         from the determination of the Tribunal in the brother's appeal that
         he even lied about his nationality.  He said he was from Serbia and
         Montenegro.  He had lied about his family name, about  his  parents
         referring to his mother as an Egyptian gypsy, and about his  father
         as an Ashkali gypsy from Kosovo who died in 1998; he also lied  and
         said his mother had died in 1998 as well.  A copy of the  brother's
         determination in which he uses a false identity is also on the file
         and was with the respondent's bundle.  The appellant said  she  was
         23 years of age and was in fear of being re-trafficked as  a  young
         woman with no male support  and  with  an  illegitimate  child  and
         completely defenceless.

20. The judge went on  to  address  the  issue  of  risk  on  return.   The
    Secretary of State had argued that the claimant could find  shelter  to
    go to, but this was not a practical solution for the  claimant.   There
    was nothing to show that the shelters for women and  NGOs  could  offer
    effective  assistance  or  protection  to  the  claimant  in   Albania.
    Furthermore, the claimant could not relocate internally as a victim  of
    trafficking.  The judge found she was at  risk  of  re-trafficking  all
    over Albania from her traffickers.  She was  also  at  risk  of  honour
    killing from her brother in Albania, who appeared to be  a  man  of  no
    credibility whatsoever.

21. The judge observed at paragraph 17 that the US State Department  Report
    stated Albania remained a source country  for  trafficking  adults  and
    minors.  It made it clear that trafficked women can be at risk  of  re-
    trafficking on return to Albania.  It was reasonable to conclude on the
    lower standard of proof that the claimant was at risk in  that  regard.
    The same report corroborated her concern in that much  of  Albania  was
    governed by  a  strict  code  of  honour  which  not  only  meant  that
    trafficked women would have direct  difficulty  in  reintegrating  into
    their  home  area  on  return,  but  also  their  ability  to  relocate
    internally would be affected.  It also made clear that those, like this
    claimant who had children out of wedlock, were particularly vulnerable.



22. At paragraph 19 he said he considered the case of AM and  BM  (Albania)
    CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC).  This made it clear that trafficked  women  in
    Albania might well be members of a particular social group on that fact
    alone.  Whether they are at risk of  persecution  on  account  of  such
    membership and whether they would be able to access  a  sufficiency  of
    protection from the authorities depended upon individual circumstances,
    including but not limited to the following:

    (1)  the social status and economic standing of the trafficked  woman's
    family;

    (2)  the level of education of the trafficked woman or her family;

    (3)  the trafficked woman's state of health;

    (4)  the presence of an illegitimate child;

    (5)  the area of origin of the trafficked woman's family; and

    (6)  the trafficked woman's age.

    The judge found that her family had no social status in their  society,
    that they were fairly poor and lived a meagre existence  as  a  family.
    The appellant had a limited education.  She was hugely depressed  as  a
    result of what had happened to her, and now was  fearful  of  returning
    with an illegitimate child and no male support; and  she  was  a  young
    attractive woman from an area of Albania, namely Shkoze (Tirana)  where
    honour was protected.

23. The judge summarised his conclusions at paragraph 20 as follows;

         On the evidence before me which I have fully considered, I  believe
         on the lower standard of proof ... that  she  has  been  trafficked
         from Albania, and on the same lower standard I consider that  there
         is a risk to her being re-trafficked were she  to  be  returned  to
         Albania.  I believe she is a member of a particular social group of
         women in Albania.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

24. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   The  judge
    had failed to give reasons or any  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
    material matters (ground 1) and/or the judge had failed  to  take  into
    account and/or resolve conflicts of fact on  material  matters  (ground
    2).  The judge had failed to provide any reasons for accepting that the
    claimant was trafficked to the UK, which was not accepted by the  SSHD.
    The judge simply made findings in respect of her ability to relocate or
    seek protection in the light of AM and BM (trafficked women) Albania CG
    [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC).  In doing so, the judge had not engaged with  the
    main aspect of the claim.  The claim to have been trafficked to the  UK
    had not been accepted in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  for  "the
    several reasons" given in paragraphs 22 to 45 for rejecting  her  claim
    to have been a victim of trafficking.  The judge had failed to  address
    any of the issues raised in the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter,  and  the
    determination was thereby flawed.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

25. On 25 September 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  V  A  Osborne  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         Within the determination the First-tier Tribunal Judge  appears  to
         have simply accepted the [claimant's] claim to have been trafficked
         without making clear findings based upon the opposing  views  taken
         by the [SSHD] and the [claimant].  Accordingly the judge has failed
         to make findings on a material issue.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

26. At the hearing before me,  Mr  Chelvan  relied  on  a  robust  Rule  24
    response that he had settled opposing the appeal.  He drew my attention
    to VHR (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014]  UKUT  00367  (IAC),  the
    head note of which reads as follows: "Appeals should not be mounted  on
    the basis of a litany of forensic criticisms of particular findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, whilst ignoring the basic legal test which the
    appellant has to meet."

27. In that decision, which was reached by a panel  consisting  of  Haddon-
    Cave J and Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson, the Tribunal  at  paragraph  24
    said:

         As McCombe  LJ  in  VW  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  522  said:
         'Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,
         when a First-tier Tribunal Judge has given  a  judgment  explaining
         why he has reached a particular decision, for seeking to burrow out
         industriously areas of evidence that have  been  less  fully  dealt
         with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for  saying  the
         judge's decision is legally flawed because it didn't  deal  with  a
         particular matter more fully.  In my judgment, with  respect,  that
         is no basis upon which to sustain a proper challenge to  a  judge's
         finding of fact'.

28. Mr Chelvan submitted that the judge  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    finding the claimant credible on her core claim of being trafficked  to
    the United Kingdom, and that in essence  the  error  of  law  challenge
    mounted by the Secretary of State was no more  than  an  expression  of
    disagreement with findings that were reasonably open to the judge.

29. Mr Melvin submitted that the refusal letter was lengthy, and the  judge
    failed to deal with numerous adverse credibility  points.   The  issues
    raised were too complex to be dealt with satisfactorily by the judge in
    half a dozen paragraphs.  The reasoning was inadequate.

Discussion

30. I do not consider that the  error  of  law  challenge  mounted  by  the
    Secretary of State  exhibits  the  mischief  deprecated  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in VHR.  On the contrary, the error of law challenge is at the
    opposite end of the spectrum.  Far from subjecting the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal to a litany of forensic criticisms,  the  error  of
    law challenge is confined to one simple point, which is that the  judge
    did not adequately engage with the reasons given in the refusal  letter
    for rejecting the credibility of the trafficking claim.

31. I consider that the error of law challenge has  prima  facie  merit  in
    that the judge's reasoning on  this  aspect  of  the  claim  is  scant,
    repetitive and to some extent circular.  The judge does not always draw
    a clear distinction between the claimant's evidence  and  what  he  has
    found to be proved.  He also does not draw a clear distinction  between
    the question of whether there is a well-founded fear  of  the  claimant
    being re-trafficked and  the  anterior  question  of  whether  she  had
    discharged the burden of proving that she was trafficked in  the  first
    place.

32. Accordingly, if the determination is considered in isolation, there  is
    considerable force in  the  Secretary  of  State's  argument  that  the
    determination does not discharge the vital function  of  explaining  to
    the losing party why he/she has lost.  However it is not right to  look
    at the determination in isolation for two reasons.  Firstly, the  error
    of law challenge requires me to review the  refusal  letter  so  as  to
    ascertain whether the judge has materially failed to  engage  with  it.
    Secondly and in any event, the Secretary of  State  can  reasonably  be
    expected to bring to bear her knowledge of the contents of the  refusal
    letter when seeking to understand why a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has
    rejected her case.

33. As I have sought to highlight earlier in this decision,  there  was  in
    essence only one  major  adverse  credibility  point  advanced  in  the
    refusal letter.  This was the divergence between the claimant's account
    of her family circumstances in Albania, and the account  given  by  her
    brother.  The rejection of the core claim of trafficking flows entirely
    from this one adverse credibility point.  For although the Secretary of
    State separately identified what she described as  two  inconsistencies
    in the trafficking account, she placed very little weight on them.  She
    placed so little weight on them that she characterised  the  claimant's
    account of trafficking as being throughout internally consistent or  at
    least broadly internally consistent.

34. So, on analysis, the Secretary  of  State  did  not  advance  "several"
    reasons in the refusal letter for disbelieving the  appellant's  claim.
    In fact, the Secretary of State only advanced one major reason  (giving
    information about her family members inconsistent with  that  given  by
    her brother and thus deliberately withholding information  relating  to
    her family members) and two subsidiary and minor (in the  Secretary  of
    State's own estimation) reasons: namely the claimant's  description  of
    Kastriot as being a "good guy irrelevant of what happened from Belgium"
    (see  paragraph  28  of  the   refusal   letter)   and   the   asserted
    implausibility of her alleged traffickers allowing her to  escape  once
    she had reached the UK  (see  paragraphs  37  and  38  of  the  refusal
    letter).

35. The judge's reason for finding in the claimant's  favour  on  the  main
    adverse credibility  point  is  tolerably  clear,  which  is  that  the
    Secretary of State could not reasonably rely on the  brother's  account
    of the family's circumstances as contradicting the  claimant's  account
    when the brother was a liar and a person of no credibility  whatsoever;
    and a previous Tribunal had made findings to this effect.

36. The major adverse credibility point having thus been swept away,  there
    was on the Secretary of State's own analysis nothing  left  to  justify
    the rejection of the core claim of trafficking beyond.,  as  previously
    canvassed, the two subsidiary credibility points were not  regarded  by
    the Secretary of State as being sufficient in themselves  to  undermine
    the credibility of the core claim.

37. In any event, the judge set out at paragraph 10  of  his  determination
    the claimant's explanation for what she had said about Kastriot in  the
    course of her asylum interview.  Although this is not spelt out, it  is
    tolerably clear that the judge found the claimant's explanation  to  be
    persuasive and credible.

38. I accept that there is no reference in the determination to  the  other
    subsidiary credibility challenge, concerning the  plausibility  of  her
    escape from her alleged traffickers once she had arrived in the UK.  So
    to that extent the determination does not engage with a reason given in
    the refusal letter for disbelieving the trafficking account.  But given
    the low status accorded  to  this  adverse  credibility  point  in  the
    refusal letter, I do not consider that the  failure  by  the  judge  to
    address this point discloses a material error of law.

39. In retrospect, it is apparent that at the date of the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal both parties knew the outcome of  the  referral  to
    the competent authority on trafficking. But  neither  party  sought  to
    rely on the findings of the competent authority  in  support  of  their
    respective  positions.   If  the  competent  authority   rejected   the
    trafficking claim, and if the judge had been provided with  a  copy  of
    its reasons for doing so, this would have triggered  an  obligation  on
    the part of the judge to engage with the reasons given by the competent
    authority as part of his decision making process.  But, as it was,  the
    Secretary of State apparently  relied  only  on  the  very  narrow  and
    inherently weak basis for rejecting the  trafficking  claim  which  was
    canvassed in the refusal letter. For the error of  law  challenge  does
    not include a claim that Mr  Panayi  advanced  additional  reasons  for
    disbelieving the trafficking claim, based inter alia on the  claimant's
    performance in cross-examination, which the judge failed to address. So
    judged holistically, the determination  of  Judge  Andonian  adequately
    explains why the claimant was successful  in  her  appeal  against  the
    refusal of asylum.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson           11 November 2014

