
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04299/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 May 2014                                |23 May 2014                  |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     n r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Davison instructed by Indra Sebastian
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  on  22  January
    1976.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 December 2008 and claimed
    asylum.   On  27  April  2009,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's claim for asylum.  Thereafter, the  appellant  appealed  to
    the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal.  Following a hearing  on  30  July
    2009, his appeal was dismissed by Judge Alakija.  The appellant  sought
    reconsideration which was initially refused by the  AIT  on  25  August
    2009 but was subsequently ordered by the High Court on 3 December 2009.
     On 27 April 2010, Upper Tribunal Judge King found an error of law  and
    set  aside  Judge  Alakija's  decision  and  directed   a   substantive
    rehearing.  That substantive hearing was initially listed  in  November
    2010 but was adjourned on that and a number  of  subsequent  occasions.
    On 1 October 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker remitted  the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing.

 3. The appeal was heard  by  Judge  B  Lloyd  on  22  November  2013.   He
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and
    human rights grounds.  The appellant sought permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal and on 29 January  2014  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Renton) granted the appellant permission to appeal.  Thus,  the  appeal
    came before me.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 4. Before Judge Lloyd, the appellant's case was that he had been  arrested
    and detained on 27 April 2008 when the police made a security check  on
    his apartment.  He was  taken  to  the  police  station  where  he  was
    questioned and later that day he was released on bail.  On 13 May 2008,
    the appellant and  his  room  mate  were  stopped  by  the  police  and
    questioned as to what they were doing, where they worked and where they
    lived before they drove away.  Later that night, the appellant saw nine
    people in civilian clothes with guns outside the flat and he recognised
    one of them  as  a  police  officer  from  earlier  in  the  day.   The
    appellant, who went outside, was asked lots  of  questions  before  the
    individuals left.

 5. On 17 August 2008, whilst the appellant was  staying  at  his  cousin's
    home, four men from the Special Task Force (STF) went to his  flat  and
    questioned  his  room  mate  about  the  appellant  and  searched   the
    appellant's belongings, taking an old mobile phone and  deleting  files
    from his computer.  They  threatened  the  appellant's  room  mate  and
    warned him that if anything went wrong they would be back.

 6. On 10 September 2008, four men from the STF  came  to  the  appellant's
    flat again and questioned him about two of his friends,  "A"  and  "K",
    and told the appellant that they were involved with the LTTE  and  were
    suspected of involvement with bombings.  The  appellant  was  asked  to
    show the STF where K was boarding.  The appellant was taken in  a  jeep
    to the house where he believed K was living but on  arrival  they  were
    told by the owners that K had returned to Jaffna.  The  STF  drove  the
    appellant to other places and eventually dropped him  off  in  a  rural
    area.

 7. The appellant's case was that on 5 June 2008, he reported the  incident
    of harassment  by  the  police  to  the  Human  Rights  Commission  and
    subsequently reported that incident and also the visit by the  STF  who
    came to his flat, when he was not there and took items from him, to the
    'Home for Human Rights' organisation which campaigns for  human  rights
    in Sri Lanka.  The appellant claims that after the  incident  involving
    the STF search for K, he went to live at his  parents'  home  where  he
    stayed for approximately two months.  During that time,  friends  of  A
    and K visited him and it was then that he found out they were  involved
    with the LTTE.  He was accused of reporting them to the authorities and
    threatened that he would be harmed if  A  and  K  were  caught  by  the
    police.  The appellant says he reported this to the police station  and
    was told that as the LTTE were  involved  the  case  would  be  made  a
    priority but he  did  not  hear  anything  back  from  the  police.  He
    continued to live at his parents' home until he could arrange to  leave
    Sri Lanka which he did, having obtained a visit visa to the  UK  on  25
    September 2008.

 8. The appellant claimed that he would be at  risk  from  the  authorities
    because he was a Tamil who had a  history  of  being  questioned  about
    links with the LTTE.

 9. In addition,  the  appellant  relied  upon  photographs  taken  at  the
    beginning of 2006, when the appellant was in the UK, taken with the son
    of the President of Sri Lanka and "EK", a prominent member of the LTTE.
     These photographs had been used in articles in a Sri Lankan  newspaper
    and circulated on a number  of  Sri  Lankan  websites.   The  appellant
    feared that the photographs with EK placed him at increased risk.

10. Judge Lloyd dismissed the appellant's appeal on two bases.   First,  he
    did not accept all of the appellant's account of what  he  claimed  had
    happened to him in Sri Lanka.  At paras 58-60, Judge Lloyd said this:

         "58. I find that the basic factual matrix which was set out by  the
             Appellant was likely to have been true.  That is  to  say,  he
             was briefly detained by the police while they  made  enquiries
             about  his  connection  with  the  two  persons  in  question.
             However, I find the evidence supports a conclusion that he was
             cleared of all suspicion.  I find that it is  likely  that  he
             has relied on the initial event of his helping the police with
             their enquiries to create a highly exaggerated  account  which
             has been intended to support an asylum claim  in  the  UK.   I
             think that the reference to his being harassed  by  a  drunken
             police officer in May 2008 and a visit from the STF in  August
             2008 are fabricated.  If  there  was  some  follow-up  by  the
             authorities it is in my view more likely to have been  in  the
             context of the complaint he had made about his detention.   It
             had nothing to do with any suspicion that he was involved with
             the LTTE.

         59.  I do not as such disbelieve him  when  he  says  that  he  was
             subject to enquiry, therefore, in April  2008.   However,  his
             credibility goes no further than that in my view.

         60.  I believe that after a period of return to Sri Lanka after the
             completion of his studies in the UK in 2006 he decided he  had
             a better future in the UK.  Events of  April  2008  I  believe
             provided a convenient factual basis on which he then built  by
             exaggeration to put together the means of  securing  leave  to
             remain in the UK; so as to pursue his career and future here."

11. Secondly, Judge Lloyd applied the  country  guidance  case  of  GJ  and
    Others (Post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).  He concluded that the appellant, even if his account were true,
    did not fall within a risk category identified in GJ and Others.  Judge
    Lloyd's reasons are set out at para 61 of his determination as follows:

         "61. Having regard to the recent  determination  of  GJ  there  has
             therefore to be the  further  dimension  to  my  findings  and
             conclusions.  That is to say, even  if  there  were  any  real
             suspicion about the Appellant back in 2008, even  on  his  own
             evidence matters will have  fundamentally  changed  given  the
             massive  political  changes  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the  virtual
             obliteration of the LTTE.  I believe that GJ sets out  clearly
             what the potential risks are and who faces those  risks.   The
             Appellant does not in my conclusion fall within  any  category
             of potential risk.  He was on his own evidence found not to be
             connected with the terrorist activities of the LTTE."

The Submissions

12. On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Davison  submitted  that  the  judge's
    adverse credibility finding could not stand.

13. First, he submitted that it was not entirely clear what the  judge  had
    accepted  of  the  appellant's  account.   In  particular,  Mr  Davison
    submitted that the judge had made no finding in relation to whether the
    appellant had been released on bail and, if he had, whether he would be
    at risk on the basis that he would be subject to an arrest warrant and,
    therefore, be on a "stop" list which was one of the at risk  categories
    recognised in GJ and Others at para 256(7)(d).

14. Secondly, Mr Davison submitted that in reaching his adverse credibility
    finding, Judge Lloyd had failed to take  into  account  the  background
    documents which supported the appellant's account.  He referred me to a
    document at page 48 of the bundle which purports to be a  letter  dated
    14 May 2008 from the police station where the  appellant  was  detained
    and addressed to the appellant's employer, stating  that  he  had  been
    taken into custody on 27 April 2008 on suspicion of being  involved  in
    terrorist activities but:

         "[a]s it had been disclosed on enquiries made thereon that  he  had
         had no involvement in terrorist activities, he was released on bail
         at 19.10 hrs the same day."

15. Mr Davison also relied upon the letter from the 'Home for Human Rights'
    association at page 57 of the bundle dated 4 November 2008 which refers
    to the appellant making a complaint concerning his  initial  detention,
    his encounter with the police outside his flat and the visit and search
    of his flat by the STF on 17 August 2008.  Mr  Davison  submitted  that
    the judge had failed to take these documents into account in  assessing
    the appellant's credibility and the expert report of Simon Harris dated
    12 July 2009 which supported the authenticity or genuineness  of  these
    documents.

16. Thirdly, Mr Davison submitted that the judge had made  no  findings  in
    relation to the 2006 photographs which  showed  the  appellant  with  a
    prominent LTTE member and therefore the judge had  failed  to  consider
    whether the appellant fell within the risk category  identified  in  GJ
    and Others in para [356(7)(a)], namely:

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka."

17. Fourthly, relying upon the grounds, Mr Davison submitted that the judge
    had failed to consider whether the appellant was at  risk  outside  the
    categories recognised in GJ and Others and he relied upon the grant  of
    permission to appeal by the Court of Appeal in MP and  NT  (Sri  Lanka)
    (order dated 13 November 2013) in which the country  guidance  decision
    of GJ and Others is subject to challenge.  In its order  the  Court  of
    Appeal stated that:

         "Pending the final determination of this appeal  or  under  further
         order, individuals who fall outside the said risk categories should
         not for that reason alone have their claims  for  asylum  rejected,
         whether by the respondent or on appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
         or the Upper Tribunal."

18. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Richards  submitted  that  the  judge's
    decision should stand as there  was  no  material  error  of  law.   He
    submitted that the expert report added very little as it merely  stated
    that there was no particular feature that  would  persuade  the  expert
    that it was not genuine.  Mr Richards relied upon  the  fact  that  the
    letter from the police station  stated  that  the  appellant  had  been
    cleared of all suspicion and that was supported by the fact that he had
    remained for five months after he was released without any difficulty.

19. As regards GJ and Others, Mr Richards submitted that it  was  difficult
    to see how the judge could have come to any other conclusion that,  the
    appellant having been released on bail if that was the  case,  but  had
    been cleared of all suspicion, it could be suggested  that  he  was  at
    risk on the basis of being on a "stop list" because an  arrest  warrant
    had been issued.  Mr Richards submitted it was difficult on the judge's
    finding to see how the judge could possibly have come  to  a  different
    conclusion.

Discussion

20. The  appeals  process  in  this  case  has  been  somewhat  protracted.
    Nevertheless, I have come to the conclusion that the  judge's  findings
    cannot stand and the appeal must again be reheard.

21. First, I accept Mr Davison's submissions that the judge failed to  make
    a finding on whether the appellant had been released on bail and, if he
    had, whether  by  his  actions  he  had  effectively  jumped  bail  and
    therefore would be subject to an arrest warrant which would  bring  him
    within one of the risk categories in GJ and Others.

22. Secondly, the  judge  made  a  differential  credibility  finding.   He
    accepted that the appellant had been arrested  and  detained  in  April
    2008 but not that he had subsequently been of interest to  the  police,
    in particular by the STF whom the appellant claimed visited  in  August
    2008 and then again in September 2008.  In fact,  the  judge  makes  no
    reference in his finding to that second  visit  at  all.   Further,  in
    concluding that he did not accept that the incident in May 2008 and the
    visit in August 2008 had occurred but were "fabricated", the judge  did
    not consider the documents and  expert  evidence  which  provided  some
    support  to  the  appellant's  claim  that  these  incidents  occurred.
    Failing to take those documents into account, the judge  erred  in  law
    and his adverse credibility finding (so far as it went) cannot stand.

23. In addition, the judge made no findings in relation to the photographic
    evidence relied upon by  the  appellant  as  potentially  bringing  him
    within  the  risk  category  in  GJ  and  Others  identified  in   para
    [356(7)(a)].  I express no view on  the  strength  of  the  appellant's
    claim, even if the photographic evidence is accepted, that  will  be  a
    matter for the Tribunal rehearing the appeal.  Suffice it to  say  that
    the point is not unarguable.

24. Those are, in my judgment, sufficient reasons to set aside the  judge's
    decision and require the appeal to be reheard.  It is not necessary  to
    determine whether the judge erred in law in  failing  to  consider  the
    appellant's claim outside of the risk categories in GJ and Others.   In
    the absence of any sustainable findings, that matter  does  not  arise.
    It will be a matter for the Tribunal to consider, in the light  of  the
    Court of Appeal's conclusion on the correctness of GJ and Others and in
    the light of the Tribunal's factual findings on the appellant's claim.

Decision and Disposal

25. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under  Arts  2
    and 3 of the ECHR involved the making of an error of law.  The decision
    is set aside and must be remade.

26. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Art 8 was not challenged and stands.

27. Having considered the issues that arise, and in the light of  the  need
    to consider the continuing effect of GJ and Others following the  Court
    of Appeal's decision, it is appropriate that  the  decision  should  be
    remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  and  not  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

28. This appeal will, as  a  consequence,  be  relisted  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal for a resumed hearing de novo in relation to  the  appellant's
    asylum and humanitarian protection claims.

                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
