
[pic]
IAC

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04636/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reason Promulgated        |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    r. y.
                            (anonymity direction)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar, counsel, instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by Mr RY,  against  the  decision  promulgated  on  4
    September 2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  who  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

2.   Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify her or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

3.   The appeal by the appellant first came before me on 27 October 2015.

Background

4.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15 October  1989.   The
    appellant applied for a Tier 4 student visit on 11 July 2011 which  was
    issued on 3 October 2011 and the appellant travelled to the  UK  on  15
    October 2011.  He applied for asylum on 19 March 2014.  The  respondent
    refused that application on 27 February 2015 and  made  a  decision  to
    remove the appellant by way of  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 1999.

5.   The appellant's appeal against  that  refusal  was  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 12 August 2015.  The  judge  made  a  number  of
    positive credibility findings in  relation  to  the  appellant's  claim
    including in relation to the appellant's arrest and  detention  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities and the reasons for  that.   However  the  judge
    went on to find that the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka.  There were a number of reasons for that  finding  including
    that the appellant had not taken part in any diaspora activities in the
    UK and that the judge found that the authorities had not looked for him
    and therefore were no longer interested in  him.   The  central  reason
    however was that the appellant had submitted an  arrest  warrant  which
    the judge did not accept, as the appellant had given oral evidence that
    he had not attended court, yet the arrest warrant stated that after the
    appellant was arrested on 28 December  2010  he  was  produced  to  the
    Magistrates' Court in Colombo to request 90 days' detention order  from
    29 December 2010.  The judge found therefore that  the  arrest  warrant
    had been produced with a view to bolster the appellant's claim.

6.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal;
    there were two grounds of appeal:  The first was that the appellant had
    obtained a letter from the translator who translated the arrest warrant
    which confirmed that he had  made  a  mistake  and  that  the  relevant
    section should read that the 'suspect was referred to magistrate court,
    Colombo'.  The translator confirmed that the Sinhalese version  of  the
    documents does not mention that the appellant  was  'produced'  to  the
    court.  It was also submitted that  the  judge  erred  in  his  general
    consideration of that document.   The  second  ground  related  to  the
    judge's consideration of whether the authorities had been  looking  for
    the appellant in Sri Lanka,  specifically  after  the  appellant  left.
    Although a third ground argued that the judge erred in relation to  his
    findings about the appellant's brother, that was not pursued before  me
    and I was not satisfied that it had any merit.

7.   I found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred  in  failing  to  make
    findings on the appellant's evidence, which it  was  not  disputed  was
    before the Tribunal, that the authorities had continued to  search  for
    him after he had left Sri  Lanka.   This  was  arguably  of  particular
    significance if the arrest warrant were accepted as this was not issued
    until after the appellant had left Sri Lanka.

8.   I was satisfied, notwithstanding the arrest  warrant  issue,  that  the
    judge erred in failing to refer to or make any findings in relation  to
    the appellant's case that the authorities had continued to  search  for
    him after he had left Sri Lanka.  Although I accepted  that  the  judge
    found that the authorities were not interested in him when  he  was  in
    hiding, I was not satisfied that  the  error  in  not  considering  the
    appellant's evidence about after he left Sri Lanka, was  not  material.
    In the absence of any findings on this point it was not possible to say
    that the judge would have inevitably reached the same conclusion as  to
    interest in the appellant after he left Sri Lanka, particularly as  the
    judge had made a considerable number of positive  credibility  findings
    in respect of the appellant's evidence generally.

9.   On that basis I found  a  material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision and set it aside.  I noted however, in relation  to
    ground 1, that the respondent had indicated in the  Rule  24  response,
    dated 9 October 2015, that the  'veracity  of  the  arrest  warrant  is
    highly likely to be determinative of the appellant's appeal'  and  that
    the respondent had 'taken urgent steps to verify whether the warrant is
    genuine'.

10.  It was not disputed before me that the findings of fact of  the  First-
    tier Judge, other than in relation to the arrest warrant and whether or
    not the authorities were still looking for the appellant, should stand.
     That included the finding that there have been to date  no  sur  place
    activities.

11.  Having  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (with
    findings preserved as noted above) I directed that there be  a  resumed
    hearing to consider the risk on return to Sri Lanka.  At the  error  of
    law hearing, the appellant lodged with and served on the  respondent  a
    new translation of  the  arrest  warrant,  by  a  different  translator
    together with confirmation from the original  translator  that  he  had
    made an error.  The respondent was to file with the Tribunal and  serve
    on the appellant the outcome of that verification no later than 4 weeks
    from the date of the Error of Law hearing, i.e., 24 November 2015  with
    the appellant to file any response, including their own verification if
    such was considered  necessary  and  any  further  documents  that  the
    appellant sought to rely on in  relation  to  risk  on  return,  by  15
    December 2015.

Resumed Hearing

12.  Neither party complied with those directions.   Mr  Whitwell  indicated
    at the resumed hearing that no response had been received.  Although he
    was not able to point to any specific information in  relation  to  the
    verification in the appellant's appeal, he provided  an  email  another
    Home office official dated 4 December 2015.   This  letter  related  to
    'Sri Lankan Attorneys' Letters' and indicated that the 'RALON  team  in
    Colombo' have finite resources' and that 'their workload is  increasing
    daily'.  The email asked therefore that  Attorneys'  letters  'are  not
    sent for verification where there are  no  other  supporting  documents
    that can be independently verified'.

13.  Although Mr Whitwell was initially ready to proceed at the hearing,  he
    then resiled from this position and  made  an  adjournment  request  to
    allow the respondent to verify the arrest warrant.   I  considered  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the  Procedure  Rules),
    in particular Rule 5, Case Management Powers and Rule 2, the overriding
    objective and parties' obligation to cooperate with the Upper Tribunal.
     The overriding objective of the Rules is to deal with cases fairly and
    justly.

14.  Mr Whitwell was unable to give any timescale as to  when,  if  at  all,
    the verification might be completed.  I noted that although the generic
    information before me (in the email dated 4 December 2015) referred  to
    the increasing workload of the  RALON  team  in  Colombo  carrying  out
    verifications, there was  no  specific  indication  as  to  either  any
    backlog or any timescale for such verifications.

15.  In addition to the relevant procedure  rules,  I  also  considered  the
    guidance of Presidential  Tribunal  in  Nwaige  (adjournment  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC)  that  the  test  is  not  reasonableness,  but
    fairness.  Although Mr Jaffar was neutral in relation to an adjournment
    I considered that an open-ended adjournment request, made belatedly  on
    the day of the resumed hearing, with no indication as to when  or  even
    if the  verification  would  be  undertaken,  would  have  resulted  in
    unfairness to  the  appellant.   Permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted on 30 September 2015 and the respondent  indicated
    on 9 October 2015 that 'urgent steps' had been taken. Although  I  have
    no reason to believe that steps had not been taken by  the  respondent,
    Mr Whitwell accepted that there had been a complete failure  to  comply
    with directions.  There was  also  no  adequate  explanation  for  that
    failure.

16.  The reason given for the belated application  for  an  adjournment  was
    unpersuasive. As noted in the preceding paragraph there was no adequate
    information,  either  generic  or  specific  in  relation  to  why  the
    verification had not taken place or as to when, or if, it would  occur.
    Notably the email makes no reference to any delay.   The  reference  to
    increasing  workloads  and  prioritising  work  is  not   an   adequate
    explanation and  as  noted  this  related  specifically  to  Attorneys'
    letters and not arrest warrants. If the respondent still considered the
    verification of the warrant to be essential, there was  no  explanation
    as to why specific information was not  provided  in  relation  to  any
    delay in this case, for example written confirmation explaining why the
    delay had occurred and/or the expected timescale for any verification.

17.  I therefore  concluded  that  the  respondent  had  failed  to  give  a
    satisfactory reason  for  the  adjournment  request  and  that  it  was
    appropriate considering the Procedure Rules  including  the  overriding
    objective, for the hearing to proceed.

Risk on Return

18.  Although the appellant was available  to  give  evidence  both  parties
    were of the view that further oral evidence was not required.

19.  Mr Whitwell relied on a generic letter dated 2  November  2015  to  the
    respondent from the British High Commission in Colombo which  indicated
    that approximately 130 verifications had been carried out in Sri Lankan
    asylum cases since June 2014 and 98.5% of these  cases  (which  it  was
    stated in almost all involved Sri Lankan Court or Police documents) the
    documents had been found not to be genuine.  Mr Whitwell also relied on
    an extract from the Country of Origin Report dated 7 March  2012  which
    indicated that there was a high prevalence of forged  and  fraudulently
    obtained documents in Sri Lanka.

20.  Mr Whitwell conceded that, as indicated in  the  respondent's  Rule  24
    response, if the arrest  warrant  and  court  documents  produced  were
    accepted these were likely to be determinative of the appellant's case.
     Although Mr Whitwell reminded the Tribunal that the documents produced
    by the appellant had to be considered in the context of the evidence of
    the prevalence of fraudulent documents in Sri Lanka, he  also  accepted
    that I had to consider this evidence in the  context  of  the  positive
    credibility findings made by Judge Adio.

21.  Judge Adio made a number of  positive  credibility  findings  at  [15],
    including that the appellant's brother owned a communication  shop  and
    that the appellant was engaged  in  this  business  which  led  to  his
    arrest.  He further found  that  the  appellant  was  arrested  by  the
    authorities 'because of the business  involvement  with  Abi  and  Siva
    which resulted in  the  authorities  accusing  him  of  being  an  LTTE
    supporter'.  The judge found that there were no inconsistencies in  the
    appellant's account in relation to not mentioning his brother's  kidnap
    at his screening interview and no real credibility issues  in  relation
    to his passport not being found by the authorities in a search  of  the
    house.

22.  The judge also  found  at  [15]  that  ''the  respondent  accepts  that
    bribery and corruption is rife in Sri Lanka and that in accordance with
    background information  the  appellant's  account  is  consistent  with
    regards to his release."  It is therefore accepted that  the  appellant
    was detained by the authorities, was accused of being an LTTE supporter
    and was released on foot of payment of bribe by his family.

23.  Mr Jaffa relied on the country guidance of GJ  and  others  (post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 and  that  the  Tribunal
    (at paragraph 275) had endorsed the evidence of Mr Anton Punethanayagam
    in relation to the criminal  processes  in  Sri  Lanka  and  that  'the
    seriousness of any charges against an individual are not  determinative
    of whether a bribe can be  paid'.   It  was  also  Mr  Punethanayagam's
    evidence as recorded at paragraph  146  that  a  detainee  released  on
    payment of bribe would 'normally be recorded as escaped from  detention
    in the database of the Police'.

24.  There was no information before me  that  might  displace  the  finding
    that there was no  evidence  that  the  authorities  searched  for  the
    appellant when he was in hiding in Sri Lanka.   However  the  appellant
    stated in his asylum  interview  (questions  25  and  112)  that  since
    leaving Sri Lanka 'unknown people' had been visiting his  home  looking
    for him and threatening his mother and his witness statement  indicates
    that there was a visit by unknown people on 10 June  2015  looking  for
    the appellant.  There was no specific finding by Judge Adio in relation
    to this.  Mr Whitwell did not challenge this evidence and on the  basis
    of  all  the  evidence  including  Judge  Adio's   generally   positive
    credibility findings, I accept to the lower standard that the appellant
    was still being sought in Sri Lanka after  his  departure  and  in  the
    context of all the evidence it is reasonably likely that these 'unknown
    people' are connected to the authorities.

25.  The translation of the arrest  warrant  produced  for  the  appellant's
    original appeal indicated at  page  5  that  after  the  appellant  was
    arrested on 28 December he was produced to the  Magistrate's  Court  in
    Colombo to request 90 days' detention  order  from  29  December  2010.
    However the appellant had given evidence at his first  appeal  that  he
    had not attended court.  Subsequent to the refusal of his first  appeal
    the appellant produced a letter from the original translator indicating
    that he had made an error in his  translation  and  that  the  original
    Sinhalese version of the documents did not say 'produced' but  that  it
    should read 'the suspect was referred to magistrate court, Colombo...'.
     It was the translator's evidence that there  was  no  mention  in  the
    Sinhalese original of the appellant being 'produced' to the  magistrate
    court.  In addition the appellant, as noted above, lodged and served  a
    further translation of the arrest warrant  in  question.   The  further
    translation indicates that the appellant was arrested  on  28  December
    2010 and that 'the suspect was referred to Magistrate Court of  Colombo
    to request 90 days detention order from 29.12.2010.'

26.  In considering the documents produced I have considered  the  case  law
    including the starting point of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318.  It is
    for the appellant to demonstrate that the  documents  produced  can  be
    relied on as claimed.  I do not accept as submitted by Mr  Jaffar  that
    this is one of the 'exceptional circumstances' referred to in  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1011, where the respondent should undertake a process of verification.

27.  However I have considered all of the documents  in  the  round  in  the
    context of all the evidence before me, including (as noted  above)  the
    background information indicating that a high proportion  of  documents
    relied on from Sri Lanka are not  genuine.   I  have  also  taken  into
    consideration that the first  translation  produced  by  the  appellant
    indicated that he had been  produced  to  the  magistrate's  court,  in
    contradiction with his oral evidence.  However, the appellant  has  now
    produced confirmation from both the original translator and  a  further
    independent translation indicating that  the  arrest  warrant  in  fact
    makes no mention of the appellant being produced  to  the  magistrate's
    court and it was common ground before me that this was the only  reason
    cited by Judge Adio for not accepting the arrest  warrant  as  genuine.
    The respondent has not produced any further independent translation  of
    the arrest warrant, which  might  suggest  that  the  translations  now
    relied on are incorrect.  I accept that the translation of the document
    is as shown on the most recent translation and that there is  therefore
    no contradiction between this and the appellant's oral evidence.

28.  I have also considered the documentary evidence in the context  of  the
    positive credibility findings and an appellant who it is  accepted  was
    detained and released following a bribe.  I  have  taken  into  account
    that the arrest warrant lists the appellant  as  an  escapee  which  is
    consistent with the evidence approved by the Tribunal in GJ and  others
    (as discussed above) in relation to those who leave detention following
    payment of a  bribe,  normally  being  recorded  as  an  escapee.   The
    appellant's evidence at interview and in  his  witness  statement  that
    'unknown people' looked for him at his home in Sri Lanka after he  left
    is also in my view consistent with an arrest warrant being issued after
    the appellant left Sri Lanka (the arrest warrant is dated  16  November
    2011 and the appellant left  Sri  Lanka  in  October  2011).   In  this
    context I am satisfied, to the lower standard,  that  it  is  plausible
    that there may therefore have been no specific search for the appellant
    (or at least that the appellant was not aware of any)  given  that  the
    arrest warrant was not issued until after he had arrived in the UK.

29.  Notwithstanding the evidence that  clearly  the  large  majority  court
    documents verified by the respondent in Colombo since  June  2014  have
    not been genuine (and I note that a small minority 'appear to have been
    genuine' so it is not the case that no  documents  can  be  relied  on)
    considered in the context of the entirety  of  the  evidence  and  this
    appellant who has been found to be consistent and generally credible, I
    accept that the arrest warrant can be relied on as claimed.

30.  The head note in GJ and others provides as follows:

         (1)  This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
         Sri Lanka.

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
         since the civil war ended in May  2009.   The  LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka
         itself is a spent force and there have been no terrorist  incidents
         since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983,  which  prohibits  the
         'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
         Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport.  Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
             rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri
             Lankan government, in particular its human rights  record,  or
             who are associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri
             Lankan government.

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
             Learned and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri
             Lankan  security  forces,  armed  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among those who  may  have
             witnessed war crimes during the conflict, particularly in  the
             No-Fire Zones  in  May  2009,  only  those  who  have  already
             identified themselves by giving such evidence would  be  known
             to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they  are  at
             real risk of adverse attention or  persecution  on  return  as
             potential or actual war crimes witnesses.

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
         an individual's activities and responsibilities  during  the  civil
         war, the exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of  the  Refugee
         Convention and  Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive).
         Regard should be had to the categories for exclusion set out in the
         "Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing the International  Protection
         Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR  on  21
         December 2012.

31.  Applying this guidance (and as  conceded  by  the  presenting  officer)
    given that I have accepted that there is  an  arrest  warrant  for  the
    appellant, I find therefore that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return on the basis of his imputed political opinion.

Conclusion

32.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and I set it aside (to the extent set  out  at  paragraph  10).   I
    remake the decision as follows:

33.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

34.  I make no finding on humanitarian protection.

35.  The appellant's appeal is allowed on human rights grounds  (Articles  2
    and 3)


Signed   Date: 11 January 2016

M. M. Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

