
[pic]
IAC-AH-krl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04728/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2015                |On 29th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M Y
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

For the Respondent:    Mr M Saleem (Solicitor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  a
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Robson)  who,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 3rd June 2015, allowed MY's appeal  to  it
    on humanitarian protection grounds.  Whilst this is an  appeal  brought
    by the Secretary of State I will, for convenience, refer to the parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.  This means that  I  shall
    refer to MY as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

How the Appeal Comes Before the Upper Tribunal for Determination

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, of Pashtun  ethnicity,  and
    he was born on 25th July 1968 in Kabul.  He entered the United  Kingdom
    on 2nd May 2002, claiming asylum upon arrival.  The Respondent  refused
    his application and the Appellant appealed.  His appeal  was  heard  by
    Immigration Judge P J G White  on  13th  December  2005.   Judge  White
    summarised the account offered by the Appellant and  which  underpinned
    his claim for asylum in this way;

         "15. The core of  the  Appellant's  account  is  as  follows.   The
             Appellant's uncle was a minister in the Najibullah  Government
             and an advisor in the Hafizullah  Government.   The  Appellant
             joined the Ministry of Interior Affairs in 1981 as a commander
             of [ - ].  He subsequently became the commander of [ -  ]  for
             five years.  During this time he was involved in  combat  with
             enemy forces.  In 1986 the Appellant was transferred to Kabul,
             being appointed as commander of a unit which provided security
             services.  The Appellant went  to  the  former  Czechoslovakia
             where he studied at a police  academy  for  a  year.   On  his
             return to  Afghanistan  he  was  posted  to  the  Ministry  of
             Interior Affairs in the [ - ]  Department.   He  worked  as  a
             detective and had agents under  his  supervision.   He  worked
             there for three months.  The Appellant was then transferred to
             become the deputy of [ -  ]  for  five  months  where  he  was
             involved in detecting activities of opposition groups and drug
             smuggling activities.  As a result of  his  work  many  people
             were arrested and some were killed during operations.  It  was
             suspected that many in  a  high  position  in  the  Government
             Authorities were also implicated in the smuggling.  As  result
             (sic) the Appellant's younger brother was kidnapped and  later
             killed.  The Appellant was then made the head of [ -  ].   The
             Appellant was involved in a particular operation  in  which  a
             relative of  General  Dostum  of  the  Northern  Alliance  was
             killed.  As a result threats were made against the  Appellant.
             The Appellant's cow was attacked and his driver  was  injured.
             The Appellant then went to Russia for further education  at  a
             police academy and returned to Afghanistan in  1996.   However
             because of the Appellant's actions against the  Mujahedin  the
             Appellant's home was attacked.  The Appellant fled to  Kunduz.
             Following the fall of the Taleban in 2002  the  Appellant  was
             arrested by General Dostum's men on account of his  ethnicity.
             The Appellant was ill-treated during his week's detention  but
             was not recognised by his captors.  Eventually  the  Appellant
             secured his release by  bribery  and  fled  Afghanistan.   The
             Appellant made his way to Moscow via Turkmenistan.  From there
             he travelled to Poland and onward to the United Kingdom  where
             he claimed asylum."

 3. Judge White was required to consider what, if anything, in that account
    was true using  what  is  commonly  referred  to  as  the  "real  risk"
    standard.  He was also  tasked  with  the  responsibility  of  deciding
    whether, as the Respondent claimed, the Appellant was excluded from the
    protection afforded by the 1951 Refugee Convention by the operation  of
    Article 1(F)(a) of the Convention in light of his  involvement  in  the
    killing  of  some  prisoners.   In  that  context,  the  Appellant  had
    acknowledged some involvement but he had offered a  version  of  events
    which sought to significantly minimise his culpability.   Judge  White,
    though, did not accept his protestations in that regard  and  concluded
    that he had been involved in  the  shooting  of  nine  members  of  the
    Mujahedin who had been taken prisoner by Government forces for whom  he
    was working and that he was not exonerated by his claim, even if  true,
    that he was simply "carrying  out  orders".   That  was  sufficient  to
    dispose of the asylum claim.  However, it was also necessary for  Judge
    White to consider whether the Appellant might  succeed  in  his  appeal
    under Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).   As
    to that, in dealing with a claimed fear of General  Dostum,  the  judge
    said this;

         "38. The particular incident  related  by  the  Appellant  that  is
             however disputed is that concerning the Appellant's allegation
             that he killed a relative of General Dostum.  After the  first
             interview on 12th July 2004 the solicitors  then  representing
             the Appellant wrote to the Respondent detailing  a  particular
             incident  in  which  the  Appellant  had  shot  men  (and   in
             particular [ - ]) under the command of Abdul  Rashid  [Dostum]
             while attempting to prevent a kidnap.  As  a  result  of  this
             letter the Appellant was interviewed again.  During the course
             of that second interview the Appellant gave further details of
             this incident which he said took place in 1989  (see  question
             6).  The Appellant stated that  at  the  time  Dostum  was  in
             Najibullah's Government (question 11).  The Appellant  thought
             that [ - ] was a cousin of Dostum (question 13).  At  question
             17 and onwards the Appellant described how he shot [ - ]  with
             a rifle after a police officer was killed.  The Appellant also
             stated  that  in  the  weeks  following   the   shooting   the
             Appellant's cow was attacked (see question  35  and  onwards).
             He was advised to leave the country (question 39).

         39.  It is correct that at the first interview  the  Appellant  did
             not give details of this  particular  incident.   But  at  the
             first interview the Appellant did make  reference  to  General
             Dostum (see for example question 111).   He  referred  to  the
             fact that if General Dostum knew who  the  Appellant  was  'he
             would  have  sucked  [the  Appellant's]  blood'  (IBID).   The
             Appellant also suggested at the end of the interview  that  he
             had not given all the details of his account (see  page  A39).
             Overall the  Appellant's  account  of  the  incidents  of  the
             shooting of [ - ] is given in a fair amount of detail  in  the
             second interview.

         40.  Of General Dostum the CIPU Report states at paragraph 4.21 [on
             1st March 2005, Reuters reported  that  President  Karzai  had
             appointed  General  Abdul  Rashid  Dostum,  as  his   personal
             military chief of staff, despite calls by human rights  groups
             for him to sideline warlords [24b].  On 3rd  March  2005,  BBC
             News reported the view of Human Rights Watch (HRW) that Dostum
             should not have been given the  high  profile  military  post.
             HRW expressed concern that it could mean he will not  be  held
             accountable for alleged past  human  rights  abuses.   Amnesty
             International also expressed  concern  over  the  appointment.
             [25c].  An earlier BBC News' report dated  20th  January  2005
             reported that General Dostum  had  survived  an  assassination
             attempt by a suicide bomber outside a mosque in  the  northern
             town of Sheberghan.  He was unhurt  but  about  twenty  others
             were wounded.

                  'The Taleban said it carried out the attack to avenge  the
                  killing of its members ... His  fighters  are  accused  of
                  leaving hundreds of  Taleban  fighters  to  perish  inside
                  sealed steel containers after their defeat  and  capture.'
                  [25ah].

             At paragraph 5.81 it states

                  'On 29th April  2005,  the  Institute  of  War  and  Peace
                  Reporting (IWPR) reported that "some are disappointed  the
                  president has given several of the warlords  he  has  long
                  railed against key positions in his Government."  The IWPR
                  Report noted that although technically three  of  Karzai's
                  more  controversial  appointments,  Abdul  Rashid   Dostum
                  (chief of staff of the armed forces), Abdul Karim  Khalili
                  (second vice president) and Ismail Khan (minister of water
                  and energy) are no longer warlords.,

                      "All three men have been sighted  by  numerous  human
                      rights  organisations  as   being   responsible   for
                      thousands of deaths and numerous war crimes committed
                      between the fall of the Najibullah Government in 1992
                      and the Taleban takeover in 1996." [73x]

         41.  Against that background I consider that it is  not  inherently
             implausible that General Dostum (or at  least  persons  acting
             under his command) was involved in a kidnap attempt.  Nor do I
             consider it inherently implausible  that  there  would  be  an
             attempt to kill the Appellant as an act of revenge  while  the
             Appellant was travelling in his car (rather than, for example,
             to attack the Appellant while he was at his home).  Looking at
             matters in the round as I am required to  do  and  bearing  in
             mind the low standard of proof  I  am  prepared  to  give  the
             Appellant the benefit of the doubt in the matter and find that
             the Appellant was involved in an incident in 1989 in which the
             Appellant shot a commander acting under General Dostum and  as
             a result the Appellant has developed the personal animosity of
             General Dostum."

 4. Thus, Judge White was accepting that the Appellant would, at that time,
    have been at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment at the  hands  of  General
    Dostum.  The judge's consideration of  matters,  though,  did  not  end
    there.  He went on to consider whether the Appellant might also  be  at
    risk as a consequence of his links to the previous Communist regimes in
    Afghanistan (see the summary of his account  set  out  above)  and  his
    previous involvement with the People's Democratic Party of  Afghanistan
    (PDPA).  As to that, he said this;

         "44. The position of persons with links  to  the  former  Communist
             regime is dealt with in the CIPU Report  at  paragraph  6.316-
             6.337.  The position of such persons  is  variable.   A  large
             number of former PDPA members  and  former  officials  of  the
             intelligence service are working in  the  Government.   Others
             are at risk.

         45.  The UNHCR Report of June 2005 (extracts  of  which  appear  at
             paragraph 6.336 of the CIPU Report) states

                  'A large number of former  People's  Democratic  Party  of
                  Afghanistan (PDPA) members as well as former officials  of
                  the Khad (the intelligence service)  are  working  in  the
                  Government, including the security apparatus.  A  congress
                  of the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA)  in
                  late 2003 which led to the creation  of  Hezb-e-Mutahid-e-
                  Mili (National United Party) with 600  members  under  the
                  former PDPA  officials  have  founded  several  other  new
                  parties.

                  While many  former  PDPA  members  and  officials  of  the
                  Communist Government, particularly  those  who  enjoy  the
                  protection of and  have  strong  links  to  the  currently
                  influential  factions  and  individuals,  are  safe   from
                  exposure due to their political and professional  past,  a
                  risk of persecution may persist for some  members  of  the
                  PDPA, later renamed Watan  (Homeland).   The  exposure  to
                  risk depends on the individual's  personal  circumstances,
                  family background, professional profile, links and whether
                  he was associated with the human rights violations of  the
                  Communist regime in Afghanistan between 1979 and 1992.

                  Some former high ranking members of PDPA without factional
                  protection from Islamic political  parties  or  tribes  or
                  influential  personalities  are   at   greater   risk   of
                  persecution.  They include ... Former military  officials,
                  members of the police force and Khad (security service) of
                  the Communist regime also continue to be at risk, not only
                  from current power holders but more so from the population
                  (families of victims),  given  their  identification  with
                  human rights abuses during the Communist regime.'

         46.  On the Appellant's own account the Appellant spent one week in
             the detention of General Dostum's men just  prior  to  leaving
             Afghanistan (questions 107-114  of  the  first  interview  and
             questions 44-49 of the second  interview).   He  was  arrested
             (with many others) as a Pashtun.  During his week in detention
             the true identity of the Appellant  was  not  discovered;  the
             Appellant obtained his release  by  bribery  before  his  true
             identity was discovered.  Whilst this may have  been  a  lucky
             escape  for  the  Appellant  I do  not  consider  that   the
             Appellant's account of his temporary detention  is  inherently
             implausible.  I do not consider that the  Appellant's  ability
             to hide his identity during one week detention  (when  he  was
             arrested not so much as an individual but rather as one  of  a
             number of Pashtuns) is indicative that the Appellant would not
             be at risk in the long-term of persecution if he were  now  to
             return to Kabul.

         47.  Looking at matters in the round as I am  required  to  do  and
             bearing in mind

             (i)  the low standard of proof required of the  Appellant  and



             (ii) the profile of the Appellant,

             for reasons as stated at paragraphs 34-46 above I find that in
             regard to Article 3, the Appellant has satisfied me that there
             is an insufficiency of state protection that would lead  to  a
             real risk that on  his  return  to  Afghanistan  he  would  be
             exposed to torture or to inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
             punishment.  I therefore conclude that to return the Appellant
             to Afghanistan would place the United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
             Article 3 of the ECHR."

 5. So, as I interpret his words, Judge White was also finding  that,  even
    if he had not attracted the enmity of  General  Dostum,  the  Appellant
    would nevertheless have been at risk  of  Article  3  ill-treatment  on
    account of his previous association with the  former  regimes  and  the
    PDPA and his history of having been involved in abuses of power.

 6. I should perhaps add, at this stage, that I have set out a considerable
    amount of Judge  White's  reasoning  because  that  will  represent  my
    starting point, following Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT  702,  when  I
    come to consider how I should resolve the Appellant's current appeal.

 7. There was no appeal, or at least no successful appeal, regarding  Judge
    White's decision which was, following the above reasoning,  to  dismiss
    the appeal on asylum grounds but  allow  it  on  human  rights  grounds
    specifically with reference to Article 3.

 8. The Appellant subsequently received various grants of limited leave  on
    human rights grounds.  However, an application  for  further  leave  he
    made on 17th April  2014  was,  on  8th  March  2015,  refused  by  the
    Respondent and, at the same time as that refusal a decision  was  taken
    to remove him from the UK by way of directions under Section 47 of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  It might, initially,  be
    thought surprising that having granted leave  on  the  basis  of  Judge
    White's decision the Respondent would suddenly take a  different  view.
    However, the reasoning deployed by the  Respondent  is  set  out  in  a
    "reasons for refusal letter" of 6th March 2015.   In  that  letter  the
    Respondent notes that the Appellant had obtained  an  Afghani  passport
    from the Embassy of Afghanistan in London which had been issued in July
    of 2007, that he had used that passport to leave the UK and  travel  to
    Pakistan in August of 2007, returning in November 2007, that he had not
    disclosed in making his current leave application that he had  obtained
    such a passport and that, in November 2012, he had  had  that  passport
    extended.

 9. The Respondent considered the above to be significant because,  in  her
    view, had the Appellant received leave on asylum grounds under the 1951
    Refugee Convention, the act of obtaining a passport would have,  within
    the terms of that Convention, amounted to  "voluntary  re-availment  of
    national protection" such that his asylum protection would have ceased.
     The Respondent accepted that the Appellant's leave was on human rights
    grounds, rather than asylum grounds, but commented  "it  is  considered
    that the principles of the cessation clause outlined above still  apply
    to you" and went on to say;

         "It is considered that you have voluntarily re-availed yourself  of
         national protection and are no  longer  in  need  of  international
         protection.  As a result of your actions it is considered that  the
         United Kingdom would not breach its obligations under Article 3  of
         the ECHR by returning you to Afghanistan."

10. The Respondent also expressed the view that,  whilst  Judge  White  had
    found that the  Appellant  had  attracted  the  personal  animosity  of
    General Dostum, his approaching the Afghanistan Embassy for a  passport
    was "incongruent with this finding".  The Respondent also  went  on  to
    decide that the Appellant could not rely upon Article  8  of  the  ECHR
    either within or outside the Immigration Rules.

11. The Appellant appealed against that decision and,  in  a  determination
    signed on 3rd June 2015 (the date of promulgation is unclear) the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Robson), as is noted above, allowed his appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.  At  that  appeal  the  Appellant  had
    sought to reargue matters regarding  his  exclusion  from  the  Refugee
    Convention but met with little success.  As to those  arguments,  Judge
    Robson said this;

         "70. I have noted however in the determination of Immigration Judge
             White at paragraph 28 the following:

                  'Furthermore the Appellant's witness  statement  (prepared
                  with the help of representatives only a  few  days  before
                  the hearing and adopted by the Appellant at the outset  of
                  his evidence-in-chief at the hearing)' states at paragraph
                  13:

                      'During this time my battalion captured  ten  men  of
                      Mujahedeen and I  was  given  orders  by  the  higher
                      authorities to execute them.  One  of  the  detainees
                      managed to escape'.

                  At paragraph 30, it states:

                      'I confirm that the Government  employed  me  and  no
                      matter what, you have to obey higher orders.   I  had
                      no other option but to follow the orders and  ask  my
                      staff to execute Mujahedeen'.

             The Appellant stated that he had not been given an opportunity
             in interviews and at the hearing to properly explain his case.



         71.  I was referred to his witness statement of 22nd July 2013.  At
             paragraphs 4 and 5 of that witness  statement,  the  Appellant
             set out the position that  he  claimed  had  occurred  and  at
             paragraph 8 of that statement he said that  he  had  made  'an
             unwavering resolution in  his  mind  that  they  (the  captive
             Mujahedeen)  would  not  be  shot.'   He  then  proceeded   at
             paragraph 9 to say that before he had a  chance  to  take  any
             action, the Mujahedeen jumped the sergeant  who  was  watching
             them and managed to kill the sergeant.  'When the officers  in
             my battalion saw that Mujahedeen were  no  longer  restrained,
             they fired upon them and managed to kill nine  of  them'.   He
             then explained that he decided to let the one  Mujahedeen  who
             started running away escape since he was not a threat  to  his
             battalion.

         72.  That explanation comes some  eight  years  after  the  hearing
             before Immigration Judge White.  Had the position be (sic)  so
             badly misunderstood, I do not accept  there  would  have  been
             such a delay.

         73.  One of the reasons for the delay was  apparently  of  lack  of
             funding to mount appeals.  However, on his own  admission  the
             Appellant said he was aware that Legal  Aid  would  have  been
             available for Judicial Review but chose not to  go  down  that
             road as he would not be able to instruct  the  solicitors  who
             had represented him, indeed the current solicitor.  I  do  not
             find it credible that given an option of resolving a  critical
             problem in his position,  i.e.  the  misunderstanding  of  the
             position resulting in nine Mujahedeen being shot, he would not
             have taken the opportunity, whichever  solicitor  it  was,  of
             obtaining legal aid and pushing his claim forward.  I  do  not
             find it credible that if it was the case that he had not  been
             responsible personally for ordering the  deaths  of  the  nine
             Mujahedeen or indeed had made the statement referred to in the
             decision of Immigration  Judge  White,  which  I  have  quoted
             above, he would not have taken very urgent action  to  resolve
             that position.

         74.  I am satisfied that in all the circumstances that the  correct
             decision of Immigration Judge White was correct and  it  still
             continues to be  correct  and  that  the  Exclusion  provision
             should stand."

12. I have set out those paragraphs in full because they are findings which
    have been preserved after a subsequent  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   The
    judge went on to make other findings which  have  not  been  preserved,
    though he accepted that the Appellant had only  used  the  passport  to
    travel to Pakistan, that this was so that he  could  visit  his  family
    members and that his visiting Pakistan  would  not  have  come  to  the
    attention of General Dostum.  He disbelieved, though, some  contentions
    made by the Appellant that the  Authorities  had  still  been  actively
    looking for him in Pakistan and had recently issued summonses  relating
    to him and that the Taleban had been asking about him and were aware of
    the fact that he was living in Great Britain.

13. The Respondent obtained permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  in
    respect of the decision of Judge  Robson.   After  a  hearing  of  24th
    August 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds set aside the decision of  Judge
    Robson.  Her detailed reasons for so doing appear in a determination of
    25th August 2015.  In a nutshell, however, she pointed out  that  Judge
    Robson could not properly allow the appeal on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds because similar exclusion clauses applied with respect to  that
    form of protection as did with respect to  asylum  and  the  judge  had
    found against the Appellant  with  respect  to  the  operation  of  the
    exclusion clauses regarding asylum.  She rejected a contention made  on
    behalf of the Appellant that Judge Robson had  intended  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds but had simply made a typographical  error.
    She preserved the above passages from Judge Robson's determination  but
    nothing more.

14. The above, then, is how the appeal comes before me.  My task was simply
    to decide, as was accepted by  all  parties,  whether  the  Appellant's
    appeal should succeed under Article 3 of the ECHR.  That was  the  only
    provision which remained in issue.

The Evidence Before Me

15. By the start of the hearing of 12th November 2015 I had, before  me,  a
    range of bundles of documents prepared and submitted on behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  I had the Respondent's bundle which had been  before  Judge
    Robson.  I have considered, with care, all of the  documentation  which
    has been provided.  At the hearing I received oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and also from a witness MZ.  The  bundles  contained  witness
    statements from each of them.

16. In summary, the Appellant said that  he  had  had  some  difficulty  in
    understanding the interpreters at his  asylum  interviews,  the  second
    interview being much more problematic in this regard.  He had told  the
    truth in his witness statement of 14th May 2015.  He had not  been  to
    blame for the killing of any people in  Afghanistan.   He  still  fears
    General Dostum and the Government  will  not  help  him.   He  said  of
    General Dostum "it's his Government".  He also  fears  the  Taleban  in
    consequence of his previous link to Najibullah's regime.  It  had  been
    very straightforward  to  obtain  his  passport  from  the  Afghanistan
    Embassy and he had not had to spend much time there or answer very many
    questions.  He had wanted the passport because his mother, who  was  in
    Pakistan, had been seriously ill.  He went to Pakistan but stayed  only
    in Peshawar.  He also saw his own children at the same  time.   He  has
    not made any further  trips  out  of  the  country  since.   In  cross-
    examination he said that he had studied in Russia when  the  Communists
    were in power in Afghanistan.  When he obtained his passport  from  the
    Afghanistan Embassy he had  not  been  asked  to  give  an  address  in
    Afghanistan, he had simply had to indicate which province he was  from.
    He had provided his father's name.  His children had been able  to  see
    him when he was in Peshawar because the border between Afghanistan  and
    Pakistan was porous.  He did not venture into Afghanistan.  At the time
    of his appeal before Judge White, General Dostum had not been a  member
    of the Government but he  had  had  his  own  army.   He  was  "just  a
    commander then".  He is now the vice president in the  Government.   He
    has been so since 2014.  He had been accompanied by a friend (MZ)  when
    he had gone to  apply  for  his  passport.   He  might  have  hid  some
    information if he had been asked about things in more detail but he had
    not been.

17. MZ, who adopted his witness statement of 7th May 2015, told me that  he
    had accompanied the Appellant  when  he  had  visited  the  Afghanistan
    Embassy.  Only simple questions had been asked of him.  The actual form
    filling  process  took  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes  only.    He   had
    accompanied the Appellant in order to provide moral  support.   All  he
    could say about the Appellant with respect to his passport  application
    is that he is a national of Afghanistan.  There was no formal interview
    and the process of form filling, in order to apply for a  passport,  is
    very simple.  The passport was  not  given  on  the  same  day  as  the
    attendance at the embassy.  He does not know whether the  passport  was
    subsequently sent to the Appellant or whether he  called  back  to  the
    embassy to collect it.  The witness had not sought to use any influence
    in order to aid the passport application.

The Arguments Presented to me by the Representatives

18. Mr Diwnycz indicated he would rely upon the content of the reasons  for
    refusal letter and the preserved findings of Judge  Robson.   I  should
    conclude, he submitted, that the Appellant has  re-availed  himself  of
    the protection of the authorities in Afghanistan.  He had  done  so  by
    obtaining the passport.  This meant he would, if a refugee,  have  lost
    the protection of the 1951 Convention and it would be  perverse  if  he
    were not, therefore, to lose the protection afforded by Article 3.   Mr
    Diwnycz was not able to point me to any  decided  authority  indicating
    that Article 3 protection would be lost in such circumstances.   As  to
    the decision of Judge White, and  the  application  of  the  Devaseelan
    principles, he submitted that,  as  I  understand  it,  there  was  new
    evidence being the Appellant's willingness to approach the  Afghanistan
    Authorities at the embassy, which suggested that either  he  had  never
    been at risk  or  no  longer  considered  himself  to  be  at  risk  in
    Afghanistan.

19. Mr Saleem, for the Appellant, said that there was no reason to  suppose
    that Article 3 protection would be lost  by  the  act  of  obtaining  a
    passport.  In any event, a careful  reading  of  the  relevant  clauses
    within the Refugee Convention suggested that the Appellant,  by  simply
    obtaining a passport and using it to go to Pakistan for pressing family
    reasons, had not re-availed himself  of  the  protection  of  his  home
    country within the terms of that Convention.  The evidence is  that  he
    had to provide only very little information  in  order  to  obtain  his
    passport and the fact that he  was  willing  to  provide  such  limited
    information does not mean he does not regard himself as being at  risk.





My Reasoning

20. Although the history has been somewhat protracted, it seems to me  that
    the issues I now have to decide are relatively  straightforward  ones.
    The first of those is whether or not it can be said that the Appellant,
    through the act of applying for and  obtaining  his  Afghani  passport,
    through the Afghanistan Embassy in London, has, as  a  matter  of  law,
    lost his protection under Article 3 of the ECHR.

21. Mr Saleem seeks to persuade me, with close reference  to  the  relevant
    parts of the Refugee Convention, that even if the  Appellant  had  been
    recognised as a refugee, the acts  he  has  performed  would  not  have
    resulted in him losing that protection.  His other argument is  to  the
    effect that, in any event, Article 3  affords  absolute  protection  so
    whatever the position might be with respect to the Refugee  Convention,
    if the Appellant is actually at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment  he  is
    entitled to Article 3 protection.  Mr Diwnycz, though, submits that  it
    would be "perverse" if that latter proposition were to be correct.

22. It has not been necessary for me to undertake a  careful  consideration
    of the precise wording of the Convention  or  the  arguments  which  Mr
    Saleem put forward regarding  such  wording.   This  is  because  I  am
    satisfied that the fact of obtaining a  passport  does  not  deprive  a
    person  previously  dependent  upon  Article  3  protection,  of   that
    protection.  It does not, as a matter of law, bring the ability to rely
    upon Article 3 protection to an end.

23. In this context, Mr Diwnycz was not able to take me to any authority in
    support of his argument and, indeed, he acknowledged that he could  not
    do so.  Protection for refugees, as such,  is  derived  from  the  1951
    Refugee Convention.  Protection on human rights grounds is derived from
    an entirely different Convention.  In light of that it seems to me that
    there is simply no basis for contending that, as a matter  of  law,  an
    act which would lead to the loss of protection under one Convention  on
    the basis of specific  wording  in  the  provisions  relating  to  that
    Convention, will do so in the other Convention,  absent  such  wording.
    Article 3 does provide  absolute  protection.   It  is  an  unqualified
    Article of the ECHR.  I do, therefore, find for the Appellant  in  this
    regard.  This means I must now go on to consider whether, as  a  matter
    of fact, the Appellant is at  risk  of  Article  3  ill-treatment  upon
    return to Afghanistan.  I am, of course, applying what is known as  the
    "real risk" test and I bear in mind that the burden, in this  context,
    rests upon the Appellant.

24.  As  indicated  above,  my  starting  point,  given  what  is  said  in
    Devaseelan, must be the findings of Judge White.  I have set out  those
    findings, in  some  detail,  above.   Those  findings,  of  course,  do
    represent my starting point but, not necessarily, my end point.

25. Mr Diwnycz's sole argument, in  this  regard,  is  that  the  Appellant
    cannot be at risk of Article 3 ill-treatment in Afghanistan  if  he  is
    prepared to make an approach to the Afghanistan Embassy in  the  United
    Kingdom and to  give  some  personal  details  in  order  to  obtain  a
    passport.  In this context, I note that Mr  Diwnycz  did  not  seek  to
    persuade me that there was any other reason why I  should  depart  from
    the findings of Judge White.  He did he urge me to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant had actually gone to Afghanistan, as opposed to Pakistan.  He
    did not urge me to conclude that any other evidence,  apart  from  that
    relating to the passport, suggested I should depart from Judge  White's
    findings.  So, the issue here, on the basis of the case as it  was  put
    to me on behalf of the Respondent, is quite a narrow one.

26. The Appellant has consistently indicated that he obtained the  passport
    for the specific purpose of visiting his sick family member in Pakistan
    and that he also took the opportunity to see some other relatives.   He
    has consistently stated that, whilst he went to Peshawar  in  Pakistan,
    he did not actually go to Afghanistan and, as indicated, Mr Diwnycz did
    not seek to persuade me otherwise.  It might  be  thought,  of  course,
    that a person genuinely afraid of the Authorities in Afghanistan  would
    not expose himself to  any  risk  of  detection  by  approaching  those
    Authorities for any reason at all.  That was, essentially, Mr Diwnycz's
    argument.  However, I find it plausible that, if the  Appellant's  wife
    were seriously unwell in Pakistan, he would  wish  to  visit  her.   He
    provided some documentary evidence  of  her  illness  for  the  hearing
    before Judge Robson and that documentation, including a form  completed
    by a medical officer at a hospital  in  Peshawar,  is  before  me.   It
    indicates that the Appellant's wife was, at the  time,  suffering  from
    ischeamic heart disease.  Both the Appellant and the witness from  whom
    I heard, adopted witness statements  in  which  they  referred  to  the
    illness and there was no cross-examination on the point.  Against  that
    background I would accept the genuineness of the  claimed  illness  and
    would also accept that, in such circumstances, the Appellant would want
    to visit Pakistan to see his  ailing  wife.   I  accept,  against  that
    background, that his bid to obtain a passport  was  understandable  and
    does not, of itself, show that the findings of Judge White, bearing  in
    mind Devaseelan, should be departed from.

27. Of course, Judge White was considering matters as they were some  years
    ago.  The Appellant's primary fear seems to me to be  that  of  General
    Dostum and, therefore, if General Dostum was no  longer  on  the  scene
    that might represent a good reason for reaching a different  conclusion
    to that of Judge White.  However, if anything, matters  have  gone  the
    opposite way.  General Dostum now holds the position of vice  president
    within the Government in Afghanistan and such was not in dispute before
    me.  He does, therefore, occupy, on the face of it, a more powerful and
    influential  position  than  was  previously  the   case.    In   those
    circumstances, and  absent  any  argument  to  the  contrary,  I  would
    conclude that, if anything, the Appellant will be at greater risk  upon
    return now than he  would  have  been  at  the  time  Judge  White  was
    considering his case.  I find, therefore, that as matters stand, if the
    Appellant were to be returned to Afghanistan he would face a real  risk
    of Article 3 ill-treatment at the hands of General Dostum.   My  having
    reached  that  conclusion  there  is  nothing  more  I  need  to   say.
    Accordingly, the Appellant's appeal succeeds on human rights grounds.

Conclusions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Robson) has been  set  aside.


In remaking the decision I allow the  Appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds (Article 3 of the ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is payable there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

