

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04863/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On  5 May 2016                           |On 17 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S V

                                                                  Respondent




                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL


1.   The appellant obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    against a decision of the First-Tier Tribunal promulgated on 7 March
    2016 allowing the appeal of the respondent on asylum grounds.

2.   By way of an email sent on 4 May 2016, the respondent seeks to
    withdraw her case before the Upper Tribunal.

3.   Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to withdraw its
    case.  Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a whole,
    and observing the terms of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, I give
    such consent to the withdrawal of the appellant's appeal.

4.   Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, this appal is recorded
    as "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This is a
    Notice pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the
    appellant's case is withdrawn.

5.   The effect of this is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal
    are at an end.  There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal and the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision in relation to this respondent shall
    stand.






Signed                                  Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
