
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 28th October 2014                          |On 20th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                              MR SHAKIR TAHERI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Radford instructed by Turpin Miller
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Shakir Taheri date  of  birth  4th  August  1996  is  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  Having considered all the circumstances I do not make  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S Taylor.  The determination was  promulgated  on  20th
    August 2014.  By the determination the judge dismissed the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to remove  the  Appellant
    from  the  United  Kingdom  after  refusing  him  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and other relief to enable  him  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The immigration decision was  taken  on  25th  June  2014  to
    remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom back to  Afghanistan.   It
    is against that decision that the Appellant originally  appealed.   The
    judge dismissed all of his claims and upheld  the  decision  to  remove
    him.

 3. The matter appeared before Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Macdonald, who on 10th September 2014 gave permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 4. In granting permission it was noted that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    had accepted the circumstances in which the Appellant  came  to  depart
    Afghanistan.  In granting permission it was noted that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had however concluded that there was  no  evidence  that
    the Appellant was still wanted by the Taliban or that he would still be
    at risk from his step-father.  In granting permission it was noted that
    given that the Appellant's  original  account  of  leaving  Afghanistan
    appeared to be accepted it was  arguable  that  further  reasoning  was
    required to explain why the Appellant would no longer be at risk.

 5. It is suggested within the Grounds of Appeal that the judge has  failed
    to take account of the effect of paragraph 339K.  Paragraph 339K  notes
    that the fact that the person has already been subjected to persecution
    or serious harm or direct threats of such is a serious indication of  a
    person's well founded fear of persecution or  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm unless there  are  good  reasons  to  consider  that  such
    persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

 6. The judge had found that there was no evidence that the  harm  will  be
    repeated.  However it was submitted that there was a serious indication
    by reason of having found that the Appellant was  a  male  of  fighting
    age; who had been of interest to the Taliban in the past; and  who  had
    been forcibly recruited into the  Taliban  by  his  father;  who  would
    continue to be of interest to the Taliban; and  whose  failure  to  co-
    operate or work with the Taliban would result in his persecution.

 7. The judge examines the personal circumstances of the Appellant and  the
    reasons why he is satisfied that the Appellant would not be at risk  in
    paragraph 21 of  the  determination.  The  judge  had  noted  that  the
    Appellant had lived for a time after escaping from a  Taliban  training
    camp and one of his uncle living in Kabul with an aunt  before  leaving
    Afghanistan to come to the United Kingdom.

 8. The judge was referred to the case of DS [2011] EWCA Civ 305.   However
    the judge also refers to the case of AA (CG) [2012] UKUT 16.   I  would
    also draw attention to the case of AK (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163. In the case  law  the  Upper  Tribunal  specifically
    considered  the  option  of  the  viability  of  return  and   internal
    relocation to Kabul.  It was held that the level  of  violence  in  the
    city had to be considered but even the difficulties experienced by  the
    poor and the circumstances within Kabul were such as not  to  generally
    make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

 9. In relying upon the case of AA [2012] the judge specifically dealt with
    the issue with regard to whether children were at risk.  The case of AA
    concluded that the risk to children was not such as would  qualify  for
    international protection.

10. The judge specifically had regard to the fact that each returnee had to
    be  considered  on  their  own  individual  circumstances.   The  judge
    therefore went on to consider  the  individual  circumstances  of  this
    Appellant in paragraph 21.  He took  account  of  the  history  of  the
    Appellant.  The Appellant as noted within  the  determination  had  for
    some time after he had escaped from the purported Taliban camp and from
    his uncle gone to live with his aunt in Kabul.  The judge has therefore
    considered the viability of the Appellant  living  in  Kabul  with  his
    aunt.  The judge was satisfied in the circumstances that there  was  no
    risk to the Appellant if the Appellant were to return to Kabul  to  his
    aunt.

11. Having examined the personal circumstances of  the  Appellant  and  the
    circumstances in which the Appellant would be returned to in Kabul  the
    judge has given sufficient reasons to justify the conclusion that  this
    Appellant could live in Kabul without his being at  risk  and  why  his
    situation would be such that he would not be at risk from  the  Taliban
    or from his uncle.  The judge was satisfied on the  circumstances  that
    the Appellant would not be at risk in Kabul.  That  was  a  finding  of
    fact that the judge was entitled to make on the basis of  the  evidence
    presented.

12. Within the Grounds of Appeal reliance  is  placed  by  the  Appellant's
    representative on AA (see above) and upon PM [2007] UKAIT 00089.  It is
    suggested that the expert's report within  those  cases  indicate  that
    Pashtuns are limited to Pashtun areas within Kabul.   It  is  submitted
    that the Appellant's background will be checked and on being checked he
    will  be  traced.   However  the  judge  specifically  considered   the
    circumstances of this Appellant and given the  support  and  assistance
    that he would have from his aunt the judge was satisfied that living in
    Kabul the Appellant would not be at risk.

13. Those were findings of fact that the judge was entitled to make on  the
    basis of the evidence  presented  before  him.   The  judge  has  given
    sufficient reasons for coming to the  conclusion  that  this  Appellant
    would not be at risk in Kabul.  The judge has given sufficient  reasons
    for finding that this Appellant would have family members upon  who  he
    could rely within Kabul.  The judge  has  specifically  considered  the
    fact that the Appellant's family in the  United  Kingdom  had  been  in
    touch with the aunt in Kabul and that therefore contact could  be  made
    with the aunt.

14. It is suggested as the fourth ground that there is no  availability  of
    sufficient protection within Kabul.  However given the  case  law  that
    has been cited the judge concluded that the Appellant would not  be  at
    risk on his return to Kabul and would be capable of relying upon family
    members.  In  those  circumstances  there  would  be  no  issue  as  to
    sufficiency of protection as the appellant would not be at risk.

15. Whilst past persecution is a significant indicator of the potential for
    future  persecution  consideration  has  to  be  given  to  the  actual
    circumstances in which an Appellant would be  returned  to  their  home
    country.  The judge has specifically considered  the  circumstances  in
    which this Appellant would be returned to his home country and has come
    to the valid conclusion that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk  of
    conduct capable of constituting persecution.  In the light of that  the
    issue with regard to protection does not arise.

16.  Given  all  the  circumstances  the  judge  has  fully  justified  the
    conclusions that he reached on the basis of the case law presented  and
    on the facts presented.  Accordingly there is no material error of  law
    within the determination and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  this
    matter on all ground.



Signed   Date 19th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

