
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04862/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 September 2015                          |On 4 February 2016            |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     ZR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, ZR, was born in 1983 and is a female citizen of Nigeria.
     The appellant has a child, B, who was born in  2010.   The  respondent
    accepts that the appellant has been subjected to female genital cutting
    (FGC).   However,  the  respondent  refused  the   appellant's   asylum
    application and the  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shimmin) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  6  October  2014
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  The first ground criticises the judge
    for having allegedly failed to  consider  background  evidence  in  his
    determination of the asylum appeal.  It was asserted that women are not
    safe outside the home in  areas  beyond  Abuja  and  the  fact  of  the
    appellant's education in the United  Kingdom  was  not  relevant.   Her
    status as a single mother would also make her  more  vulnerable.   That
    ground is little more than a disagreement with  findings  available  to
    the judge on the evidence before me.   The  judge  accepted  [42]  that
    there is discrimination against women in Nigeria and sexual harassment.
     The judge  noted  the  appellant's  qualifications  in  mental  health
    nursing obtained in the United Kingdom.  He found  that  she  would  be
    likely to obtain a good job in the medical profession  in  Nigeria  and
    was unable to accept that the child B would be subjected to  FGC.   The
    appellant failed to  specify  what  parts  of  the  background  country
    material indicate that the appellant and child in this  instance  would
    be exposed to a real risk in Nigeria.  I am satisfied  that  the  judge
    has considered the background material  together  with  all  the  other
    evidence and that he has reached findings available to him.

 3. The second ground concerns Article 8 ECHR.  The judge relied on Gulshan
    (Article  8-new  rules-correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC  and
    concluded that the appellant and B  could  not  meet  the  private  and
    family life requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  [52].   The  judge
    stated that he had "analysed their position" and was unable to identify
    any exceptional or compelling circumstances.  The grounds complain that
    there were no threshold criteria for the engagement of Article 8  which
    the judge should have considered in any event.  However,  I  find  that
    the suggestion (relying on Gulshan) that there was  some  form  of  two
    stage test to be followed is  misguided;  either  the  appellant  could
    succeed on the facts under Article 8 ECHR or she could not.

 4. The judge's analysis of Article 8 is admittedly brief.  However,  there
    was no need for the judge to go through the  same  evidence  which  has
    failed to satisfy the Immigration Rules if it  is  apparent  that  that
    evidence is incapable of  satisfying  the  requirements  of  Article  8
    (Singh [2015] EWCA Civ  74).   In  the  present  case,  the  judge  has
    considered the public  interest  concerned  with  the  removal  of  the
    appellant and B.  He records that the appellant has "for a considerable
    period" enjoyed the education system  in  the  United  Kingdom  without
    payment and that both the appellant and B have used the services of the
    National Health Service "to  the  economic  disadvantage  of  the  UK."
    Further, the appellant has committed an offence and has been  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment.  The judge considered  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended) and found that he should give
    little weight to the appellant's private life.  He considered the  best
    interests of B as he was required to by  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. B  would  not  be  "substantially
    affected by relocation to Nigeria" [45].  B  does  not  live  with  her
    father but does have contact with him and  the  judge  noted  that  B's
    father has no immigration status and may  himself  have  to  return  to
    Nigeria [46].

 5. Although the judge refers to Gulshan and  appears  to  have  considered
    [52] refraining from any  Article  8  assessment,  he  did  nonetheless
    consider Article 8.  His assessment is brief but there was no need  for
    him to set out again the circumstances of the appellant and B which  he
    had described earlier in his decision.  He has, quite properly,  sought
    to identify the public interest  in  this  case.   His  conclusions  as
    regards Section 55 (that  B  has  no  particular  ties  to  the  United
    Kingdom, that her essential social cultural ties remain at  this  stage
    with her mother and that she would not be  "substantially  affected  by
    relocation in Nigeria") were plainly available to him on the  evidence.
    The appellant and B might only succeed  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules insofar as their circumstances did  not  fall  within
    the  private  and  family  life  provisions  of  the  Rules.   It   was
    significant also that the grounds of appeal complain of  a  failure  of
    process; there was no attempt made in the  grounds  to  identify  those
    circumstances of the appellant or B which fell outside the  Immigration
    Rules analysis  but  which  should  have  tipped  the  balance  of  the
    proportionality exercise for Article  8  outside  the  rules  in  their
    favour.  In the circumstances, I find that the judge has not  erred  in
    law and I shall not set aside his decision.

 6. I was grateful for the appellant attending the  court  and  letting  me
    have her views regarding the prospect of returning to  Nigeria.   I  am
    well aware that she is passionately opposed to the idea of return  both
    for herself and her child but, for the reasons which  I  have  set  out
    above, I do not intend to interfere with or change the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 January 2016



Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
