
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04504/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19th February 2016                    |On 15th March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     RSS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Samra of Harbans Singh & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Graham of the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 13th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan who  claimed  asylum  in
    the United Kingdom.  His wife and two children  are  dependent  on  his
    claim.

 3. The application was refused on 27th February 2015,  and  on  5th  March
    2015 the Respondent made a decision to remove  the  Appellant  and  his
    family from the United Kingdom.

 4. The subsequent appeal was heard by the FTT on 11th June 2015.  The  FTT
    found the Appellant to be incredible and did not accept his claim.   In
    relation to risk on return to Afghanistan as a Sikh, the FTT found that
    there was discrimination and harassment of Sikhs  in  Afghanistan,  but
    this did not amount to persecution.  The appeal was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the FTT erred in law and had failed to
    make findings as to whether as a Sikh, the Appellant would be  at  risk
    in Afghanistan.  It was contended that it would be  exceptional  for  a
    Sikh not to be at risk if returned to  Afghanistan,  and  reliance  was
    placed  upon  DSG  and  Others  (Afghan  Sikhs:  departure   from   CG)
    Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC).  It was submitted that the FTT had
    accepted that Sikhs in  Afghanistan  "have  a  problem"  and  therefore
    should  have  granted  the  Appellant  asylum,  as  the  harassment  in
    Afghanistan amounted to persecution.

 6. Permission to appeal was refused  by  Designated  Judge  Baird  on  5th
    August 2015, and the Appellant  thereafter  submitted  renewed  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 7. In the renewed grounds it was submitted that the case law of DSG should
    be taken into account and the FTT had failed to follow  the  principles
    set out in that case.  If the FTT had followed the principles  in  DSG,
    then the FTT could have departed from the country guidance relied  upon
    that being SL and Others (returning Sikhs and  Hindus)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2005] UKIAT 00137.

 8. It was submitted that in SL the Tribunal had wrongly concluded that the
    population of Sikhs and Hindus in Afghanistan amounted to approximately
    20,000 people, but in DSG this figure was said to  be  3,700.   It  was
    submitted that the FTT should have looked at the diminishing number  of
    Sikhs in Afghanistan, and accepted that this was caused by persecution.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins in the
    following terms;

         "1.  The decision is measured and might stand up to scrutiny.

         2.   However I consider the grounds to be arguable.  In  particular
             it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  consider
             properly the diminishing size of the Sikh  community  and  the
             identified background material."

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  contending  that  the  grounds  amounted  to  no  more   than   a
    disagreement with findings which had been properly made by the FTT  and
    the FTT had directed  itself  appropriately  and  that  SL  and  Others
    remained a country guidance decision, until it was replaced.

11. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

12. At the hearing on 19th February 2006 Mr Samra relied upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for  permission  to  appeal,  together
    with the written submissions  submitted  to  the  Tribunal  dated  15th
    February 2016, to which there was attached a  copy  of  TG  and  Others
    Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT 00595.   There  are  in  fact  two  sets  of
    written submissions submitted on behalf of  the  Appellant  both  dated
    15th February 2016, both in similar terms.

13. In summary it was submitted that the  FTT  had  erred,  and  relocation
    within Afghanistan was not possible, the Appellant and his family faced
    discrimination which had been accepted by the FTT, the Appellant  would
    not be able to access accommodation  or  employment  and  his  children
    would not be educated and the Appellant has no  family  in  Afghanistan
    who could assist.  The gurdwara would not be able to  provide  adequate
    support, and the Appellant's wife would face difficulty as she does not
    adhere to strict Islamic principles and does not wear the hijab, and is
    unable to speak Dari or Pushtu.

14. Mr Samra submitted that issues had now  been  clarified  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in TG and Others, although it was accepted that this  decision
    had not been published when the FTT decision was promulgated.

The Respondent's Submissions

15. Mr Richards relied upon the rule 24 response.  He  submitted  that  the
    FTT had clearly taken into account the diminishing number of  Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan as this was referred to in paragraph 45  of  the  decision.
    The FTT clearly could not take into account TG as the decision had  not
    been promulgated when the FTT decision was made.

16. The FTT had considered the objective evidence put before it  and  noted
    the absence of any expert report.  The FTT had considered the education
    of the Appellant's children and had considered their best interests.

17. I was asked to note the adverse credibility finding made by the FTT  at
    paragraph 42.  I was asked to find that the FTT had given  reasons  for
    not departing from the existing country guidance decision of SL and the
    decision disclosed no error of law.

The Appellant's Response

18. Mr Samra pointed out that at paragraph 30 of the FTT  decision  it  was
    accepted that the Appellant and  his  family  faced  discrimination  in
    Afghanistan, and submitted that this might amount to persecution.

19. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. There has been no challenge to the credibility assessment  carried  out
    by the FTT at paragraphs  30-42  and  the  conclusion  of  the  FTT  at
    paragraph 42 that the Appellant is not credible, and that all that  was
    accepted  of  his  account  was  that  he  may  have   faced   societal
    discrimination in Afghanistan, but the remainder of his account was not
    accepted, and he had not been persecuted in Afghanistan.

21. Having found that the Appellant had provided an incredible account, the
    FTT went on to assess the risk to  the  Appellant  and  his  family  as
    Sikhs, as their religion  was  not  disputed.   Risk  was  assessed  at
    paragraphs 43-51.

22. It cannot fairly be said that the FTT did not consider DSG and  Others.
    Consideration of this case is contained within paragraphs  44  and  45.
    The FTT was demonstrably aware that in  certain  circumstances  it  was
    possible to depart from a  country  guidance  decision,  and  that  DSG
    demonstrated this.

23. In my view the FTT was entitled to conclude that on the facts  of  this
    appeal, it was not appropriate to depart from the country  guidance  in
    SL.  For example in DSG, the FTT pointed out that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    had found it relevant that there were  positive  credibility  findings,
    and that it had  been  found  that  the  Appellant  in  that  case  had
    experienced persecution in the past in  Afghanistan.   This  contrasted
    with the findings of the FTT  in  this  appeal,  which  had  found  the
    Appellant's account to be incredible.

24. The FTT demonstrated an awareness of the diminishing numbers  of  Sikhs
    in Afghanistan, and this is recorded in paragraph 50, and  it  is  also
    accepted that Sikhs in Afghanistan faced  societal  discrimination  and
    harassment in their daily lives.

25. The FTT considered the background evidence placed before it,  and  this
    is demonstrated by reading paragraphs 46-49.

26. The FTT concluded that  the  harassment  and  discrimination  faced  by
    Sikhs, which was demonstrated  by  the  background  evidence,  did  not
    amount to persecution, and found that there was a reasonable option  of
    internal relocation to Kabul.  It is  accepted  that  the  most  recent
    country guidance, TG and Others, was not  in  existence  when  the  FTT
    decision was made.  It is not an error of law to  fail  to  consider  a
    country guidance decision which has not been published.

27. The FTT did not disregard any  material  evidence,  and  made  findings
    which were open to it on the evidence, and I conclude that the  grounds
    contained within the application for  permission  to  appeal,  and  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Appellant, demonstrate a disagreement
    with the findings made by the FTT, but they do not disclose a  material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

An anonymity direction was made by  the  FTT.   I  continue  that  anonymity
order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 26th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or is payable.  The appeal is dismissed.   There  is  no  fee
award.




Signed                              Date 26th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

