
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04514/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 20 August 2015                    |On 15 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                              Ms SILVANA PULAKE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, counsel instructed by Howe & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           ERROR OF LAW & REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a national of Albania, born on  17  March  1987.  She
arrived in the United Kingdom  on  3  June  2014  and  subsequently  claimed
asylum on the basis of having been trafficked from Albania to  Italy.  On  3
June 2014,  the  Respondent  refused  to  grant  asylum  and  the  case  was
initially processed with the DFT but was transferred out on  21  July  2014.
The appeal was hearing on 1 May 2015 by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ms  J
Macdonald and in a determination promulgated on 27 May 2015 the  appeal  was
dismissed, essentially on the basis that she  did  not  find  the  Appellant
credible.

2.    An application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
made on 10 May 2015 on the basis that the Judge erred materially in  law  in
a number of respects, namely: in making adverse findings in respect  of  the
fact that the Appellant did not claim  asylum  immediately  on  arrival  and
failed to mention the basis of her claim at  the  screening  interview,  the
Judge failed  to  take  account  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  as  to  her
insecurity based on previous experiences. Paragraph  8  of  the  grounds  of
appeal asserted that:  "The  Immigration  Judge's  approach  to  the  expert
report of Ms Abigail Stepnitz is of particular concern. The Stepnitz  report
is detailed, comprehensively sourced cf paragraph 40  of  the  Determination
and provides support for the plausibility of the Appellant's  account.  That
report is all but ignored by the Immigration Judge the only reference to  it
being to Ms Stepnitz's observation that the Appellant's means of  escape  as
"uncommon." That is a wholly unsustainable approach to expert  evidence  cf,
FS Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00004. The grounds of appeal further  asserted  that
it was of deep concern that nowhere did the  Judge  properly  or  adequately
consider the background material which indicates that Albania  is  a  source
country for trafficking, particularly of young women and her analysis of  AM
& BM (Trafficked Women) Albania [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC)  was  strange  focusing
on the factual differences between the cases rather than the  ratio  of  the
decision and the guidance provided.

3.    Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Deans
sitting as a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal on 22 June 2015 on  the  basis
that: "The criticisms in the application of the judge's decision  might  all
be regarded as quite minor apart from the apparent lack of consideration  of
the expert report, which arguably amounts to an error  by  failing  to  have
regard to relevant evidence. In turn the content of the expert report  might
have cast light on the other issues raised in the application  as  affecting
credibility and accordingly these grounds too are arguable."

Hearing

4.    At the hearing before me, Mr Amunwa relied on the  grounds  of  appeal
of 10 May 2015, his skeleton argument dated 20 August 2015 and  appended  to
htat the Home Office  guidance  on  Victims  of  Modern  Slavery:  Competent
Authority Guidance (Version 2) and the judgment of HHJ Clive  Heaton  QC  in
AB v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWHC  1490  (Admin)
and the terms of the grant of permission to appeal by Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Deans.  He  submitted  that  what  is  most  concerning  about  the  Judge's
reasoning is that there is no particular discussion of  the  report  in  his
note of the evidence. There is some  discussion  in  submissions  -  it  was
suggested that the fact that the escape route is uncommon shows  the  report
is independent. The Judge's  analysis  at  [140]  is  that  the  account  of
leaving the flat is described by her expert as uncommon.  This  falls  short
of a proper analysis of what is a substantial expert report  which  contains
conclusions which tend to strengthen  the  conclusions  of  the  Appellant's
account.

5.    Mr Whitwell relied upon the Rule 24 response and submitted that,  read
as a whole - not just the findings and reasoning at [136-154] - the  account
becomes more considered. He submitted that the expert  report  would  appear
to have been produced to attack the competent grounds letter and looking  at
[114] of the report  the  thrust  of  that  is  that  the  decision  of  the
competent authority was not challenged by way  of  a  judicial  review.  The
Judge in deciding the determination was perfectly entitled to take the  view
that the decision has not been  challenged  in  the  appropriate  forum.  He
submitted that the Judge was aware of the report as it was  referred  to  in
his recording of the submissions of the parties. At [140] the  escape  story
as uncommon is recorded. Ultimately the Judge has reasoned why he  does  not
accept the Appellant's account due to the delay  in  claiming  asylum  until
service of refusal  of  leave  to  enter  and  the  fact  that  she  gave  a
completely different account at her screening interview. Whilst the  Judge's
analysis of the expert report  could  be  more  detailed  as  it  is  rather
limited in its conclusions there is no error of law.

6.    In  his  response,  Mr  Amunwa  submitted  that  there  was  a  highly
important gap in the Judge's analysis; the evidence should have  been  taken
into account holistically. The expert was not just  attacking  the  decision
of the competent authority.

Decision

7.    I find that First Tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald  erred  materially  in
law in failing to engage with and make findings of fact in  respect  of  the
expert report of Abigail Stepnitz. Her  report  dated  16  July  2014  is  a
detailed one and is based not only on her expertise [set out in Appendix  1]
but also on an interview with the Appellant at Yarls Wood  IRC  on  11  July
2014. At [48]-[51] of the report the expert specifically  commented  on  the
Appellant's response and demeanour  when  being  questioned  concerning  her
experience  of  sexual  violence  and  she  further  noted  that,   in   her
experience, people who have been trafficked also disclose things  over  time
or partially or in a disjointed fashion for a number  of  reasons  including
stigma, shame, guilt,  lack  of  trust  in  authorities  and  experience  of
corrupt officials. The expert further stated that she considered  the  facts
in the  Appellant's  case  as  they  relate  to  the  UN  Human  Trafficking
Indicators checklist and the ILO matrix of indicators.

8.    Whilst the Judge was not obliged to accept the expert's  view  of  the
Appellant's account of having been trafficked, it  was  incumbent  upon  the
Judge to take account of the expert's evidence when  considering  the  issue
of the Appellant's  credibility  and  to  give  reasons  for  rejecting  the
expert's view if not accepted cf. R ota Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
Department ex parte B [2002] EWHC 1469 (Admin)  per  Forbes  J  and  in  the
specific context of expert evidence in trafficking cases:  the  judgment  of
HHJ Clive Heaton QC in AB v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
[2015] EWHC 1490 (Admin) at [40]-[41].

9.    In this case, the Judge made no findings at  all  in  respect  of  the
expert report. The only reference to the report is at  paragraph  140  where
the expert stated that: "her account of  leaving  the  flat  where  she  was
taken by Andi is described by her expert as uncommon." Thus in  the  absence
of any clear findings it is not possible to ascertain  whether  or  not  the
Judge accepted the expert's evidence in part or in its totality.

10.   Consequently, the appeal needs to be re-heard and the evidence of  the
Appellant requires re-assessment and  determination  as  does  that  of  her
witness. Mr Whitwell was anxious that the remitted  appeal  be  confined  to
asylum only as reliance on Article 8 was expressly withdrawn by counsel  for
the Appellant at the First Tier Tribunal, based  on  instructions  from  the
Appellant. Therefore, I remit the appeal back to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
for a hearing de novo on asylum and Articles 2 and 3  of  ECHR,  not  to  be
listed before First Tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

20 August 2015
