

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: AA042342015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 27th May 2016                             |On 16th June 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YH
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Rashid, Counsel instructed by Kothala & Co
(Harrow Road)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan born in 1977.  On  the  4th
    June 2015 the First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal against a decision
    to refuse him leave enter the United Kingdom following rejection of his
    asylum claim. The Secretary of  State  now  has  permission  to  appeal
    against that decision.


 2. The basis of the Respondent's asylum claim was that had a well  founded
    fear of persecution in Afghanistan for reason of his imputed  political
    opinion. He had worked as an interpreter for the  United  States'  Army
    and had latterly been involved in the 'Colombo Plan', a  western-backed
    project to try to discourage farmers from producing  the  opium  poppy.
    He claimed that because of these  jobs  he  had  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the Taliban, and a gang of drug smugglers,  both  of  whom
    had threatened his life.

 3. The Secretary of State had, in  a  letter  dated  25th  February  2015,
    rejected the claim in its entirety (bar acceptance that the  Respondent
    is Afghani).  The  reason  given  is  that  the  chronology  reveals  a
    significant discrepancy. The Respondent had been asked whether  he  had
    ever left Afghanistan and he said that he had been  to  Sri  Lanka  and
    Pakistan. When he was asked directly if he had been in the Maldives  he
    agreed that he had, in June or July 2014. Asked why he had  gone  there
    the Respondent had said that it was his intention to  try  and  get  to
    Europe to save the lives of himself and his family. The author  of  the
    refusal letter seized upon this disclosure for two  reasons.  First  of
    all the Respondent had not initially disclosed this trip, and  when  it
    was directly put to him gave an explanation for the omission  that  the
    Secretary of State regarded as unsatisfactory. This  generally  damaged
    his credibility. Secondly the reason cited for the journey - a fear for
    his safety - was not supported by the chronology.  The  Respondent  had
    claimed that he was not made directly aware of any threat, from  either
    drug smugglers or the Taliban, until the 22nd August 2014.  That begged
    the question why he would be trying to organise an escape  in  June  or
    July of that year. The Respondent's answer was  that  he  felt  general
    hostility from the people in Kala  Khal  who  were  supportive  of  the
    Taliban and he perceived the need to get his family  away  from  there.
    The Secretary  of  State  was  not  impressed  with  that  explanation,
    pointing out that on his own evidence the Respondent  had  returned  to
    his home town to attend Freedom Day celebrations in the August.




    The Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal


 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the Respondent gave
    oral testimony and  relied  on  documentary  evidence.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal stated that it considered all of the  evidence  in  the  round
    alongside the submissions. It directed itself to the correct burden and
    standard of proof and having done so made  the  following  finding  [at
    24]: "I accept that the Appellant is a credible witness at least so far
    as the core  of  his  account  is  concerned".   At  paragraph  27  the
    determination finds that the Respondent (the then appellant)  had  been
    unable to provide a proper  explanation  as  to  why  he  went  to  the
    Maldives in June/July 2014 and notes that in his witness  statement  he
    had changed his account from that given at interview. That trip was not
    made in order to organise his family's flight  to  Europe,  it  was  in
    order to seek medical treatment  for  his  daughter  who  had  a  cleft
    palate. It was not found credible that he would have returned home  for
    Freedom Day in August if he were so scared of the villagers that he had
    tried to leave the country.

 5. In respect of the Respondent's claimed occupation as an interpreter the
    Tribunal was satisfied  that  he  had  done  this  work.  The  Tribunal
    directed itself to the expert evidence of Dr Giustozzi  to  the  effect
    that there would be a risk from the Taliban to  someone  who  had  done
    that work for the Americans.  The conclusion is reached [at 30]:

         "I accept that this employment would potentially put him at risk of
         adverse attention from the Taliban. In that context his account  of
         the  threatening  letter  and  subsequent  raid  on  his  house  is
         credible. Whilst I accept that interpreters are not  considered  to
         be at risk on return simply because of the job they had,  I  accept
         that this individual appellant is at risk of harm from the  Taliban
         as a result of his previous job".

 6. Turning to the question of internal relocation the determination  finds
    that the Respondent would not be safe in Kabul. The  reason  given  for
    this finding is the "level of police corruption and the ineffectiveness
    of the police force".




    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are:


           a) That the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons
              for its finding that the Respondent would be at risk from the
              Taliban because he had briefly worked as  an  interpreter  in
              2007;


           b) That the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  reasons
              for its finding that the Respondent would be at risk of  harm
              in Kabul, given that the Taliban had not sought to  find  him
              there previously;

           c) The findings on credibility are contradictory  and  perverse.
              The  determination  states  that  the  Respondent  has  given
              unsatisfactory  explanations  for  discrepancies,  has  given
              evidence that  is  "not  credible"  and  has  not  given  "an
              entirely truthful account". It is therefore not clear to  the
              Secretary of State why the Tribunal accepted the core of  the
              account;

           d) The conclusions are contradictory and  perverse.  It  is  not
              clear from paragraph 33  whether  the  Tribunal  intended  to
              allow the appeal at all. If the appeal is allowed  on  asylum
              grounds, there is a  further  contradiction  in  that  it  is
              dismissed on Article 2 & 3 grounds with no explanation as  to
              why that should be.


 8. Mr Rashid pointed out that Tribunal's are perfectly entitled to  reject
    some of the evidence whilst finding  the  burden  of  proof  discharged
    overall.  There was no contradiction in,  for  instance,  the  Tribunal
    rejecting the claimed risk from drug smugglers but accepting  the  risk
    from the Taliban to be proven.  In respect of Kabul  the  Tribunal  had
    made a clear finding that the Respondent would  be  at  risk  from  the
    Taliban, and it was open to the Tribunal on the evidence before  it  to
    conclude that police corruption and inefficiency meant that  there  was
    not a sufficiency of protection.


    My Findings

 9. Mr Rashid is quite correct to say that  fact-finders  are  entitled  to
    reject some evidence whilst accepting other elements of a claim.  There
    is nonetheless in this determination a lack of logic and  clarity  such
    that it must be set aside. The Tribunal  accepted  the  risk  from  the
    Taliban was real whilst at the same time making adverse findings  about
    the chronology which went directly to that question  of  risk.  If  the
    Secretary of State had made good her  points  about  the  trip  to  the
    Maldives and  the  Freedom  Day  visit  that  was  capable  of  casting
    considerable doubt on the claim that the Respondent  fled  following  a
    threat from the Taliban. It is not apparent from the determination that
    the Tribunal assessed the credibility of the  claim  about  the  threat
    from the Taliban in  light  of  the  chronology.  Since  that  was  the
    Secretary of State's entire case before the First-tier Tribunal she  is
    entitled to complain about that omission.


10. I am further satisfied that the determination fails  to  give  adequate
    reasons in respect of return to Kabul. It is the Respondent's own  case
    that he was living in Kabul without difficulty from April 2013.  Again,
    this was a matter expressly relied upon  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    There was no evidence that the Taliban had looked for the Respondent in
    Kabul, nor that they had the means or inclination to do  so.  In  those
    circumstances it is difficult to find the evidential  underpinning  for
    the finding that they would do so today.   The  fact  that  the  police
    might be inefficient does not really matter if there are  no  operative
    agents of persecution.

11. Finally there is some difficulty arising from the concluding paragraphs
    of the determination. Paragraph 33 reads:

         "Given the factual conclusions that I have come to, I find that the
         Appellant has discharged the burden of proof to establish  that  he
         is a refugee. I am not satisfied that the  Appellant's  removal  to
         Afghanistan would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach  of  its
         obligations under the 2006 Qualification Regulations" (sic).


    My  added  emphasis  serves  to  highlight  the  discrepancy  in  these
    findings. In the paragraph that follows, the  appeal  is  dismissed  on
    Article 3 grounds.  I am not satisfied  that  the  conclusions  of  the
    Tribunal are at all clear.


12. It follows that the determination is set aside in its entirety. In  the
    circumstances the parties agreed that the matter should be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. Given  that  no  findings  of  fact  could  be
    preserved,  and  having  regard  to  the  extent  of  the  fact-finding
    required, I agreed that this was the most suitable disposal.




    Decisions

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  it
    is set aside.


14. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original  Appellant  (identified   in   this   determination   as   the
    Respondent).  This direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.
    Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
    of court proceedings








                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               10th June 2016
