
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04910/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 28 November 2013                           |On 13 December 2013          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                             MR AHIJAZ NABIZADA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                         DECISION ON AN ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born on 1 October 1995.   He
    claims to  have  left  Afghanistan  two  to  three  months  before  his
    screening interview held on 23 August 2011.  He was  a  minor  when  he
    arrived in the UK.  His appeal against the decision of  the  respondent
    made on 8 May 2013 refusing to grant him asylum and  giving  directions
    for his removal from the UK by way of directions under  Section  10  of
    the Asylum  and  Immigration  Act  1999  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lal.  The judge also dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

2.   On 18 July 2013 the appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal
    against the judge's decision was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ford.  FTTJ Ford held that the appellant's application was out of time,
    against a decision of the judge  promulgated  on  28  June  2013.   The
    appellant served the application for permission to appeal  on  8  July.
    No application was made for an extension of time under paragraph 24  of
    the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005   (as
    amended).

3.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  granted  permission  saying  that  the
    lateness of the First-tier application (for which the appellant  blames
    his lawyers) was not picked up by the administration: in any event,  it
    was relatively small, and arguably the judge who refused permission  in
    the First-tier Tribunal should not have done so on the sole basis  that
    there had been  no  application  for  an  extension  of  time,  without
    referring to the merits of the case  at  all.   He  granted  permission
    limited in the first place to the  question  of  whether  an  extension
    should have been given.  If that is decided in the appellant's  favour,
    he and his representatives should expect immediately to be called on to
    argue the question of whether the grounds showed any error  of  law  on
    the part of the judge.

4.   A skeleton argument was submitted by Counsel on 28 November  2013.   At
    paragraph 9 he stated that  the  determination  was  sent  by  recorded
    delivery on Friday 28 June 2013.   It  was  actually  received  by  his
    solicitors on 1 July 2013, which was a  Monday.   The  time  limit  for
    applying for permission to appeal was therefore Monday 8 July 2013.  On
    this basis he submitted that the appellant's application was in time.

5.    I  found,  as  submitted  by  Mr  Deller,  that  the  application  for
    permission to appeal which was made on 8 July was in time.

6.   I then had to consider what to do next as a result of  the  failure  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider the merits of the grounds  of
    appeal lodged with the application.  In  the  absence  of  a  grant  of
    permission we could not proceed to consider whether the grounds  showed
    any error of law on the part of the judge as directed by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Freeman.  In order to consider whether the grounds  disclosed  an
    arguable error of law, I heard oral submissions from the parties.

7.   I agreed with Mr Deller's submission that there were  two  identifiable
    errors in the judge's decision and these errors  were  fundamental  and
    therefore I could grant permission on those issues and at the same time
    set aside the judge's decision.

8.   The errors were as follows:

9.   The first error is that nowhere in the  determination  is  it  apparent
    that the judge was considering an  appeal  from  a  child.   The  Upper
    Tribunal has set out guidance on how to consider appeals from children.
     The judge failed to  apply  the  guidance.   The  judge  unnecessarily
    focused on  the  discrepancies  in  the  evidence,  in  particular  the
    discrepancy in relation to the appellant's journey to the  UK  and  his
    failure to claim asylum en route.

10.   The  second  error  was  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  documentary
    evidence.  He erred by discounting the Jirga and police report  on  the
    basis  of  his  earlier  finding  that  the  appellant's  account   was
    incredible. This error  was  material  in  that  the  judge  failed  to
    determine whether the report corroborated the appellant's account.

11.  On these errors alone  I  find  that  the  judge  erred  in  law.   His
    decision cannot stand.  I set it aside in order for it to be re-made.



DIRECTIONS

12.  By virtue of paragraph 7.2 of the Practice  Statements  issued  by  the
    Senior President of Tribunals on 25 September 2012, I am satisfied that
    the effect of the error has been to deprive the  appellant  of  a  fair
    hearing.  I therefore remit the appellant's appeal to Hatton Cross  for
    a fresh hearing.

13.  None of the judge's findings shall last.

14.  The appeal is to be re-heard by a  different  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    not First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal.

15.  The agreed date for the hearing of this case is 25 February 2014.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

