
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/04018/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 December 2013                            |On 17 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    H E-H
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a stateless person of  Palestinian  origins.   He  was
    born on 24 November 1982 in Egypt where he has lived  his  whole  life.
    He left Egypt on 16 June 2012 and came to the  UK  as  a  visitor  with
    leave valid until 30 November 2012.  He overstayed.  On 15 March  2013,
    the appellant claimed asylum on the basis that he  would  face  a  real
    risk of persecution if  returned  to  Egypt.   On  8  April  2013,  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim for asylum and  on  11
    April 2013 made a decision to remove the appellant to Egypt by  way  of
    directions under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 1 June 2013, Judge Cresswell dismissed the appellant's appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.



 4. On 26 June 2013, the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bird)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal first
    came before me on 7 October 2013.  In a decision dated 11 October 2013,
    I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in dismissing
    the appellant's appeal.  My  reasons  are  set  out  in  full  in  that
    decision which I do not repeat here.  In particular, I  concluded  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in finding that the  appellant
    would not be  at  risk  on  return  to  Egypt  based  upon  the  (then)
    Presenting Officer's  concession  that  the  appellant  would  only  be
    returned if he had a valid residence permit and therefore would not  be
    at risk as an illegal Palestinian living in Egypt.  Further the  First-
    tier Tribunal had failed to  take  into  account  the  expert  evidence
    first, that the appellant could only obtain a residence  permit  whilst
    in Egypt and secondly, that as a returning stateless Palestinian with a
    visit visa (but without a residence permit) he was at risk of detention
    and ill-treatment amounting to  persecution  or  serious  ill-treatment
    contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

 5. As a consequence, I set aside the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and
    the appeal was relisted for a resumed hearing before me on  2  December
    2013.

The Hearing

 6. Mr Hodgetts, on behalf of  the  appellant,  relied  upon  a  number  of
    documents contained  within  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  bundle  ("FtT
    bundle"), a principal bundle prepared for the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing
    ("UT  bundle"),  two  supplementary  bundles  prepared  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal ("supplementary bundle 1" and "supplementary bundle  2")and  a
    clarifying letter from one of the experts.

 7. Mr Hodgetts also relied upon the appellant's statement dated 2  October
    2013 (at pages 1-5 of  supplementary  bundle  1)  which  the  appellant
    adopted in his oral evidence.   He  also  relied  upon  expert  reports
    prepared by Dr George at pages 1-28 of the FtT bundle; by Ms Oroub  El-
    Abed at pages 29-35 of the FtT bundle, Dr George's letter dated 17 July
    2013 at pages 2-3 of the UT bundle, and an  addendum  to  Ms  El-Abed's
    report at pages 5A-5G of supplementary bundle 1 and the  report  of  Dr
    Harrell-Bond dated 28 November 2013  at  pages  3-32  of  supplementary
    bundle 2.  In addition Mr Hodgetts relied upon a number of emails  from
    the appellant (or sent on his behalf) to the Egyptian Consulate/Embassy
    and vice versa.  No objection was made on behalf of the  respondent  to
    the admission of the additional documents  not  previously  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 8. As I have indicated, the appellant  gave  oral  evidence  in  which  he
    adopted his statement of 2 October 2013 and  was  not  subject  to  any
    cross-examination by Mr Richards on behalf of the respondent.

The Appellant's Claim

 9. The appellant's claim can be summarised as follows.  He is a  stateless
    Palestinian who was born in Egypt and lived there until coming  to  the
    UK in June 2012.  As a stateless Palestinian, the appellant had various
    residence permits valid for three years and, so I was  told,  his  most
    recent such permit had been valid until sometime in 2014.

10. On 6 June 2012, he came to the UK with a six months' visa to visit  his
    two brothers who lived in the UK.   His  elder  brother  is  a  British
    citizen and his younger brother has an application for indefinite leave
    to remain pending.  The appellant's visit visa expired in December 2012
    and he overstayed.

11. The appellant's case is that, as he has been  outside  Egypt  for  more
    than six months, he can only return if he obtains a re-entry visa.   In
    addition, his residence permit in Egypt has been cancelled as he failed
    to return within six months.   The  appellant's  case  is  that  he  is
    unlikely to be able to obtain a re-entry visa to Egypt.  However, if he
    does obtain such a re-entry visa,  on  arrival  in  Egypt  he  will  be
    detained in conditions that  amount  to  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.  As I understood Mr  Hodgetts,
    that is the appellant's principal claim.  In addition, it  is  said  on
    the appellant's behalf that if he does gain entry (and it is only  then
    that he could seek a residence permit) the bureaucracy is such that  he
    is unlikely to obtain a residence permit within the 60 day  period  for
    which his re-entry visa would be valid and he will as a  result  become
    an illegal Palestinian in Egypt and again be at risk of detention as  a
    stateless illegal Palestinian in circumstances amounting to persecution
    or serious ill-treatment.  It is also said that he would not be able to
    satisfy the criteria for  the  renewal  of  his  residence  permit,  in
    particular he  would  lack  permission  to  work  or  enrolment  in  an
    educational institution.

The Respondent's Case

12. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the appellant's
    claim should fail.  He submitted that the appellant had failed to  show
    that he had been subject to any persecution  or  ill-treatment  in  the
    past.  The appellant had surrendered  his  residence  permit  by  being
    outside Egypt for more than six months.  He had applied  for  a  travel
    document and that application was pending.  Mr Richards submitted  that
    it might still be issued by the Egyptian authorities  and  if  it  were
    there was no reason  to  believe  that  he  would  be  subject  to  any
    mistreatment on return.  There was insufficient evidence to show that a
    stateless Palestinian travelling to Egypt who had not  been  mistreated
    in the past was subject to a real risk of serious ill-treatment in  the
    future.

The Impediment to Return issue

13. At the end of the representatives' submissions, I raised with them  the
    recent decision of the Court of Appeal in HF and Others (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 12.  There, the court considered the issue  of  whether
    an international protection claim can be established  where  there  are
    impediments  to  an  individual's  return,  for  example  because   the
    individual will  not  co-operate  in  obtaining  the  necessary  travel
    document.

14. I invited both representatives  to  make  written  submissions  on  the
    application of HF and Others and, as a consequence,  both  Mr  Hodgetts
    and Mr Richards  made  written  submissions.   In  brief,  Mr  Hodgetts
    submitted that HF and Others did not prevent the appellant establishing
    his international protection claim if he were returned to Egypt  having
    obtained a travel document and re-entry visa.   Mr  Hodgetts  submitted
    that HF  and  Others  was  distinguishable  as  there  the  individuals
    concerned declined to co-operate so as to make  their  return  to  Iraq
    feasible.  Here, Mr Hodgetts submitted, the appellant was  co-operating
    in applying for a travel document and, if he obtained a re-entry  visa,
    the expert and background evidence established that he would be at risk
    on return either by being detained at the airport  or,  if  allowed  to
    enter Egypt, because he would not be able to obtain a residence  permit
    which would again, as an illegal Palestinian living in Egypt,  put  him
    at risk of detention in conditions amounting to persecution or a breach
    of Art 3.

15. Mr Richards' written submission was that HF and Others applied  because
    the Secretary of State had given an assurance that the appellant  would
    not be removed to Egypt  without  a  residence  permit  and  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that stateless Palestinians in Egypt with
    residence permits were at risk of persecution or treatment contrary  to
    Art 3 of the ECHR.

Discussion and Findings

16. The primary facts are no longer in dispute in this appeal.  Mr Richards
    did not seek to challenge the appellant's evidence as set  out  in  his
    statement dated 2 October 2013.  I also did not understand Mr  Richards
    to  challenge  the  evidence   both   emanating   from   the   Egyptian
    Consulate/Embassy and set out in  the  expert  reports  concerning  the
    process (if any) by which the appellant could return to Egypt.

17. Consequently, I make the following findings  of  fact  based  upon  the
    evidence:

      a) The appellant left Egypt and arrived in the UK on 6 June 2012;

      b) The appellant remained more than six months outside Egypt  and,  as
         he had not first obtained a re-entry visa, his three year residence
         permit, in effect, was cancelled;

      c) The appellant did not apply for a re-entry visa prior to travelling
         because he only intended to stay in the UK for less than six months
         but did, in fact, choose to stay longer as a result of the  changed
         political situation in Egypt and his fear of return;

      d) The appellant first contacted the Egyptian Consulate on 10 December
         2012 and was told that unless he travelled back to Egypt before  16
         December 2012 his residence permit would be automatically cancelled
         on that day.  He was told that if he  wished  to  return  to  Egypt
         after 16 December 2012, he would have to apply for a  tourist  visa
         and that before he made an application he would have to  apply  for
         "pre-approval" which could take up to three months;

      e) Thereafter the appellant sought  confirmation  that  his  residence
         permit had been cancelled but was told by the Embassy that it could
         not be officially confirmed in  writing  unless  confirmed  by  the
         Egyptian authorities in Cairo first;

      f) In March 2013, the appellant was invited to  the  Egyptian  Embassy
         and told to bring his travel  document  as  confirmation  had  been
         received from the Egyptian authorities that  his  residence  permit
         had been cancelled;

      g) On 5 March 2013 the appellant attended  the  Egyptian  Embassy  and
         handed over his travel document which was stamped and he was  given
         a letter confirming the cancellation of his residence permit;

      h) Having sought legal advice, on 3 May 2013 the appellant emailed the
         Egyptian Embassy asking what procedure should be followed to  renew
         his residence permit;

      i) There then followed a number of  exchanges  by  email  between  the
         appellant (or his legal representatives)  and  the  Embassy,  which
         culminated in an email dated 26 July 2013 which set out the process
         by which the appellant could first, acquire a new  travel  document
         (his own having expired on 23 May 2013); obtain  a  visa;  and,  on
         return to Egypt, apply for residency.  The appellant can only apply
         for a residence permit from within Egypt (see  also  report  of  Dr
         George at para 75, FtT bundle)

      j) That procedure requires for a travel document  to  be  obtained,  a
         prior approval process which involves sending documents and details
         to Egypt and can take between one to three months;  if  that  prior
         approval is obtained then approval can be sought from the Consulate
         and a travel document obtained within one to two months;  in  order
         to obtain a tourist visa a further pre-approval process is set  out
         involving, again sending the documents to Egypt,  a  process  which
         takes between  two  to  six  weeks  and,  then,  if  successful  an
         application can be made to the Egyptian Consulate and a visa may be
         issued within two to three working days if the application is  made
         in person or five to seven working days if made by post.

      k) The appellant's evidence which, as I have said, was not challenged,
         and I accept, is that he has made the "prior-approval"  application
         for a travel document (and this is supported by the  documentation)
         and, most recently, on 27 November 2013 he emailed  again  but  has
         had no reply and he has not, therefore, obtained a travel document.

18. Further, I consider the submissions and evidence and make the following
    findings.

19. Mr Hodgetts submitted that the appellant would not be able to obtain  a
    travel document because, even if  he  were  to  pass  the  pre-approval
    process, he did not have the required "certificate of work or study" as
    set out in the email from the Egyptian Embassy dated 26 July 2013.   Mr
    Hodgetts did  not  elaborate  upon  what  precisely  was  this  missing
    documentation.  The expert evidence does not provide any  illumination.
    Dr Harrell-Bond deals only with the process from the point of seeking a
    visa to re-enter Egypt.  Ms El-Abed in an addendum to  her  report  (at
    page 5C of supplementary bundle 1) states that:  "I am  not  acquainted
    with the details of the travel document pre-approval and these are pre-
    approval processes." Again, she deals with the process from  the  point
    of the  appellant  seeking  a  visa  to  re-enter  Egypt.   Dr  George,
    likewise, does not deal with this part of the process in his report.

20. Consequently, it is not clear to me whether the requirement set out  in
    the  Embassy's  email  that  the  appellant  should  provide  either  a
    certificate of work or a certificate of study  in  order  to  obtain  a
    travel document, assuming that the appellant passes the prior  approval
    process, relates to a certificate of work or study  in  the  UK  or  in
    Egypt.  In truth, whichever it is, the appellant  does  not  appear  to
    have documents whether relating to the UK or Egypt.

21. Thus, I am not satisfied that the appellant would be able to  obtain  a
    travel document from the Egyptian authorities.  As the  recent  history
    has made plain, the Egyptian authorities have not  even  completed  the
    prior approval process within the claimed one to three months.

22. Further, even if the appellant did obtain a travel document, I  am  not
    satisfied that he would be able to obtain a visa to return to Egypt.

23. Dr Harrell-Bond in her report states in her conclusion  that:   "In  my
    opinion the appellant will not  obtain  a  tourist  or  other  visa  to
    Egypt."  That view derives from a passage in her report at page  17  of
    the supplementary bundle 2 in the following terms:

         "It has to be understood that a person will only obtain  a  visitor
         visa if the ambassador in the  embassy  concerned  approves.   This
         approval is not given without  first  obtaining  a  state  security
         clearance - as is the case in all embassies worldwide.  In the case
         of a Palestinian with an Egyptian residence, who has overstayed his
         exit permit, the ambassador will not be  able  to  obtain  security
         clearance on his behalf."

24. Ms El-Abed in the addendum to her report  states  at  page  5C  of  the
    supplementary bundle 1:

         "I can confirm the chances of [the appellant] being  issued  a  re-
         entry visa are virtually nil.  The  procedures  have  remained  the
         same after the revolution.  The Egyptian  Government  continues  to
         prevent any Palestinian who leaves the  Egyptian  territories  from
         returning back to Egypt if remaining outside of  Egypt  for  longer
         than the period allowed."

25. Ms El-Abed continues at page  5D  of  the  supplementary  bundle  1  as
    follows:

         "To my knowledge, all of the Palestinians that I  have  interviewed
         apart from one who had tried to apply for a visiting visa to return
         to Egypt from abroad were refused.  I  have  interviewed  one  only
         person who had been able to obtain a visitor's  visa  from  abroad.
         His family in Egypt used some contacts  to  help  him  obtaining  a
         visa."

26. Dr George, in his report dated 13 May 2013, states at para 77:

         "To the best of my knowledge and belief, 'temporary  admission'  is
         simply the admission to Egypt that is enabled by  possession  of  a
         visitor's visa.  I have no way  of  knowing  whether  the  Egyptian
         authorities would  be  likely  to  issue  [the  appellant]  with  a
         visitor's visa.  On the basis that  the  Egyptian  authorities  are
         antagonistic towards Palestinian refugees, I consider  it  unlikely
         that he would be issued with a visitor's visa.  I do not hold  this
         view with great confidence, however.  The authorities' decision  on
         the application would be influenced by a variety of  factors.   One
         such could be a desire not  to  cause  problems  with  the  British
         authorities by leaving [the appellant] stranded in the UK.  Such  a
         consideration could prompt the authorities  to  issue  him  with  a
         visitor's  visa,  although  I  stress  that  this  is   essentially
         speculation on my part."

27.  Bearing  in  mind,  Dr  George's  recognition  that   his   view   was
    "speculation", I am satisfied on the basis of the other expert evidence
    that the appellant is unlikely to be issued with a visit visa.

28. What would be the position if the appellant did obtain  a  visit  visa?
    In my judgment, the expert evidence is all one way.  There  is  a  real
    risk that he would be detained at the airport.  It is  likely  that  he
    would  be  denied  entry  to  Egypt  and  would  be  detained  for   an
    indeterminate period of  time  in  conditions  which  would  amount  to
    serious ill-treatment or persecution on the basis  of  his  Palestinian
    background.

29. Ms El-Abed at page 5B of supplementary bundle 1 states that:

         "... even if he is granted a visa he will not be allowed  to  enter
         Egypt on arrival at the airport."

30. At page 5D she continues:

         "If, hypothetically, [the appellant] were to be granted a  visa  to
         Egypt (after the renewal of his Travel Document) and allowed  entry
         to Egypt, he most probably would  be  held  in  the  airport  jail.
         However, he might be let into Egypt  only  to  be  imprisoned.   To
         note, there is a big  number  of  young  Palestinians  in  Egyptian
         prisons who have failed to provide  a  justifiable  and  acceptable
         reason for their stay in Egypt."

31. At paras 9-12 of  her  original  report,  Ms  El-Abed  deals  with  the
    treatment of Palestinians on return as follows:

         "9.  Detaining Palestinians at the border is a  common  occurrence,
             particularly for those who are stateless  and  have  only  the
             Egyptian travel document.  One example is Abu Saqer,  born  in
             Cairo in 1976, who held an Egyptian travel  document  and  had
             been living in Moscow.   When  his  Russian  residence  permit
             expired, he went to Egypt  to  see  his  family  and  also  to
             reapply for a permit at the  Russian  consulate  in  Egypt  to
             return to Moscow.  On arrival at Cairo airport in August 2001,
             he was denied entry and was eventually deported to Moscow.  In
             turn, the authorities in Moscow prevented  him  from  entering
             Russia due to the expiration of his residence permit.  He  was
             stranded between airports (at Moscow  and  Cairo  airports  as
             each country was sending  him  to  the  other)  for  at  least
             fourteen months.

         10.  In March of 2004, at Cairo Airport, I met  a  Palestinian  who
             held an Egyptian travel document who was given a re-entry visa
             in Germany but was denied  entry  to  Egypt.   His  mother  is
             Egyptian and he was raised in Egypt.  He  had  left  Egypt  in
             order to look for work and found employment in  Tanzania.   He
             came back to Egypt hoping to see his family for the  holidays.
             With a stamped re-entry visa (from  the  Egyptian  embassy  in
             Germany - the country of his wife), the  Egyptian  authorities
             still denied him entry and incarcerated him and  told  him  to
             seek a visa for another country.

         11.  Palestinians who are stateless and only  holding  an  Egyptian
             travel document face persecution especially because  they  may
             be detained for indeterminate periods of time.  When arrested,
             Palestinians may be sentenced, regardless of  the  grounds  of
             arrest.

         12.  Without a valid residency  permit,  Palestinians  coming  from
             outside Egypt will face incarceration for  indefinite  periods
             of  time  in  deplorable  conditions  and   face   abuse   and
             persecution at  the  hands  of  Egyptian  authorities.   These
             people will not be permitted to re-enter Egypt.  The  case  of
             the hundred  of  thousands  of  Palestinians  holders  of  the
             Egyptian travel documents who in 1990-1991 escaped from Kuwait
             as the Gulf war I erupted.  Many of them,  without  a  renewed
             residency permit, albeit the  Egyptian  travel  document  they
             held and the exceptional  conditions  of  the  war,  were  not
             permitted to enter Egypt.  The same scenario was repeated when
             Qadhaffi of Libya pushed Palestinians living in his country to
             go to the Palestinian borders in order to pressurize Israel to
             accept them.  From the estimated 30,000 Palestinians living in
             Libya, in majority holders of the Egyptian  travel  documents,
             almost 300-600 families ended up  being  stranded  in  Salloum
             camp for almost two years.  A deal, between the two states had
             to be negotiated for half of these families to be permitted to
             re-enter Egypt while the others had to go back to Libya."

32. At para 17 she set out the condition of detainees in Egypt as follows:

         "17. Detainees in Egypt are  kept  in  conditions  that  amount  to
             cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, and some become ill  as
             a result.  Recent reports of Amnesty International  and  Human
             Rights Watch all attest to the fact that persons are  detained
             without charge and held indefinitely  in  extremely  poor  and
             unhealthy conditions.   Such  detainees  are  also  more  than
             likely to be ill-treated, denied access to the outside  world,
             detained for indefinite periods  of  time,  denied  access  to
             healthcare, and possibly tortured."

33. In her report, Dr Harrell-Bond concludes as  follows  (at  page  18  of
    supplementary bundle 2):

         "If he were to obtain [a visa], he will be detained on  arrival  in
         Egypt (if allowed to disembark) and will not be allowed  to  resume
         his residency status in that country and  will  remain  imprisoned.
         The evidence gathered and presented in  the  Dutch  court  strongly
         suggests that a person in the appellant's position would be at risk
         of being detained indefinitely at  arrival  in  Egypt,  denied  the
         possibility to apply for  a  residence  permit  (even  if  he  were
         granted a visitor's visa, which in itself is unlikely) and while in
         detention be subjected to severe mistreatment.  ....

         I believe that there is also a risk that he would  subsequently  be
         moved to a state  prison  if  he  cannot  be  deported  to  another
         country.  If this were the case,  then  the  appellant  would  face
         further mistreatment at the hands of the Egyptian prison system, in
         the currently severe anti-Palestinian  atmosphere  which  permeates
         throughout Egyptian society."

34. In her report (at pages 14-15 of supplementary bundle 2),  Dr  Harrell-
    Bond explores in more detail the situation of returning Palestinians:

         "The treatment Palestinians on arrival  at  the  Cairo  airport  is
         theoretically determined on the basis of the travel documents  they
         are carrying and the country from which they arrived.  Palestinians
         with a valid Palestinian Authority passport are deported  from  the
         airport to the Gaza.  Palestinians with travel  documents  but  who
         have residence in another country will be deported  back  to  where
         they came from or coerced into travelling at their own  expense  to
         which ever country that will take them.  Palestinians  with  travel
         documents but no residency or visa to Egypt will be detained at the
         airport until they find a place to go, if  not  they  get  sent  to
         Egyptian prisons indefinitely.

         .....

         All Palestinians, regardless of the passport they hold,  appear  to
         be (mis)-treated equally.   This is best exemplified in the case of
         two Canadians - one of whom was a Palestinian medical doctor -  who
         were arbitrarily arrested, beaten, kept in horrific conditions  and
         held without charge for six weeks, only to be  released  after  six
         weeks of diplomatic work by the Canadian government."

35. At page 17 of the supplementary bundle 2, Dr Harrell-Bond continues:

         "If he is able to  obtain  a  visitor  visa  despite  the  existing
         security measures in place, the person will still  be  detained  at
         the airport.  If the person holds a Palestinian Authority  passport
         he will be escorted to Rafah, and deported to Gaza.  If he does not
         he will be detained indefinitely.  The only  exception,  as  stated
         earlier, is if he is a man of 60 years of age.

         The appellant being a Palestinian born in Egypt from a  family  who
         arrived in 1948, he cannot obtain a Palestinian Authority  Passport
         and as the Egyptian authorities will not be able to remove  him  to
         Gaza he will be detained on arrival at the  airport.   He  will  be
         detained for an indefinite period in an Egyptian prison.   It  will
         be difficult to ascertain his whereabouts after detention."

36. Mr Hodgetts also referred me to the potential detention  conditions  if
    that was the fate of the appellant as set out in the  respondent's  own
    Operational Guidance Notes as follows:

         "3.14.3   Consideration:   According  to  the   2012   U.S.   State
              Department  report,  conditions  in   Egyptian   prisons   and
              detention centres are generally harsh, with overcrowding, lack
              of medical  care  and  poor  sanitation  particular  problems.
              Provisions for  food,  water,  lighting  and  ventilation  are
              generally inadequate.  Abuse of prisoners, including  torture,
              is  common,  especially  in   relation   to   juveniles,   and
              tuberculosis is widespread.  Freedom House similarly  reported
              in January 2013 that prison inmates are subject to torture and
              other human rights abuses.  There  were  approximately  60,000
              prisoners in the penal system during 2012;  prison  conditions
              for women are said to be marginally better than for  men,  but
              there are credible reports  of  the  sexual  abuse  of  female
              prisoners.

              ...

         3.14.5   Amnesty  International  reports  that  torture  in  police
              custody has  been  systematic  and  widespread  in  Egypt  for
              decades and despite numerous official  pledges  following  the
              January 2011 uprising that police would respect human  rights,
              videos of torture and other ill-treatment continue to emerge.

              ...

         3.14.11  Conclusion:  Prison conditions in Egypt are harsh and  can
              be life-threatening, with  overcrowding,  poor  sanitation,  a
              lack of healthcare and generally  unhealthy  conditions  being
              particular problems.  In addition to these adverse  conditions
              there are numerous reports that officials and guards act  with
              impunity and regularly abuse and torture prisoners, physically
              and sexually, including to death.  Information  suggests  that
              such  ill-treatment  is  generalised  throughout  the   prison
              population, indicating that conditions are likely to reach the
              article 3 threshold in most cases."

37. On the basis of this evidence, I accept that if the appellant obtains a
    visa to re-enter Egypt, there is a real risk that he will  be  detained
    at the airport on return.  I further accept that  there  is  real  risk
    that he will, thereafter, be detained in an Egyptian  prison  and  that
    conditions will be such  as  to  breach  Art  3  of  the  ECHR  as  the
    respondent's own OGN states.  His detention will be on account  of  his
    Palestinian origin and his ill-treatment  will,  therefore,  be  for  a
    Convention reason.

38. Further, remembering that a residence permit may only be obtained  from
    within Egypt (see above para 17(i)), I accept  that  if  the  appellant
    were allowed to enter Egypt (which  I  consider  to  be  unlikely)  the
    evidence to which I was referred  demonstrates  that  the  bureaucratic
    process for him obtaining a residence permit is likely to be protracted
    (see Dr Harrell-Bond's report at page 8 of supplementary bundle 2).  Dr
    Harrell-Bond states that:

         "Without a residency permit, the  appellant  would  be  subject  to
         imprisonment .... Palestinians report that  the  process  for  them
         applying for any document is always prolonged.  Before applying for
         any document, a Palestinian needs a security check  which  takes  a
         minimum of eight weeks.  To renew one's residency, it is  necessary
         to begin the process at least four months before  it  expires,  and
         this has to be done in person if one is over the age of 18."

39. The appellant's visit visa would only be valid for 60 days.  Dr Harrell-
    Bond states that:

          "... where the Palestinian loses the  residence  for  any  reason,
         they cannot be permitted re-entry  to  Egypt  unless  the  security
         authorities look into  their  cases  and  issue  a  new  residence.
         Mostly however, security authorities never allow  re-entry  and  no
         new residencies are issued."

40. In my judgment, it is likely that the process for obtaining a residency
    permit could not be completed within the time of the appellant's  visit
    visa and he would, as a result, become an illegal Palestinian in  Egypt
    and would then be at risk of detention on that basis and, in the  light
    of  the  evidence  I  have  already  set  out,  to  the  conditions  of
    imprisonment amounting to a breach of Art 3 of the ECHR.

41. I was not specifically addressed on the issue of 'internal  relocation'
    by Mr Richards.  It is unclear the extent to which he now  relied  upon
    that.  Given, however that the real risk to the appellant of  detention
    and ill-treatment  on  return  arises  at  the  airport,  there  is  no
    possibility of internal relocation open to him to avoid that risk.   It
    would be impossible, in my judgment, given the background  evidence  to
    make good an argument that, when within Egypt, a stateless  Palestinian
    could avoid the  Egyptian  authorities,  particularly  given  that  the
    appellant would, entirely reasonably, be  seeking  a  residence  permit
    from the very authorities who might persecute or cause him serious harm
    by detention.

42. Consequently, if the appellant returns to Egypt, I  am  satisfied  that
    there is a real risk that he will be detained and the conditions of his
    detention would breach Art 3 of the ECHR and also, as they would result
    from his detention because of his Palestinian origins, would amount  to
    persecution for a Convention reason.

43. However, my findings are that it has  not  been  established  that  the
    appellant can (or will) be able to return voluntarily to Egypt  because
    either he will not be  able  to  obtain  a  travel  document  from  the
    Egyptian authorities or, alternatively, even if he  does  he  will  not
    obtain a visit visa.

44. Does that affect the validity of his claim to international protection?
     That is an issue not dissimilar to the argument  put  forward  by  the
    Secretary of State that the appellant will not be  returned  without  a
    residency permit.  As I have already indicated, I invited and  received
    written submissions from  both  representatives  in  relation  to  that
    latter issue and the effect of HF and Others (Iraq).

45. In HF and Others, it was argued that an individual could not succeed in
    establishing that he was a refugee or that his return would breach  Art
    3 of the ECHR where the Secretary of State undertook not to return that
    individual without the appropriate documentation and, in the absence of
    that documentation, there was a  real  risk  of  the  individual  being
    detained in a prison near Baghdad International Airport  in  conditions
    involving a breach of Art 3.

46. The Court of Appeal rejected  the  argument  that  the  fact  that  the
    individuals would  only  be  returned  with  documentation  had  to  be
    ignored.  The Court of Appeal accepted the submissions made  on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State set out at paras [98]-[99] as follows:

         "98. ... [Counsel for the Secretary of State's] contention is that,
             properly analysed, the practice of not returning those without
             the appropriate travel documents is not a voluntary policy  of
             the Secretary of State at  all.   The  lack  of  documentation
             creates an impediment to return which the Secretary  of  State
             cannot circumvent.  Iraq will not receive anyone from  the  UK
             without the relevant  travel  document.   If  an  unsuccessful
             applicant for asylum  refuses  to  co-operate  to  obtain  the
             laissez passer document, he is in precisely the same situation
             as any other failed asylum seeker whom the Secretary of  State
             is unable to return for one reason or another.  The  assurance
             of the Secretary of State that she would not return someone to
             Iraq  without  the  relevant  document  is   of   no   special
             significance;  it  simply  reflects  realities.   The  general
             position of someone who cannot be returned, whether because he
             cannot obtain  the  requisite  documents  or  for  some  other
             reason, is that  he  may  be  detained  or  granted  temporary
             admission  pursuant  to  section  67   of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  provided  at  least  there
             remains a possibility of his being returned at some  stage  in
             the future:  see R  (on  the  application  of  AR  and  FW)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ
             1310.  As Lord Justice Sedley pointed out in  that  case,  the
             condition of someone with that status is harsh, although being
             granted  temporary  admission  does   at   least   allow   the
             unsuccessful asylum-seeker to be free of actual detention.

         99.  Mr Eadie submits that these appellants are  precisely  in  the
             situation of any other failed asylum seekers who would not  be
             at risk in their own state but cannot for technical reasons be
             returned home.  The existence of such  technical  difficulties
             does not entitle them  to  humanitarian  protection.   Article
             8(3) of the Qualification Directive makes that plain where, as
             here, relocation is an option and it is a  fortiori  the  case
             where they are not at risk in their home area.  Moreover, they
             can hardly be in any better position  than  any  other  asylum
             seeker who cannot be returned technical reasons given that the
             technical difficulty stems from a deliberate  refusal  to  co-
             operate."

47. At [101] the court stated that the analysis was  "correct".   Elias  LJ
    (with whom Maurice Kay LJ and Fulford LJ agreed) stated that:

         "I accept .... that it would be necessary for the court to consider
         whether the appellants would be at risk on return if  their  return
         were feasible, but I do not accept that the  Tribunal  has  to  ask
         itself the hypothetical question of what would happen on return  if
         that is simply not possible for one reason or another."

48. Elias LJ continued:

         "I agree with the Secretary of State that the sur place  cases  are
         distinguishable because there the applicant could be  returned  and
         would be at risk if he were returned.  They are not  impediment  to
         return cases."

49. In my judgment, HF and Others does not prevent the appellant succeeding
    in this appeal.

50. First, the Court of Appeal was seeking  to  distinguish  the  situation
    where the non-returnability of an individual stemmed from the Secretary
    of State's policy not to return a person unless it was safe  to  do  so
    (which could not defeat a claim to international protection) and  where
    that individual's return could not be effected because  of  a  lack  of
    documentation.

51. Secondly, however, in HF  and  others  that  latter  situation,  namely
    return without the documentation, gave rise to the  very  circumstances
    which created the risk of serious ill-treatment to  the  individual  on
    return.  The risk of being imprisoned in conditions breaching Art 3  in
    Iraq only  arose  for  those  who  were  returned  without  appropriate
    documentation.  In this appeal, the absence of documentation (at  least
    in respect of a travel document and entry visa) is not  the  source  of
    the risk to the appellant on return to Egypt.  The source of  risk  is,
    rather, that he is a returning Palestinian without a  residence  permit
    in Egypt.  I do not understand the Court of Appeal to  exclude  from  a
    claim to international protection a person who, if he were in  his  own
    country, would be at risk but (independently  of  the  source  of  that
    risk) cannot in fact be returned to his own country.  In accepting  the
    submission of the Secretary of State's Counsel in HF  and  Others,  the
    Court of Appeal accepted that the individuals in HF and  Others  should
    not be treated differently from any "other  failed  asylum  seeker  who
    would not be at risk in their own  state"  but  "cannot  for  technical
    reasons be returned home".  Whilst that was true of the individuals  in
    HF and Others, it is not true of the appellant.  If returned to his own
    country, on the evidence as I have found above, he would be at risk  of
    persecution for a Convention reason or serious  ill-treatment  contrary
    to Art 3.  The appellant is a refugee as  he  is  outside  his  country
    because of a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason.
    He is not a  failed  asylum-seeker  or  someone  analogous  who  cannot
    demonstrate a risk within his own  country  or  could  only  do  so  by
    relying on the particular circumstances or route of return.   For  him,
    the risk exists independently of how he is returned, once he arrives in
    Egypt.

52. Finally, this may not even be a case  where  the  appellant  cannot  be
    returned by the Secretary of State to Egypt.  The evidence is only that
    he cannot himself voluntarily return because  he  would  not  obtain  a
    travel document or visa to do so.  Nothing in Mr Richards'  submissions
    in relation to HF and others, either made  orally  or  subsequently  in
    writing, deals with  the  appellant's  inability  to  return  to  Egypt
    voluntarily.   Rather,   Mr   Richards'   written   submissions   focus
    exclusively upon the Secretary of State's intention not to  return  the
    appellant unless and until he obtains a residency document.   That,  of
    course, on the evidence as I have found,  he  cannot  do  from  outside
    Egypt.  The fact that the Secretary of State has decided not to  return
    the appellant to a situation where, if he did, through no fault of  the
    appellant's, he would be at risk on arrival (and thereafter)  of  being
    detained and seriously  ill-treated,  does  not  defeat  his  claim  to
    international protection.

53. For these reasons, therefore, the fact that the  appellant  cannot,  in
    fact, voluntarily return to Egypt and the Secretary  of  State  has  no
    intention of returning him unless he has a residency permit  in  Egypt,
    does not abrogate his entitlement to international  protection  on  the
    basis that, if returned, he would be  at  risk  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason and treatment contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

Decision

54. For the reasons set out in my earlier decision, the First-tier Tribunal
    erred in law in dismissing the appeal.  The decision is set aside.

55. For the above reasons, I remake the decision allowing on asylum grounds
    and under Art 3 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
