
[pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04886/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th November 2014                        |On 19th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                              MRS GURPREET KAUR
                        (NO anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr J Chhotu, Direct Access Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 8th July  1989.  She  first
    came to the UK  on  4th  July  2009  as  a  working  holiday-maker.  In
    2009/2010 she says  she  converted  from  Sikhism  to  Islam.  On  12th
    September 2011 she married Mr  Atta  Ullah  Khan,  a  Pakistani  Muslim
    studying in the UK. Between 2011  and  2013  there  were  a  number  of
    applications made for the appellant to remain as the partner/spouse  of
    Mr Khan which were all unsuccessful. On 25th March 2013  the  appellant
    applied for asylum. She was refused asylum in a letter dated 25th  June
    2014.  She appealed on 16th July 2014.  Her appeal was dismissed  in  a
    determination of Judge LK Gibbs of the First-tier Tribunal following  a
    hearing on 18th August 2014.

 2. On 1st October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew found  that
    there was an arguable error of law  because  the  Judge  Gibbs  had  no
    engaged with country of origin  material  before  her  and  because  no
    reasons were given for  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  and  her
    husband could have their family life in India.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 4. Mr Chhotu relied upon the grounds of appeal but amended  them  in  oral
    submissions and with the help of a skeleton  argument.  In  summary  he
    argues as follows. It was argued that the appellant had a valid  asylum
    claim which needed to be determined based on  her  fear  of  an  honour
    killing by her family as she had married a  Muslim  man  against  their
    wishes. It was accepted by Judge Gibbs that the appellant had  formally
    (if not sincerely) converted to Islam and that she was in a genuine and
    subsisting relationship with a Muslim Pakistani man. Country of  origin
    material was before the First-tier Tribunal which would support risk of
    an honour killing in these circumstances and was not considered.  Judge
    Gibbs had erred because she has seen the appeal as one just about  risk
    based on a religious conversion, and thus had not  adequately  explored
    risk from the appellant's family arising from her marriage.

 5. Mr Chhotu maintained also that there had been a  procedural  unfairness
    in that the appellant's evidence had not been  sufficiently  challenged
    about anything other than her conversion to Islam in  the  hearing.  As
    such she was unaware that such negative conclusions, as were set out in
    paragraph 40 of the determination, would be  drawn  about  the  general
    credibility of her evidence. The appellant's evidence about  the  risks
    to her in India and Pakistan ought to have been accepted by Judge Gibbs
    absent direct challenges to it in the hearing. It was  not  permissible
    for the respondent just to rely upon the  refusal  letter  globally  in
    submissions.

 6. In relation to the Article 8 ECHR claim  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed to look at all  the  elements  of  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act and so had not given the appellant  the
    benefit of the positive elements. It was inaccurate  to  say  that  her
    relationship had developed when she was unlawfully in the UK as she had
    started her relationship with her husband when she was in the  UK  with
    leave as a working holiday-maker. There  was  also  a  failing  in  the
    determination as it did not set out a Razgar style analysis of  Article
    8 ECHR at paragraphs 43 and 44, and because it had not been  considered
    whether the appellant could live in India or Pakistan with her husband.
    Mr Chottu accepted that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
    of the relevant Immigration Rules at paragraph 319C.

 7. Mr Jarvis argued that there had been no challenge to the lawfulness  of
    the finding by Judge Gibbs that there would be no adverse interest from
    the appellant's family. This was a new ground of appeal and  permission
    should have been applied for on this basis.

 8. It was also a new ground to argue that there were procedural errors  in
    the determination of Judge Gibbs. It was not correct to say that it was
    the role of the judge to cross-examine on any issue, this was not  part
    of the Procedure Rules indeed it would be an error if a judge  were  to
    do so. It was also perfectly acceptable for the Secretary of  State  to
    globally rely upon the refusal letter in submissions. There was no need
    for the Secretary of State to cross-examine on all issues  either.  The
    Secretary of State relied upon what the appellant had said at interview
    about living with her husband in India at paragraph 76 of  the  reasons
    for refusal letter: that he would not want to do this  because  it  was
    his dream to settle in the UK or Saudi Arabia.

 9. The appellant had in any case failed to identify any material flaws  in
    the  determination  of  Judge  Gibbs.  Judge  Gibbs  finding  that  the
    appellant's family would not treat her with  adverse  interest  is  not
    irrational at paragraph 40 of the determination. She points to the lack
    of credibility  in  the  appellant's  evidence;  the  lack  of  adverse
    interest by the appellant's relatives in the UK and the lack  of  calls
    from the appellant's family in India since September 2011.

10. It had been accepted for  the  appellant  that  the  finding  that  the
    appellant had just made a formal conversion to Islam (paragraph  38  of
    the determination) was not legally flawed; and  this  was  the  central
    plank of the asylum case put to Judge Gibbs. There was no need for  her
    to look at the country of origin evidence about honour killings as  she
    found at paragraph 40 of her determination that this appellant's family
    had no adverse interest in her.

11. The Article 8 ECHR analysis was not legally flawed. There was  no  need
    to set the five Razgar points out if all  the  relevant  findings  were
    made. It was clear that Judge Gibbs found that the appellant had family
    life and that this would  be  interfered  with  if  she  were  removed.
    However this was found  to  be  a  proportionate  interference  in  the
    circumstances of the case.

12. At the end of the hearing I told the parties that I was satisfied  that
    Judge Gibbs had not erred in law. I set out my reasons below.

Conclusions

13. The first ground of appeal contends that it was an error of law not  to
    have dealt with country of origin material  regarding  family  "honour"
    killings in India in  circumstances  where  the  victims  have  married
    against their family's wishes. It is correct that this material was not
    referred to by Judge Gibbs but she had no reason to do so as she  found
    that the appellant was not at  risk  of  an  honour  killing  from  her
    family.

14. As Mr Jarvis has argued Judge Gibbs gives three substantial reasons for
    her finding at paragraph 40 of her  determination  that  she  does  not
    believe that the appellant's family have an adverse interest in her  as
    a result of her marriage to Mr Khan. These reasons are  not  irrational
    and there is no error of law in her conclusion on this issue.

15. Judge Gibbs was entitled to find that the appellant was not a  credible
    witness as she gives detailed reasons for her findings that she has not
    told the truth to the Tribunal about  her  reasons  for  conversion  to
    Islam. However she does not just rely upon a finding that the appellant
    is not a credible witness, she points to two further  issues  based  on
    the appellant's testimony (the lack of adverse interest by  her  family
    in India since 2011 and the lack  of  any  adverse  interest  from  her
    family in the UK) as leading her to conclude that the appellant was not
    at risk from an honour killing. As Judge Gibbs has found  there  is  no
    risk from the appellant's family there is no need for her  to  consider
    background evidence on the issue.

16. Mr Chhotu has argued  a  further  ground  which  was  not  amongst  the
    original ones granted permission. This is not procedurally  correct  as
    Mr Jarvis has pointed out. However I will deal with  it  as  I  do  not
    believe it discloses a material  error  of  law  either.  There  is  no
    procedural error in Judge Gibbs not  engaging  herself  in  any  cross-
    examination of the appellant on any issue. It is for the  appellant  to
    present her case in the context of the issues raised as in  dispute  by
    the respondent in the reasons for refusal letter. All  matters  put  in
    dispute by the reasons for refusal letter are ones  which  Judge  Gibbs
    must  determine  on  the  totality  of  the  evidence,  including   any
    examination in chief and cross-examination of witnesses, before her. It
    is for the parties to decide the extent any examination  of  witnesses.
    The  appellant  was  not  taken  by  surprise  in  any  sense  in  this
    determination as there were no incidences of Judge Gibbs going behind a
    concession made by the respondent. Judge Gibbs did not simply determine
    the issue of the sincerity of the conversion:  she  examined  the  risk
    from the appellant's family in the context of her relationship and  her
    Article 8 ECHR rights.

17. Mr Jarvis correctly argues that there is no need  for  Judge  Gibbs  to
    refer to Razgar or  set  out  a  five  point  analysis  following  this
    authority so long as she deals with all of the key issues. I find  that
    she has done this. She has found that there  is  family  life  in  this
    case, and at paragraph 43 refers back to her previous reasoning  as  to
    why the relationship between the appellant and Mr Khan is found  to  be
    genuine.  She  clearly  accepts  that  there  will  be  an  element  of
    interference if the appellant is removed, although she notes that as Mr
    Khan only has leave to remain in the UK until 19th April 2015 this  may
    not  be  a  significantly  long  one   (see   paragraph   44   of   the
    determination).

18. Judge Gibbs notes the authority of Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  Rules  -
    correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 and that following  this  authority
    she is not obliged to carry out a freestanding Article 8 ECHR  analysis
    if here are no arguably good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules. It is accepted by Mr Chhotu  for  the
    appellant that the appellant could not meet  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules to remain as Mr  Khan's  wife.  No  case  was  advanced  for  the
    appellant that she could meet the Immigration Rules as a  spouse  of  a
    Tier 4 student migrant bar not having  leave  or  entry  clearance  for
    instance. Before Judge Gibbs the appellant's representative (Mr  Bahja)
    had not given any  particulars  of  good  grounds  for  granting  leave
    outside of the Immigration Rules in his skeleton but  had  just  baldly
    stated  that  such  grounds  did  exist  (see  paragraph  44   of   the
    determination).

19. However Judge Gibbs does in fact go on to examine  the  proportionality
    of removal at paragraph 44 of her  determination.  She  finds  that  it
    would be proportionate in the context of the appellant  marrying  after
    she no longer had leave (this is factually correct as  she  married  on
    12th September 2011 when her working holiday leave to enter had expired
    in June 2011) and gives consideration to s.117B(4) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in this connection. It  is  clear  that
    Judge Gibbs had been aware that the appellant had valid leave prior  to
    this as she notes this at paragraphs 5 and 6 of the  determination  and
    that the first in-time application for the appellant  to  remain  as  a
    partner of Mr Khan had been refused due to insufficient funds.

20. Judge Gibbs  also  notes  the  limited  stay  the  appellant's  husband
    currently has in the UK; she finds that it is open to the appellant  to
    return to India and apply for entry clearance to join Mr Khan here; and
    that the appellant and Mr Khan could have family life in India for  the
    reasons set out earlier in her determination. Judge Gibbs has of course
    found earlier in the determination at paragraph 40 that the appellant's
    family has no adverse interest in her as  a  result  of  her  marriage.
    There is also a finding that there was no country of origin information
    before her that suggested that an interfaith marriage put the appellant
    and Mr Khan at risk in India (see paragraph 41). I  do  not  find  that
    this analysis is materially legally flawed or factually incorrect.

Decision

 1. The First-tier Tribunal had not erred in law.

 2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the  appeal  is
    upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date 18th November 2014

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed        Date 18th November 2014

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



