
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04357/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2014                           |On 27 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                     F Y
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel instructed by Switalskis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She  entered  the  UK  on  15
      August 2011 with a valid grant of entry  clearance  until  14  October
      2013, in the company of her mother and siblings.
   2. In May 2013 the Appellant approached staff at her  college  to  report
      that her family proposed to force her into  an  arranged  marriage  to
      which she did not consent. Bolton  Social  Services  and  police  were
      involved as a result, and she was removed from her family to a refuge.


   3. On 3 February 2014 with the assistance of Bolton Social  Services  the
      Appellant claimed asylum. The Appellant's case was that  she  faced  a
      risk of harm from non state  agents  in  the  event  of  a  return  to
      Pakistan, against which the authorities would be unable  or  unwilling
      to provide protection.
   4. On 12 June 2014 the Respondent refused her asylum claim,  and  made  a
      decision to remove her to Pakistan. The Appellant's appeal against the
      removal decision was heard on 28 July 2014, and  was  dismissed  in  a
      Determination promulgated on 6 August  2014  by  First  Tier  Tribunal
      Judge Hands. In the course of that  Determination  the  Judge  made  a
      series  of  adverse  findings  of  fact,  rejecting  as   untrue   the
      Appellant's account of her experiences.
   5. First Tier Tribunal Judge Mailer granted the Appellant  permission  to
      appeal the decision on 2 September 2014.
   6. The Respondent has filed no Rule 24 Notice, but opposes the appeal  on
      the basis there was no error of law in the  Judge's  approach  to  the
      evidence.
   7. Thus the matter comes before me.


   The Judge's reasoning
   8. According to paragraph 25 of the Determination the Respondent accepted
      by the date of the hearing of the appeal that the Appellant  had  been
      subject to a forced marriage, and that she would  be  a  member  of  a
      "particular social group" in the event of return to Pakistan.
   9. It is common ground that the Judge's approach was to  find;  (i)  that
      the Appellant did not disclose the fact that she was  already  married
      when she first sought assistance from staff at her college,  and  (ii)
      that the Appellant  had  not  told  the  truth  about  her  continuing
      contacts with members of her family after she first sought  assistance
      from staff at her college.
  10. The Judge appears to have identified that the enquiries made by Social
      Services which are detailed in the report prepared  in  early  October
      2013 [B1-] did not  extend  to  any  enquiries  or  interview  of  the
      Appellant's husband, and father in law, even though officers  were  by
      then aware that the Appellant was already married.  The Judge comments
      that  this  aspect  of  the  Appellant's  account  "has  largely  been
      ignored".
  11. The Judge noted the account the Appellant had given of marital rape in
      her witness statement and interview, and that this was the trigger for
      her seeking help at her college.


   The errors in the Judge's approach
  12. It is common ground that the Determination contains  no  reference  to
      the letter from Bolton Social Services of 29 January 2014 that in turn
      refers to the multi agency approach to the Appellant's  circumstances,
      and the conclusion that she was at risk of harm from both (a)  members
      of her own extended family, and, (b) members of her husband's extended
      family. That letter was specifically referred to by  Counsel  for  the
      Appellant in the course of her oral submissions, and was  referred  to
      in her skeleton argument. At paragraph 34  of  the  Determination  the
      Judge notes the earlier Bolton Social Services  report  of  4  October
      2013 [B1-] and concludes that it does not make any  reference  to  the
      Appellant facing a risk  of  harm  from  her  husband.  It  is  in  my
      judgement plain from the Determination that the Judge  has  overlooked
      the letter of 29 January 2014, and thus overlooked the  fact  that  it
      constituted evidence that a multi agency assessment of risk  conducted
      by both Bolton Social Services and the police had concluded  that  she
      faced precisely that risk.
  13.  There  is  moreover,  no  adequate  analysis  to  be  found  in   the
      Determination,  of  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  sequential
      disclosure by the Appellant of her account, because the  Judge  having
      noted the Appellant's account of the incidents of marital  rape  being
      the trigger for her seeking the assistance of a welfare officer at her
      college, makes no further comment upon that evidence.
  14. Instead the Judge's approach appears to have been to conclude that the
      Appellant's  account  was  not  credible   notwithstanding   (a)   the
      concession made by the Respondent  that  she  was  subject  to  forced
      marriage, and, (b) the assessment of the risk faced by  the  Appellant
      as a result of her rejection of that forced  marriage  that  had  been
      undertaken  by  the  professionals  involved  in  dealing   with   the
      Appellant.
  15. I am satisfied that the Judge's approach to the evidence was  such  as
      to render the Determination unsafe, for lack of adequate reasoning and
      analysis of the evidence placed before the Tribunal. I have  in  these
      circumstances considered whether or not to remit  the  appeal  to  the
      First Tier Tribunal  for  it  to  be  reheard,  as  requested  by  the
      Appellant. In the circumstances of the appeal I am satisfied that this
      is the correct approach, and I  note  Mr  Dewison  does  not  seek  to
      suggest otherwise. In circumstances where it  would  appear  that  the
      relevant evidence has not properly been considered by the  First  Tier
      Tribunal, the effect of that error of law  has  been  to  deprive  the
      Appellant of the opportunity for his case to be properly considered by
      the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of
      25 September 2012. Moreover the extent of the  judicial  fact  finding
      exercise is such that having regard to the over-riding  objective,  it
      is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted to  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of  25  September
      2012.
  16. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal. The appeal is not to  be
              listed before Judge Hands. The appeal  is  to  be  listed  at
              North Shields on 25 November 2014 before me, allowing 1 hour,
              for Directions only (which shall include fixing  a  date  for
              the hearing of the  appeal),  since  it  is  anticipated  the
              Appellant will now  seek  to  obtain  further  evidence  from
              Bolton Social Services and the police as to their enquiries.
          ii) An Urdu interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal
              although not for the Directions hearing.
         iii) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.




Decision

  17. The Determination promulgated on 6 August 2014 did involve the  making
      of an error of law and accordingly the decision upon the appeal is set
      aside. The appeal is remitted to the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeal is set aside and the  appeal  is
              remitted to the First Tier Tribunal. The appeal is not to  be
              listed before Judge Hands. The appeal  is  to  be  listed  at
              North Shields on 25 November 2014 before me, allowing 1 hour,
              for Directions only (which shall include fixing  a  date  for
              the hearing of the  appeal),  since  it  is  anticipated  the
              Appellant will now  seek  to  obtain  further  evidence  from
              Bolton Social Services and the police as to their enquiries.
          ii) An Urdu interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal
              although not for the Directions hearing.
         iii) The Anonymity Direction previously made  by  the  First  Tier
              Tribunal is preserved.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 22 October 2014

