
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/04935/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                    |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 September 2017                   |       On 11 September 2017          |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          mohamed abdullahi abdalle
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holt, instructed by Sutovic Hartigan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mohamed Abdullahi Abdalle, was born on  1  January  1978
    and is a citizen of Somalia.  He entered the United Kingdom in February
    2014.  By a decision dated 6 March 2015,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application for asylum and made directions  to  remove  him
    under paragraphs 8-10 of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge O'Flynn) in a decision promulgated on  19  January
    2017 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  First, the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is challenged on the  basis  that  the  judge  failed  to
    understand the evidence.  At the core  of  the  appellant's  claim  for
    asylum was his assertion that he had been approached by Al  Shabaab  in
    Mogadishu, Somalia and that the organisation had wanted  the  appellant
    to help them recruit others to its cause.   The  appellant  had  relied
    upon an expert report (Miss Harper) which indicates that,  although  Al
    Shabaab was unable to engage in systematic large-scale recruitment,  it
    needed to enlist the help of  others.   Miss  Harper  quotes  a  Danish
    Immigration Service report: "the UN official saying  that  although  Al
    Shabaab probably no longer  recruits  systematically  in  Mogadishu  it
    might employ people to carry out certain  activities  on  its  behalf."
    Judge O'Flynn, however, relying upon the country guidance of MOJ [2014]
    UKUT 00442 (IAC) found at [39] that

         the difficulty for the appellant in this case is that  the  country
         guidance case of MOJ suggests that Al Shabaab does  not  engage  in
         forced recruitment in Mogadishu at the time the appellant claims he
         was threatened by them (2013/2014).  It is clear from the case that
         there may be arbitrary attacks in public places and what I have  to
         consider here is Al Shabaab's activity in forcing the appellant  to
         recruit on their behalf or be threatened with death.

 3. The judge refers to the relevant country guidance of MOJ & Ors  (Return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).   I   note  that  the
    Tribunal in MOJ considered forced recruitment at [395-396]:

         395.    It is entirely clear from the evidence  that  there  is  no
         real risk of forced recruitment to Al Shabaab, despite the  opinion
         to the contrary expressed by the expert witnesses. We have set  out
         above a range of well-informed views, given by respected  observers
         present on the ground in Mogadishu, that contradicts that  opinion,
         including the following, taken from the Danish 2 report:




         "The local NGO (C) had no reports of forced recruits to  al-Shabaab
         in the city of Mogadishu..."



         "When asked... an international  NGO  working  in  SC  Somalia  (D)
         stated that it had not heard about this..."



         "The NGO reiterated that it did not believe that al-Shabaab is able
         to undertake forced recruitment in Mogadishu..."



         "Saferworld found it unlikely  that  al-Shabaab  undertakes  forced
         recruitment today"




          "Regarding  forced  recruitment  to  al-Shabaab  in  Mogadishu  an
         international NGO working in S/C Somalia (C) stated that al-Shabaab
         does not have the leverage to undertake forced recruitment today...
         and  the  NGO  was  confident  that  al-Shabaab  is  incapable   of
         recruiting in Mogadishu.

          396.    Mr Toal advances an ingenious argument the thrust of which
         is that, even if there is no  risk  of  forced  recruitment,  if  a
         person has no resources, no access to a livelihood  and  is  facing
         destitution, he may be driven to accept money from  Al  Shabaab  to
         carry out tasks for them but, in recruiting him on this  basis,  Al
         Shabaab would be abusing  his  vulnerability  such  that  it  would
         amount to trafficking,  such  as  to  infringe  Article  4  of  the
         Convention against Trafficking. We do not exclude that argument  as
         being sustainable in certain individual circumstances,  but  it  is
         certainly not made out in relation to civilian returnees in general
         and whether it is applicable in the case of SSM will depend upon an
         assessment of his circumstances and  whether  he  established  that
         level of vulnerability. In any event, where it is established  that
         a returnee would in fact  find  himself  living  in  conditions  of
         destitution, he would look to the protection of Article  3  of  the
         ECHR.

 4. The judge also noted that the Tribunal in MOJ had found that a  durable
    change had occurred and that Al Shabaab had  withdrawn  from  Mogadishu
    "completely" and there  was  "no  real  prospect  of  a  re-established
    presence [of Al Shabaab] within the city."  At [43] the judge  went  on
    to find that,

         having found that the appellant's account was not  consistent  with
         the country guidance on Somalia, then the  appellant's  'story'  is
         not credible with regard to threats from Al Shabaab.  This  is  the
         key reason why I find his story is not believable.

    The judge then proceeded to assess the case, including risk on  return,
    on the basis the appellant had given  an  untruthful  account  of  past
    events.

 5. The first ground of appeal challenges the judge's analysis on the basis
    that the appellant had not claimed that he had been forcibly  recruited
    by Al Shabaab or forcibly attempted to recruit him as described by  the
    Tribunal in MOJ.  Rather,

         It is the appellant's case that Al Shabaab wanted the appellant  to
         help to recruit people to their cause.  He guesses that Al  Shabaab
         thought he would be a good person to spread their word because  his
         tea shop was busy and he was friendly and  good  with  people.   In
         addition it is the appellant's account that after he rejected  that
         offer to recruit on their behalf Al Shabaab ordered  them  to  stop
         selling to government forces and it was  at  this  point  that  the
         threats began.

 6. I find that the ground of appeal has no merit.   The  Upper  Tribunal's
    analysis of forced recruitment by Al Shabaab at [395] (see  [3]  above)
    makes no distinction whatever between forcible recruitment to the ranks
    of Al Shabaab and persuasion of individuals to recruit on behalf of  Al
    Shabaab.  The point made by the Tribunal is that Al Shabaab's influence
    in Mogadishu had, since the time of the previous  country  guidance  of
    AMM, collapsed and that there was "no real prospect  of  re-established
    presence within the city."  That is  a  finding  which  I  consider  is
    comprehensive  enough  to  include   forcible   recruitment   and   the
    recruitment by proxy which the appellant describes in his  account.   I
    am also not persuaded at all that the judge misunderstood the nature of
    the appellant's case.  At [21], the judge recorded that, in  answer  to
    questions which he had  asked  the  appellant  at  the  hearing,  "[the
    appellant] explained that at first they asked him to join them  and  be
    their agent but when he refused it was then they told him not  to  sell
    goods to  the  soldiers."   [My  emphasis].   It  is  clear  from  this
    paragraph that the judge was aware that the appellant had claimed  that
    Al Shabaab had approached him to act "as their agent".  Further,  I  am
    satisfied that the form of approach by  Al  Shabaab  described  by  the
    appellant which he said he had encountered in  Mogadishu  falls  within
    the definition of forced recruitment.  When the appellant refused to co-
    operate with Al Shabaab and to use his influence to recruit  others  on
    behalf of the organisation, he  claims  that  he  was  threatened  with
    violence.   The  recruitment  was,  therefore,  forced  in  that,   the
    appellant had no alternative but to comply if he wished  to  avoid  the
    threat of violence.  I am satisfied that the ground of  appeal  amounts
    to no more than an attempt to establish a false distinction between  an
    activity which the country guidance clearly  indicates  had  ceased  in
    Mogadishu and what the appellant claimed to have  experienced  in  that
    city.

 7. The second ground of appeal concerns the judge's finding  that  he  did
    not accept that the appellant's  family  members  in  Somalia  were  in
    hiding as the appellant had claimed.  The judge also found that the  he
    had family members in Somalia and that he could "make attempts to  find
    his family."

 8. I find that this ground has no merit.  Having found that the  appellant
    was not a credible witness,  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the
    appellant's claim if his family members were in hiding.  Indeed, it was
    open to the judge to find that nothing  that  the  appellant  had  said
    about  his  family  members  in  Somalia  was  reliable  and  in  those
    circumstances, the judge's finding that the appellant could employ  the
    assistance of extended family members to  find  members  of  his  close
    family that was open to him.

 9. The third ground of appeal concerns an alleged procedural irregularity.
     The appellant and his wife live in Manchester.  The appeal took  place
    at Hatton Cross, in west London.  The representative of  the  appellant
    at the First-tier Tribunal hearing had applied for  an  adjournment  so
    the matter may be transferred to Manchester  so  that  the  wife  could
    attend to give oral evidence.  The grounds of appeal assert  that  "the
    appellant's wife's evidence was clearly  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    family life in the UK."  Considering  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds at [58], the First-tier Tribunal Judge took the view that there
    would be "little to be added by  [the  appellant's  wife]  giving  oral
    evidence."  The grounds complain that in the same paragraph  the  judge
    identified a lack of evidence regarding  the  appellant's  relationship
    with his wife's children (his step-children).

10. I find this ground of appeal has no merit.  At [58]  the  judge,  as  I
    have recorded above, noted that little  would  be  added  by  the  wife
    giving oral evidence.  The judge was entitled to take into account when
    considering the adjournment  application  that  the  hearing  had  been
    listed for some six months in advance.  Secondly, it was accepted  that
    the appellant and his wife were in a genuine relationship; there was no
    need for her to give oral evidence concerning her relationship with the
    appellant.  Thirdly, it was not possible for the appellant to meet  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  (there  was  no  evidence  of
    proficiency in English and the financial requirements  were  not  met).
    The judge noted accurately that the children were not  the  appellant's
    children and that there was no evidence "which could have been  put  in
    Ms Mohamed's [the wife's] statement that there is any  particular  bond
    between the appellant and Ms Mohamed's  children."   It  is  this  last
    statement which defeats the third ground of appeal.  Judge O'Flynn  was
    entirely correct to observe that the statement of Ms  Mohamed  dated  5
    January 2017  contains  no  reference  whatsoever  to  the  appellant's
    claimed relationship with her children.  The statement deals  with  the
    family finances and records the  fact  that  Ms  Mohamed  had  met  the
    appellant in early 2016 and had lived with him since August  2016.   As
    Mr Bates submitted, it had been open to the appellant's wife to provide
    a supplementary  statement  addressing  any  relationship  between  her
    children and the appellant but she had chosen not to do  so.   She  had
    chosen not to do so fully aware of the difficulties which  she  claimed
    would prevent her attending the appeal hearing at Hatton Cross to  give
    oral evidence.  I am aware that the Presenting Officer before the First-
    tier Tribunal had not objected to the adjournment  and,  as  the  judge
    records, may have "had some questions for the wife" but I do  not  find
    that that undermines the legitimacy of the judge's decision  to  refuse
    the adjournment.  Evidence-in-chief  led  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should  be  provided  in  full  and  detailed  written  statements;  an
    appellant cannot rely upon the respondent's cross-examination to  bring
    before the Tribunal evidence which the appellant may consider  relevant
    to the appeal.  In any event, the Presenting Officer's  "questions  for
    the wife" may not have included any questions regarding the appellant's
    relationship with the children.  I fully  agree  with  Judge  O'Flynn's
    conclusion that nothing  would  have  been  gained  by  adjourning  the
    hearing to enable the wife to give oral evidence.   The  appellant  has
    not suffered any injustice by the failure to adjourn the hearing; if he
    wished to lead evidence regarding his relationship  with  Ms  Mohamed's
    children then he should have done so and his failure  is  entirely  the
    fault of himself and his representatives.  Even at this  stage  in  the
    proceedings, no evidence has been put before the Tribunal under Rule 15
    which might suggest that the relationship  between  the  appellant  and
    children whom he has only known since last year is so strong  that  his
    appeal should be allowed on Article 8 grounds.

11. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

12. This appeal is dismissed.

13. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

