
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04079/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2016                           |On 20 January 2017            |
|Extempore                                     |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between
                                    T C T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker promulgated on 7 October 2015.  In that
    decision  the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 24 February 2015  to  refuse
    to grant him asylum and to remove him  from  the  United  Kingdom.   It
    should be noted at this point  that  the  matter  did  previously  come
    before the Upper Tribunal when the  matter  came  before  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Ryan on 15 January 2016.  For the reasons set  out  in
    the note issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson, the Principal  Resident
    Judge, it was not possible for the Deputy Judge to complete his written
    decision within a reasonable time and the matter was then  the  subject
    of a transfer order and on that basis it comes before me.

 2. The appellant's case is in brief that he was trafficked to  the  United
    Kingdom and that he would be at risk on return to Vietnam from  both  a
    traffic team who it appears would seek to enforce against  him  a  debt
    with threats of violence.  He also states that he would be at  risk  in
    his home area because there would be no sufficiency of  protection  and
    that it would not be safe for him elsewhere in  Vietnam  either  as  on
    account of those who trafficked him being able to trace him or that  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect him to relocate given that  he  is,  on
    his account, a vulnerable person owing to the fact  that  he  has  been
    trafficked and owing to his mental ill-health.  It  is  also  his  case
    that he would be at risk from the Vietnamese authorities on account  of
    the opposition activities which he has undertaken in the United Kingdom
    in the past few years having arrived here a number of years earlier.

 3. The judge's  findings  appear  from  paragraph  [59]  of  her  decision
    onwards.  Although accepting that he had been trafficked  she  did  not
    accept that there was any outstanding debt to the traffickers, did  not
    accept that, as he had claimed, there had been an altercation in London
    where he had come to the adverse attention of the gang who had  brought
    him here; nor did she accept that he was a vulnerable  person,  finding
    at paragraph [64] that he was no longer receiving  counselling  in  the
    United Kingdom.  She considered he could be returned to  Vietnam;  that
    his mental health was not such as to engage Articles  3  or  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention; and, that he had not established a family life
    here for the purposes of Article 8.  She considered  that  although  he
    had a private life established in the United Kingdom and that  includes
    the relationship with his girlfriend it would not be a disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect for his private life  to  return
    him to Vietnam.

 4. There are five grounds of appeal which are set out in the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission in  respect  of
    all of them was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimmett  on  4
    November 2015.

 5. The first ground can conveniently be summarised in  that  there  is  an
    inconsistency in the judge's findings with regard to trafficking as set
    out in the bullet points in paragraph [59] in comparison with what  had
    been accepted by the Secretary of State and also what the  judge  found
    at paragraph [60].  Mr Tufan did not seek to persuade me that there was
    no inconsistency.  I note that there is an inconsistency  in  that  the
    judge found that the applicant had been trafficked yet also that he had
    journeyed to the United Kingdom for economic reasons.  There  is  clear
    inconsistency in this.

 6. Further, as is averred ground 2, the judge found that the applicant was
    not a vulnerable person.  It is not however clear on what basis she was
    reached that conclusion.  On the basis of the statutory definition  for
    a  vulnerable  person,  given  that  the  applicant  is  a  victim   of
    trafficking and suffer from  mental  ill-health,  it  is  difficult  to
    understand how the judge could have concluded he was not  a  vulnerable
    person as defined.  Further, the judge's conclusion that the  appellant
    is not a vulnerable  person  is  infected  by  an  error  of  fact.  At
    paragraph [64] the judge  stated  that  the  appellant  was  no  longer
    receiving counselling, contrary to the letter from  Dr  Garbar  of  the
    Lister Primary Care Centre dated 27 July 2015 which indicates that  the
    appellant is undergoing counselling.  On that basis  the  finding  that
    the applicant is not a vulnerable person is unsafe.

 7. It is also argued in ground 3 that the  judge  had  failed  to  provide
    proper reasons as to why it was reasonable to expect the  appellant  to
    relocate elsewhere despite being the victim of previous trafficking.  I
    consider that this submission is also made out given that it is not  at
    all clear why, given the previous findings of fact, the judge  did  not
    accept that there would be difficulties and, as is pleaded  in  grounds
    at [18] and [19] the judge appears not properly to  have  engaged  with
    the material before her as to the difficulties that would be  faced  on
    return.

 8. In ground 4  it  is  averred  that  the  judge  made  specific  adverse
    credibility findings against the appellant which were not  well-founded
    or adequately reasoned.  I consider that there is significant merit  in
    this ground also.  The judge simply says that she has made findings  of
    fact and credibility yet she appears to have accepted some of what  the
    applicant said but has discounted other  parts  of  his  claim  without
    properly explaining why she has done so nor has she  said  whether  she
    accepts his testimony as  credible  or  not  or  why  she  accepted  in
    particular the reason that he had given for  failing  to  claim  asylum
    earlier.

 9. Finally, as is set out in ground 5 the judge appears not to have  taken
    into account or made findings on the applicant's sur  place  activities
    and whether they had taken place or  whether  they  would  put  him  at
    adverse risk on return to Vietnam.

10. Whilst no particular one of these errors is determinative I  find  that
    looking at them cumulatively the judge  has  failed  properly  to  give
    adequate reasons for her findings of fact,  has  failed  to  deal  with
    material issues that is the sur place activities, and has erred also in
    failing adequately to explain  why  she  accepted  some  parts  of  the
    applicant's testimony but  not  others.   Taking  them  together  I  am
    satisfied that the decision did involve the making of an error  of  law
    and I set it aside.

11. Given the absence of proper findings of credibility and proper findings
    of fact as well as the failure to deal with the  significant  issue  of
    sur place activities, I consider that it will  be  necessary,  as  both
    parties agreed, for a fresh fact-finding exercise  in  respect  of  all
    relevant matters  to  be  made  in  this  case  and  that  accordingly,
    following the Practice Direction, it needs to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all material issues.



SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on
    all material issues.  None of the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    are preserved.

 3. I maintain the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal



Signed                                  Date: 19 January 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

