
ST

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04134/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          | Decision  Promulgated       |
|On 11th November 2014                         |On 15th December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES


                                   Between

                                   MS E G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:  Miss H Short, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant was born on 23rd October  1975  and  is  a  citizen  of
       Ethiopia. On 23rd July 2014 she appeared at Taylor House before First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Traynor (the Judge)  in  an  appeal  against  the
       decision of the respondent, made on 3rd  June  2014,  to  refuse  her
       asylum claim.  She appealed under section 83(2) of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 having been granted  leave  to  enter
       the United Kingdom under the Legacy Policy for a period exceeding one
       year until 2nd September 2016. There  is  no  removal  decision.  The
       Judge dismissed her appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
       grounds in a determination dated 5th September 2014.

    2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
       on 1st October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal  Cruthers  who  found  the
       grounds of appeal to be arguable. The matter accordingly came  before
       me for an initial hearing to determine  whether  the  making  of  the
       decision in the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  an  error
       on a point of law.

    3. The background facts are that the appellant claims to have been  born
       to an Ethiopian mother and an Eritrean father in  Ethiopia  in  1975.
       She claimed that because her father was involved  with  the  Eritrean
       People's Liberation Front (EPLF) he came to the adverse attention  of
       the Ethiopian authorities who arrested him. As a result of the family
       difficulties the appellant relocated to Saudi Arabia where she worked
       as a domestic servant for a family who treated her badly.   When  the
       family travelled to the United Kingdom in 2002 the appellant  escaped
       from them and claimed asylum  on  12th  April  2002.  Her  claim  was
       refused on 1st May 2002 and  her  appeal  against  the  decision  was
       dismissed on 29th October 2003 by Immigration Judge Froom.

    4. The appellant submitted further  grounds  for  consideration  to  the
       respondent based on her fear of return to  Ethiopia  because  of  her
       father's activities there and her approaches to the Ethiopian embassy
       in the United Kingdom in 2003. She claimed that her efforts to obtain
       a passport from the embassy failed because she  lacked  documents  to
       confirm her identity and  nationality;  she  claimed  that  this  had
       effectively left her stateless. Her appeal against  the  respondent's
       refusal of her renewed claim was dismissed by  Designated  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge  Manuell  in  2007.    The  appeal  before  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Traynor  was  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
       refuse the claim based on the appellant's renewed approaches  to  the
       Ethiopian embassy in 2013 and her fear of return because of her mixed
       parentage.

    5. The grounds of appeal against the Judge's  decision  state  that  the
       issue is narrow, namely whether the appellant is stateless and  falls
       within the Refugee Convention or paragraph  339  of  the  Immigration
       Rules. The cases of ST  (Ethnic  Eritrean  -  nationality  -  return)
       Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 00252(IAC) and Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 000702
       are  relied  upon  and  the  Judge  is  submitted  arguably  to  have
       misdirected  himself  as  to  the  law  in  paragraph   28   of   his
       determination in relation to his findings,  firstly  by  misdirecting
       himself by requiring the appellant to  furnish  the  embassy  with  a
       letter from her representatives.

    6. Secondly, the Judge is  submitted  to  have  erred  in  his  finding,
       unsupported  by  the  evidence,  that  the  appellant  had  partially
       completed a form on which she was requested by the Ethiopian  Embassy
       to provide information; the Judge is submitted to have  reached  this
       finding without evidence, and/or to have made a contradictory finding
       as to the same. It is submitted that the country  guidance  case  law
       requires all relevant details to be put  in  writing,  but  does  not
       specify the format for doing so; there was  no  requirement  for  the
       appellant's representatives to replicate information in a letter; the
       form is the indicator of the relevant details.

    7. The Judge is accordingly submitted to have departed from the case  of
       ST at paragraph 5 of the head note as follows:

          (5) Judicial fact-finders will expect a person asserting arbitrary
          deprivation of Ethiopian nationality to approach  the  embassy  in
          London with all documentation emanating  from  Ethiopia  that  the
          person may have, relevant to establishing  nationality,  including
          ID card, address, place of birth, identity and place of  birth  of
          parents, identity and whereabouts of any relatives in Ethiopia and
          details of the person's schooling in Ethiopia. Failing  production
          of Ethiopian documentation in respect of such matters, the  person
          should put in writing all relevant details, to be  handed  to  the
          embassy. Whilst persons are  not  for  this  purpose  entitled  to
          portray themselves to the embassy as Eritrean, there is no need to
          suppress details which disclose an Eritrean connection  (paragraph
          105).

    8. The appellant  is  submitted  to  have  provided  to  the  embassy  a
       completed form giving details of her father and grandfather  so  that
       there was no basis for the Judge to find that she had only  partially
       completed the form.  The application was  refused  by  the  Ethiopian
       embassy for failure to produce Ethiopian identity documents. There is
       submitted to be a contradiction in the Judge's finding in line  7  of
       paragraph 28, on page 9 of the determination, that the appellant  had
       "partially completed" the form and his reference, further on  in  the
       same paragraph on page 10, that the appellant had a "completed"  form
       which bears confirmation that she attended the embassy.

    9. The Judge is submitted to have further erred by  either  misdirecting
       himself as to law or failing to consider a relevant matter, namely an
       earlier fact found by Immigration Judge Froom that the appellant  had
       travelled on a passport which did not bear her details, was fake  and
       likely to have been issued by a corrupt official.  The  Judge  should
       accordingly not have found that the appellant had not  done  all  she
       could reasonably expected to do and should not have found that it was
       "a matter of speculation" to suggest that she used a passport not  in
       her name issued by a corrupt official.

   10. It is submitted that the  Judge  should  not,  without  a  change  of
       circumstances and without giving  reasons,  have  departed  from  the
       relevant findings of Immigration Judge Froom made in October 2013  in
       paragraph 22 of his determination as follows:

          22...."the passport had been obtained  through  a  business  deal.
          The  photograph  was  hers  but  the  rest  of  the  details  were
          not.....it is well known that passports can be obtained by illegal
          ethos.  It is highly unlikely that a passport  would  be  obtained
          with    the    appellant's    true    particulars    under     the
          circumstances...she obtained the passport,  which  may  have  been
          genuine in the sense of not being a complete forgery, having  been
          issued by a corrupt official, but not in the  sense  that  it  was
          legally issued.

          24. In summary...she fled using a false passport to Saudi Arabia.

   11. The respondent issued a response under Rule  24  to  the  grounds  of
       appeal indicating that  the  appeal  is  opposed  because  the  Judge
       properly directed himself and was entitled to reach the  findings  he
       did.  Mr  Nath  adopted  this  response  as  the  core  of  his  oral
       submissions and invited me to find no error of  law  in  the  Judge's
       decision and to allow it to stand.

   12. Having considered all the relevant evidence and submissions before me
       I am satisfied for the following reasons that the Judge did not  make
       any material error of law in  reaching  his  decision.  In  her  oral
       submissions to me Miss Short stated  that  the  appellant  could  not
       reasonably have been expected to disclose details to the  embassy  of
       her passport because it was false; the Judge should not have found it
       reasonable to expect her to do  so  as  it  would  have  been  of  no
       assistance to the embassy.

   13. I reject this submission.  It may be that the  Judge  had  overlooked
       the previous  finding  of  Immigration  Judge  Froom  about  how  the
       appellant obtained the passport and  that  it  was  not  therefore  a
       matter of speculation to suggest that she used a passport not in  her
       name issued by a corrupt official. However, if this was an  error  on
       the part of the Judge I find that it was  not  material  because  his
       important finding was that information about the passport  had  never
       been given to the embassy and as such the appellant had not done  all
       that she could reasonably be expected  to  do  in  order  to  provide
       information.  It is submitted for the appellant that the  information
       would have been of no use to the embassy but I find  that  the  Judge
       was entitled to come to the view that it should have been  submitted;
       the use of the information was a matter for the embassy.

   14. I am satisfied that the Judge properly  directed  himself  throughout
       his determination with clear references to the relevant case law.  He
       set out the case law on which he relied, including the matters to  be
       considered and the approach set out for judicial fact-finders in head
       note (5) of ST. I do not accept that the Judge erred as suggested  in
       the grounds of appeal by requiring the appellant's representative  to
       replicate information  in  a  letter.  The  Judge  properly  directed
       himself, in accordance with ST, that failing production of  Ethiopian
       documentation in respect of relevant matters, the person  should  put
       in writing all relevant details to be handed to the  embassy.  It  is
       implicit in the Judge's finding that more information  was  required,
       not that that the information should, in the wording of  the  grounds
       of appeal, be "replicated" in a letter.

   15.  It was a matter  of  fact  for  the  Judge  to  assess  whether  the
       appellant had done all she reasonably could; he was  entitled  in  my
       view  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  was  obliged   to   provide
       "considerably more  information"  than  she  had  done  and  he  gave
       adequate reasons, without error, for that finding. The Judge found in
       the particular circumstances of  this  case,  in  the  light  of  the
       appellant's  representation  in  the  proceedings,  that  she   could
       reasonably have been expected to provide relevant details in a letter
       from her representatives. This was not placing an additional or  more
       onerous requirement upon the appellant; it was in  my  view  no  more
       than a consideration of the format in which the appellant might  have
       discharged  the  obligation  set  out  in  ST  to   provide   written
       information.

   16. The Judge's reference to a partially completed form in my view, taken
       in the context of the whole determination, reflects no more than  his
       view that the appellant provided  only  partial  information  to  the
       embassy  having  completed  the  form  and  does  not   represent   a
       contradiction in his findings. Looking at the  determination  of  the
       Judge as a whole I find that it contains no material  error  of  law.
       The grounds of appeal represent a continuing  disagreement  with  the
       findings of the Judge to which he was in my view  entitled  to  come.
       The decision accordingly does not fall  to  be  set  aside  and  this
       appeal in the Upper Tribunal fails.

   Notice of Decision


   17. I find that the making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did
       not involve the making of a material error on a point of law  and  it
       follows that the Judge's decision stands.


   18. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal fails.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

The anonymity direction made in the First-tier  Tribunal  continues  in  the
following terms. Unless and until a tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date:  12th December 2014

