
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
AA/04349/2015

                                                       AA/03966/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                      |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd January 2018                     |      On 16th February 2018         |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                            dav (first appellant)
                           mrv (second appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Waite, Counsel, instructed by Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The first appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and  the  second  is  his
    wife.

2.   The appellants have one daughter in  the  United  Kingdom.   They  also
    have two children living in Sri Lanka.

3.   The first appellant claimed asylum on 19th September 2013.  He  claimed
    that he was twice arrested for suspected involvement with the  LTTE  in
    2006 and 2013.  On  both  occasions  he  managed  to  escape  from  the
    authorities.  His escape in 2013 triggered an investigation as  to  his
    absence by the authorities, who came to his home and raped his wife.

4.   The respondent did not accept the credibility of the claim and  refused
    to grant asylum or other protection, the date of those decisions  being
    29th August 2014 and 28th January 2015 respectively.

5.   The appellants sought to appeal against those decisions,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 21st August 2015.

6.   The appeal was dismissed in all respects.

7.    The challenge  made to the First tier Tribunal decision,  came  before
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce for consideration on 28th April  2016.   For
    the reasons as set out in her judgment the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was set aside to be re-made.

8.   Thus it was that the matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holt
    on 7th June 2017.  In a determination dated 16th June 2017  the  appeal
    was dismissed in all respects.

9.   Challenge was made to that  decision  and,  by  permission  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio on 2nd October 2017,  the  matter  comes
    before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether or not indeed there  was
    a material error of law in the determination.

10.  The first challenge as mounted in the grounds of  appeal  is  that  the
    Tribunal Judge failed to take into account material  evidence  relating
    to the claim of the first appellant, namely an article in the "Uthayal"
    newspaper regarding the appellant which it is said forms a vital  piece
    of evidence regarding his asylum claim.

11.  In that connection it is right to note the difficulties which  seem  to
    have been presented in obtaining a complete set of  documents  for  the
    hearing as set out in paragraph 7 of the determination.  Mr Waite,  who
    now represents the appellant, indicated that  he  was  unclear  on  his
    instructions as to the nature of the evidence now relied upon.

12.  I located in the bundle of documents an untranslated article  from  the
    said newspaper dated 24th March 2016.  There was  loosely  attached  to
    that document a purported translation  in these terms for an  entry  of
    24th March:-

         "The security forces who had been carrying out a  search  operation
         following a gunfire attack on the security checkpoint at Kudathanai
         day before yesterday has arrested a young family man  living  at  a
         welfare camp.  It was AV (aged 22) who had been living at a welfare
         camp meant for displaced persons  at  Manalkadu  was  arrested  day
         before yesterday.  It was said that a demonstration  demanding  the
         release of the family man was held in front of  Pont  Pedro  Police
         Station but police did not have any records showing this man to  be
         arrested".


 13. In terms of that matter, the first appellant was  interviewed  on  27th
    November 2013, when he indicated that he was arrested by  the  army  in
    2006 when he was loading a tractor on a road.  He  said  the  army  had
    been attacking the LTTE and the army had been attacking one another and
    shots had been fired.  The camp that he was  then  living  in  was  for
    construction workers.  There is no mention of  the  fact  that  anybody
    campaigned on his behalf following his arrest, which he claimed  lasted
    for many days.

14.  There is no indication that the  Judge  was  specifically  directed  to
    that piece of evidence but in any event it would seem not to correspond
    to the nature of the evidence as given  by  the  appellant  as  to  the
    circumstances of his first arrest.  The shooting was not  the  previous
    day but said by the appellant to have been occurred at  the  time  when
    six people were detained including the appellant.

15.  It is far from clear as to what relevance that article had in terms  of
    the submissions made to the Judge.

16.  Essentially the Judge, in considering the claim as presented on  behalf
    of the two appellants, concluded  for  clear  reasons  that  the  first
    appellant lacked credibility.  The reasons for such  findings  are  set
    out in detail in the determination.   The  Judge  also  considered  the
    evidence of the second appellant, the wife, particularly  in  paragraph
    34 of the determination. It was noted that she  did  not   specify  the
    first appellant's connection with the LTTE; rather stated that  it  was
    the tsunami which was the motivating factor for  their  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.  I can detect no lack of rationality in the  conclusion
    as to credibility.

17.  At the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 21st  August
    2015, reliance was placed  upon  a  report  by  Dr  Robin  E  Lawrence,
    consultant and general adult psychiatrist.  This was in relation to the
    mental state of the second appellant.  The Judge, for  various  reasons
    as set out in the determination gave  little  weight  to  that  report.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce in her decision of 23rd May  2016  indicated
    that the Judge was entirely right to  place  little  weight  upon  that
    report and set out her reasons why she came to that conclusion.

18.  Mr Waite in his submissions to me seeks to rely upon  that  report  and
    contends that the Judge erred in law in not paying due regard to it.  I
    have some concern as to that approach bearing in mind that that  report
    is not the subject of the grounds of appeal and  in  any  event  was  a
    report that was adjudged  to  be  given  little  weight  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

19.  Of more relevance, however, is the report by Dr Lucy Klenki  who  is  a
    consultant psychiatrist.  The report is dated 26th May 2017.

20.  It is said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was unduly dismissive  of
    that report in the context of the case.

21.  It is perhaps of importance to look in detail  at  that  report,  which
    was prepared following a number of observations which  the  author  had
    had of the second appellant over a period particularly from 1st October
    2015 to 28th October 2015.  It was noted that the second appellant  had
    two daughters aged 9 and 10  living  in  Sri  Lanka  with  her  mother.
    Asylum was initially claimed on 10th October 2013 and refused  on  28th
    April 2016 and is currently going through a process of appeal.

22.  There was no past psychiatric history evidence  until  the  appellant's
    first presentation with low mood a month prior to admission in  October
    2013.  The asylum claim was based on the rape which  is  said  to  have
    occurred on 25th August 2013.

23.  It was noted that the psychiatric services  became  involved  some  two
    years following the initial arrival in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    noted that the second appellant's mental health  had  deteriorated  and
    her mood was low.   She  was  referred  to  the  Accident  &  Emergency
    Department in the hospital in Wrexham on 1st October 2015 and was  seen
    by the liaison psychiatric team.

         "The reason for admission at that time was that there  had  been  a
         gradual deterioration in mood a few months following the  rejection
         of her asylum claim.  Mrs V's mood  had  been  going  down  and  it
         culminated in her self-harming.  She had been head banging, burning
         herself, her husband had found a wire around her neck and  she  had
         started neglecting herself in that she was not washing, she was not
         looking after herself and has refused to eat".

24.  The diagnosis at the time was that of severe  depressive  episode  with
    psychotic features.

25.  The medication was re-started  and  the  second  appellant  started  to
    improve, being discharged from hospital on 28th October 2015.  Her mood
    and situation has improved thereafter.

26.  It was the view of the author of the  report  that  the  appellant  had
    been in the United Kingdom for two years  and  had  not  been  seen  by
    psychiatric services but had managed to cope without  any  professional
    support.  "In my opinion what  initiated  her  presentation  to  mental
    health services was the threat and fear of going back to Sri Lanka".

27.  The report went on : "what she talks about more is the  fact  that  she
    misses her two daughters and the rest of the family back in Sri Lanka".

         "Certainly during the time that I have been  involved  with  Mrs  V
         since her discharge into the community, she has  not  mentioned  to
         either myself, Jacquie  Lewis  or  Angela  Jones,  any  mention  of
         flashbacks and nightmares or any other symptoms of  post  traumatic
         stress disorder which have affected her to a point  that  she  felt
         that she needed to mention them and this  is  corroborated  by  the
         individuals that I have mentioned".

28.  The report concludes that the  appellant  Mrs  V  has  a  diagnosis  of
    severe  depressive  episode  with  psychotic  symptoms  which   is   in
    remission.

29.  A number of other documents are cited, linked to that report, which  do
    not significantly add to the issues.  There was a service delivery plan
    review on 15th February 2017, which deals with her  re-engagement  with
    the public; a letter from the doctor's surgery confirming that  she  is
    under the care of the community mental health team and  a  letter  from
    the Methodist Church dated 18th May 2017  speaking  as  to  the  second
    appellant's mental health problems  which  it  is  said  have  improved
    immeasurably.  There is also a letter from Jacquie Williams  who  is  a
    specialist health visitor  for  asylum  seekers  dated  17th  May  2017
    speaking of the fact that the  family  is  known  to  her  since  their
    arrival in Wrexham in December 2013.  Until August 2015 Mrs  V  was  in
    good health which deteriorated quite rapidly over a period of two weeks
    leading to depression and being sectioned under the Mental  Health  Act
    for a period of time.

30.  The Judge in the determination, in particular in paragraph 31  and  33,
    notes that particular evidence.

31.  Although the second appellant claims to have suffered horrific rape  in
    2013, which resulted in her coming to the United Kingdom, there  is  no
    indication from her mental behaviour that that had  adversely  affected
    her; rather it was following the rejection of  her  asylum  claim  that
    there was a very rapid onslaught of that mental illness in 2015.

32.  The Judge notes the proximity of the mental illness to the  refusal  of
    the asylum claim and links it with the comments made by Dr Klenki  that
    the appellant is missing her family in Sri Lanka and concludes  that  a
    reasonable explanation for the onset  of  her  mental  difficulties  is
    precisely because of the failure of her asylum claim and the fact  that
    she does miss her family in Sri Lanka.

33.  The Judge in paragraph 32 of the determination seeks  to  suggest  that
    the report of Dr Klenki is not an independent report and is essentially
    an uncritical report based on what the appellant has  to  say.   It  is
    said in paragraph 33 that that report  adopts  an  uncritical  role  of
    being the appellant's advocate.

34.  As is highlighted in the grounds of appeal, it  would  seem  that  such
    criticism of the report is unnecessary.  Dr Klenki is seeking solely to
    reflect her observations of the appellant and of her assessment  as  to
    her condition.  It is perhaps unreasonable  to  accuse  the  doctor  of
    being biased.

35.  That having been said, however, there has been no analysis  as  to  the
    link of PTSD with the rape.

36.  Given the traumatic experiences as claimed by the second appellant,  it
    is perhaps surprising that that in itself had  not  adversely  affected
    her mental wellbeing when coming to the United Kingdom.   It  was  only
    after the rejection of the asylum claim that symptoms began  to  emerge
    in 2015.  Clearly one interpretation of such matters would be that  the
    second appellant fears to return, with the second  being  that  she  is
    upset that the system has not supported her claim.

37.  Without some probing as to the causation of the PTSD, it  seems  to  me
    to be reasonably open to  the  Judge  to  conclude  that  it  does  not
    materially assist in the evaluation of the credibility of the claim.

38.  It is important to bear in mind that the  claim  of  rape  is  to  some
    extent dependent upon the correct analysis of the context of the claim.
     The rape only occurred it is  claimed  because  the  authorities  were
    seeking the appellant following his escape in 2013.  If  there  was  no
    such escape, but rather the alternative reason for coming to the United
    Kingdom as suggested in paragraph 34 of the  determination,  then  that
    makes the claim of rape to be even less likely or credible.

39.  As the Judge properly notes, the fact that the appellant was  upset  in
    2015 is as consistent with her feeling upset because of the loss of her
    asylum claim than it is in her genuine fear of return because of  rape.



40.  It was open to the Judge in paragraph 34 to conclude, in the  light  of
    what the second appellant had to say in interview, that the real reason
    for coming to the United Kingdom was as an economic migrant and nothing
    more.

41.  The important element is that which is highlighted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce in her determination  at  paragraph  31,  namely  that  the
    second appellant was entitled to a proper analysis of her evidence.  It
    seems to me that in paragraph 34 there has been that consideration.  In
    some very real sense, as was recognised by Judge Bruce, the claims  are
    interconnected.  If  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  the  first
    appellant was sought by the authorities then that  throws  considerable
    doubt upon the claim of rape.  Equally if the claim for  rape  is  made
    out then that enhances the claim of the first appellant.

42.  It seems to me that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did the best to  give
    effect to  that  mutuality  of  claim,  indeed  it  was  recognised  in
    paragraph  35  of  the  determination.   Although  the  bold  comments,
    critical of the medical report perhaps should not have been  made,  the
    reality exists that the report, even  taken  at  its  highest,  is  not
    supportive of the rape as  claimed,  other  than  indicating  that  the
    second appellant has a mental problem or had one.

43.  In all the circumstances I do not find there to be a material error  of
    law.   The  Judge  gave  cogent  reasons  for  disbelieving  the  first
    appellant as to his claim for asylum.  The Judge noted what the  second
    appellant had said, which indicates that the reason for the  appellants
    coming to the United Kingdom was as a financial  basis  rather  than  a
    protection one.  The Judge's analysis of the medical  evidence  is  not
    such as to distort unreasonably that picture or those findings.

44.  In all the circumstances therefore the appeal is dismissed  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

45.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand, namely  that  the
    appeal is dismissed in all respects.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




[pic]

Signed                                  Date 14 February 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD





