

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: aa/ 04258/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on    01.11.2017                         |on 06.11.2017                     |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                   M. RM M
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Agata Patyna (counsel instructed by Gurney Harden,
Ashford)
For the respondent: Mr Lawrence Tarlow

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Samantha Mace), sitting at Hatton Cross on 14 June,  to
    an asylum appeal by a Muslim citizen of Sri Lanka, born 1983.

 2. The evidence for the appellant before the judge  included  evidence  of
    scarring, in an unusually detailed report from Dr Elizabeth Clarke. The
    judge said at paragraph 26 that she considered the report in the  light
    of its consistency with the appellant's account, which however she  had
    other reasons for rejecting:  these  she  gave  clearly  and  cogently.
    However, the only specific point on which she indicated,  at  paragraph
    26 that the report itself, and the conclusions  in  it,  might  not  be
    acceptable was the writer's failure to deal with the issue of  possible
    self-infliction by proxy 'SIBP', though Dr Clarke did in fact deal with
    it on the points she noted at paragraphs 6.18 and 6.20.

 3. Though the judge did not refer to it, this must have been based on  the
    country guidance in KV (scarring - medical evidence)  [2014]  UKUT  230
    (IAC). That however had already been overruled on the point in question
    in KV (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 119, to which  counsel  who  appeared
    before the judge (not Miss Patyna) might usefully have referred her.

 4. In the circumstances, Mr  Tarlow  accepted  that  the  judge's  overall
    credibility findings at paragraph 26 were wrong in law, as she had  not
    dealt with Dr Clarke's report on its merits. The result will be a fresh
    hearing before another first-tier judge.

Appeal : decision set aside
Fresh hearing before First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross (not Judge Mace)
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)


                               Dated: 02 November 2017
