
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/04077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 16 September  2015                |
|Prepared 30 July 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARD


                                   Between

                                     v s
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 2  October  1976,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 13 June 2014, to make
    removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999, a human rights and asylum based claim having been rejected and  a
    form IS151AS having been  served on 2 June 2014.

2.   An appeal against that decision came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    A Kelly who, on 23 February 2015, promulgated his decision in which  he
    dismissed the appeals based  on  Refugee  Convention  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds as well as in respect of Article  2  and  3  of  the
    ECHR.

3.   It is to be noted that although  Article  8  had  been  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was  not  a  matter
    pursued at the hearing before the judge nor does it form  any  part  of
    this current application.

4.   The Appellant was then  represented  by  Mr  Jaisri,  Counsel,  who  is
    experienced in immigration matters.  We have seen the skeleton argument
    that he advanced to the judge and we have also seen the extensive typed
    Record of Proceedings by the judge.

5.   The centrepiece of  the  complaint  was  essentially  that  the  judge,
    having made a number of positive findings about the Appellant's account
    of events, failed to properly consider the facts that the Appellant had
    signed a confession, which he could not read but whose contents he  was
    told of and that he had departed unlawfully from Sri Lanka.  On  return
    this would mean more than simply he would not  be  able  to  enter  the
    country without risk through the circumstances of the confession he had
    signed but also that there would be  continuing  concern  that  he  was
    involved in seeking to restore the fortunes of the LTTE and destabilise
    Sri Lanka.

6.   Miss Isherwood argued that the judge had  done  enough,  addressed  the
    issues as raised, had made an assessment with reference to the relevant
    case law of the Appellants claimed fears, past adverse interest and the
    real risk of him suffering ill-treatment on return.

7.   We have been helpfully taken through the decision of  Judge  Kelly  and
    the way the arguments were advanced to him.  We noted that the issue of
    the Appellant's departure and means of departure to India was  not  put
    forward as a specific basis on risk to the Appellant on return, nor was
    it argued in conjunction for example, with the  previous  detention  or
    the contents of the confession signed by the Appellant that that  posed
    a particular  and  continuing  risk.   Given  that  the  Appellant  was
    represented by experienced Counsel, it did not seem  to  us  that  this
    would have been a point lost in the course of the hearing. It  did  not
    feature in Mr Jaisri's skeleton argument, nor in the  submissions  made
    to the judge by either party at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



8.   We note the judge had  taken  the  view  that  the  risks  particularly
    associated with the cause of the Appellant's detention  and  connection
    with a person known as "AP" did not give rise to a continuing  risk  on
    return.  We think that properly reflected the way the  case  was  being
    put to the judge, with the Appellant likely to be  placed  on  a  watch
    list, and the Appellant might be  monitored  on  return.   The  judge's
    assessment was fact specific to the First-tier Tribunal hearing and one
    which the judge was entitled to reach.

9.   It is trite law that it is not open to this Tribunal to interfere  with
    decisions of the First-tier Tribunal simply because we might have  come
    to a different conclusion.   In  the  circumstances  therefore,  having
    carefully considered Mr Martin's arguments, we are satisfied  that  the
    judge made no material error of law and that the views  he  reached  on
    the facts, having heard and assessed the credibility of  the  Appellant
    and the witnesses, was entirely one for him to make and with  which  we
    should not interfere.

10.  For these reasons we  dismiss  the  appeal.   The  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

The anonymity direction is continued.


Signed   Date 13 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey



We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 13 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
