

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04628/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Determined on the papers                           Decision & Reason
Promulgated
without a hearing
on 15 December 2017                                18 December 2017

                                     By

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [B D]
                                                                  Respondent

                                  DECISION


   1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD") has been granted permission to  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Bird who, by a determination promulgated on 2 July 2017, allowed
      [BD]'s appeal against a decision of the SSHD to refuse his  protection
      claim.


   2. The appeal is presently listed for hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal
      on 19 December 2017.


   3. The Tribunal has today received a written communication from the  SSHD
      in which she recognises, realistically, that her appeal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal has no prospect of success, saying that


           "On review of the relatively unusual circumstances in this  case
           it has been decided that the current Grounds of  Appeal  do  not
           evidence a material error of law...


           The SSHD therefore asks that the UT exercise its own  discretion
           under Rule 17(2) and consent to the  withdrawal  of  the  appeal
           from the UT's jurisdiction and delist the appeal..."


   4. Rule  17  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
      provides, so far as is relevant:


           Withdrawal


           17.-(1) Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice of the
           withdrawal of its case, or any part of it,-


            a) By sending or delivering to the  Upper  Tribunal  a  written
               notice of withdrawal; or
            b) Orally at a hearing.


               (2) Notice of withdrawal will not  take  effect  unless  the
               Upper Tribunal consents to the withdrawal except in relation
               to an application for permission to appeal.


   5. Thus, unlike the position in the First-tier Tribunal, a party can seek
      the Tribunal's consent to the withdrawal of its case but there  is  no
      provisions in the rules for a party to  withdraw  its  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal. However, in adversarial litigation,  where  one  party
      withdraws its case that means that the case of the  other  party  goes
      unchallenged.


   6. The Upper Tribunal now provides the consent demanded by rule 17(2)  so
      that the SSHD's case has been withdrawn. That means that there  is  no
      challenge to the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bird  and  no
      basis upon which to consider that she made any error of law,  material
      or otherwise. The consequence is that the SSHD's appal  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal is dismissed and the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Bird to allow [BD]'s appeal is to stand.


   7. It follows that there will be no hearing on 19 December 2017  and  the
      parties need not attend.


      Summary of Decision


   8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird made no error of law and  her  decision
      to allow the appeal of [BD] is to stand.


   9. The SSHD's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed           [pic]


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               Date: 15 December 2017


