
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/04858/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 6th July 2015                    |On 20th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OVA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Wortley, Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Nigeria who is now aged 45.  On the 6th
    January 2015 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Abebrese)  allowed  his
    appeal against a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
    pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.  Although  the
    Respondent failed in his protection-based claim the Tribunal found that
    his removal would be a disproportionate interference with his Article 8
    rights. The Secretary of State now has permission to appeal[1]  against
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

    Error of Law

 2. The grounds of appeal contend that in  conducting  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise under Article 8 'outside of the Rules' the  Tribunal
    failed to have regard to, or make findings on, the matters set  out  in
    s117B of the Nationality Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 (as amended by
    the Immigration Act 1971).

 3. That submission has  merit.  Article  8  is  dealt  with  in  a  single
    paragraph of the decision wherein the Tribunal  fails  to  specifically
    address each of the mandatory considerations set out by  parliament  in
    that section of the Act. There is, for instance, no recognition of  the
    fact that the maintenance of  immigration  control  is  in  the  public
    interest, nor any findings on whether the  Respondent  speaks  English,
    nor whether he is financially self-sufficient.  The Tribunal appears to
    have placed significant weight on the fact that the Respondent is in  a
    long-term relationship with an EEA national, with no  consideration  of
    the terms of s117B(4) which states that "little weight" is to be placed
    on such a relationship where the person subject to immigration  control
    is in the UK unlawfully  when  it  is  established.  The  reasoning  in
    respect of Article 8 'outside of the rules'  is  therefore  flawed  and
    must be set aside.

 4. The grounds further contend that the Judge failed to give  reasons  why
    it was accepted that the Respondent was in a relationship at all.  This
    ground has no merit: it is noted at paragraph 6  of  the  determination
    that the claim that he was in a relationship with  a  Latvian  national
    was not contested by  the  Secretary  of  State  at  the  hearing.  The
    Secretary  of  State  cannot  therefore  complain  that  the   Tribunal
    proceeded on that basis.

 5. The 'error of law' hearing took place on the 9th June  2015.   At  that
    hearing the parties agreed that the re-making of the Article  8  appeal
    should be adjourned,  to  enable  me  to  hear  from  the  Respondent's
    partner. She was not present at the initial hearing because she was  in
    Glasgow caring for her elderly father. I agreed.   Before  doing  so  I
    observed that the determination appears to contain a discrete error  in
    that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  the  old  test  in  paragraph
    276ADE(vi):

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including social,
         cultural or family) with the country to which he would have to go
         if required to leave the UK"

    When in fact it should have applied the new test:

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK

 6. The parties were in agreement that the outcome may have turned on this.
    The Respondent lived in Nigeria for much of his adult  life  and  could
    not therefore successfully argue that he had "no ties" to that country.
     However on the particular facts of this case - he is  an  HIV  patient
    with a Latvian partner who claims to have no contact with any surviving
    family members, nor any means of supporting himself in  Nigeria  -  the
    "very significant obstacles" test would appear  to  be  arguable.   The
    Secretary of State agreed that in the re-making of Article 8  I  should
    have regard to the current rules.

    The Re-Made Decision

 7. I heard evidence from the Respondent, from his partner P, and her adult
    daughter C1.  I  was  provided  with  documentary  evidence,  including
    letters in respect of P's minor son, C2.   I  have  taken  all  of  the
    evidence before me into account, including that which is not  expressly
    mentioned herein.

    Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)

 8. I must begin my assessment of Article  8  by  considering  whether  the
    Respondent can meet the requirements of sub-section (vi)  of  paragraph
    276ADE of the Rules. The parties were in agreement that the  Respondent
    could not meet any of the other  alternative  provisions  therein;  nor
    could he succeed with reference to Appendix FM, since  he  cannot  meet
    the definition of 'partner' in GEN.1.2. (for  which  see  below).   The
    applicable test is whether there are "very  significant  obstacles"  to
    his re-integration in Nigeria. The standard of proof is the balance  of
    probabilities.

 9. The Respondent's case is that he has no living family in  Nigeria  with
    whom he is in contact, and that he has no friends with whom he could re-
    establish ties. He has not lived in that country since he  left  it  in
    2000. He states that before he left his family had been forced to  move
    to Kaduna, a violent land dispute having arisen in their home state  of
    Imo.  Shortly  after  they  had  re-established  themselves  in  Kaduna
    communal strife broke  out  and  their  family  home  was  attacked  by
    Muslims. The Respondent claims that his mother and siblings were killed
    and that as a result he suffers from  depression  and  flashbacks,  and
    finds  being  in  large  crowds  distressing  and  frightening.     The
    Respondent had been working as a  peddler,  selling  mainly  fruit  and
    vegetables, but he avers that he would not be able to do that  kind  of
    work today, partly because he has forgotten how to  do  it  and  partly
    because of his health.  He is HIV+ and states  that  he  is  unable  to
    stand for any length of  time  because  he  gets  pains  in  his  legs.
    Although he receives emotional and practical support from  a  Christian
    group here in the UK no such assistance would be available  to  him  in
    Nigeria. The Respondent states that in Nigeria he would not receive any
    charity and that he would face discrimination and stigma as a result of
    his illness.

10. I do not find it credible that the Respondent would not be able to work
    in Nigeria.  He has worked in that country previously and upon  leaving
    Nigeria he travelled to South Korea where he set up his own business in
    import/export. I agree with Mr Clarke that this shows the Respondent to
    be a resourceful and hard-working individual. I do not accept  that  he
    has "forgotten" how to run a business or work. Nor do I accept that  he
    is too ill to work. His testimony that he suffers from pain in his legs
    such that he is unable to stand is not supported by medical evidence; I
    also note that it would appear to be at odds with  his  admission  that
    since his arrival in the UK he has worked (illegally) as a roadsweeper.
     The Respondent is an adult who has managed to work in  Nigeria,  South
    Korea and the UK.  He  could  therefore  work  to  support  himself  in
    Nigeria. In those circumstances the question  of  whether  he  has  any
    friends or family there is moot: he had no friends or family in  either
    South Korea or the UK and yet managed to establish himself in  both  of
    these countries.  The Respondent's response when asked about  obstacles
    was to refer to his  relationship  with  P;  she  being  unable  and/or
    unwilling to go to Nigeria his relationship with her would come  to  an
    end. That might  be  an  unfortunate  consequence  of  his  removal  to
    Nigeria, but it is not something that would present an obstacle to  his
    integration there.  The Respondent further claims to be suffering  from
    depression and anxiety related to crowds, arising from his  experiences
    in  Kaduna  during  the  2000  riots.  Whilst  there  is  some  medical
    evidence[2] to support this assertion, there is no  country  background
    material to suggest that he would be more likely to encounter crowds in
    his place of residence in Nigeria than he would in Dagenham,  where  he
    currently lives. Nor does the scant medical evidence before me  suggest
    that his condition would be worsened by  return  to  Nigeria.  None  of
    these factors therefore attracts any material weight  when  considering
    the question of "very significant obstacles".

11. The central difficulty that the Respondent points to in respect of  his
    reintegration into Nigerian society is the fact that he  is  HIV+.  The
    Respondent's oral evidence  was  that  the  hospitals  in  Nigeria  are
    effectively empty buildings and that he would not be  able  to  receive
    any treatment. Ms Wortley did not pursue this line in  her  submissions
    and was wise not to do so.  The Secretary of State relies on a document
    entitled  "Country  Information  and  Guidance  Nigeria:  Medical   and
    Healthcare Issues" published by the Country  Information  Unit  in  May
    2015 which states [at 2.3] that Anti-Retroviral Therapy  is  "available
    free to eligible patients in almost all public  hospitals  in  Nigeria.
    For example in Lagos state  there  are  57  free  HIV  counselling  and
    testing sites run by the government,  civil  society  and  the  private
    sector...". The document provides a list of the ART drugs available  in
    Nigeria. In light of that evidence  I  cannot  be  satisfied  that  the
    Respondent would be unable to access the medication that  he  needs  to
    stay well.

12. Having taken all of those matters into account I cannot  be  satisfied,
    on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the  Respondent  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules.

    Article 8

13. The Respondent has not been able to meet the requirements of  the  Rule
    relating to private life. As for family life under the  Rules,  as  set
    out in Appendix FM, it has been conceded that he cannot get a claim off
    the ground, since he cannot show himself  to  be  a  'partner'  and  so
    cannot meet  the  relationship  requirements.  The  term  'partner'  is
    defined at GEN.1.2 of Appendix FM:

         GEN.1.2. For the purposes of this Appendix "partner" means-

             (i) the applicant's spouse;

             (ii) the applicant's civil partner;

             (iii) the applicant's fiance?(e) or proposed civil partner; or

             (iv) a person who has been living together with the applicant
             in a relationship akin to a marriage or civil partnership for
             at least two years prior to the date of application,

         unless a different meaning of partner applies elsewhere in this
         Appendix.

14. The Respondent has not married P. Nor  has  he  entered  into  a  civil
    partnership with her. They have never lived together. Although both  he
    and P indicated that they did hope to live together in the future there
    has been no formal engagement and so he cannot be considered  to  be  a
    fianc�.

15. The fact that the Respondent cannot bring himself within the Rules is a
    matter relevant to my consideration of Article 8. That is  because  the
    Rules, as they are currently formulated, provide an expression of where
    the Secretary of State considers the balance to be struck, and  provide
    a focused analysis of the relevant factors[3].   I am entitled to adopt
    a two-stage process,  considering  first  the  Rules  and  then  Razgar
    Article 8[4], but in doing so I need not  cover  the  same  ground.  As
    Underhill LJ puts it in Singh and Khalid  [at 64]:

         "... there is no need to conduct a full separate examination of Art
         8 outside the Rules where, in the  circumstances  of  a  particular
         case, all the issues have been addressed in the consideration under
         the Rules."

16. Ms Wortley submits that in this  case  the  particular  nature  of  the
    Respondent's relationship with P and her children means that  the  case
    as it stands 'outside of the Rules' is  substantial.  Although  he  has
    been in a serious relationship with P for approximately five  years  it
    is not one that can be brought within the Rules inter alia  because  of
    the restrictive definition of 'partner' at GEN.1.2.  Mr  Clarke  agreed
    that this was so. Although the Respondent does not fall  under  any  of
    the four categories set out at GEN.1.2, Mr Clarke accepted  that  there
    is a 'family life' with P and her children such that Article 8 would be
    engaged.

17. The evidence was that P lives in Glasgow with her daughter C1  (who  is
    now an adult) and her son C2 (aged12). She also lives with,  and  cares
    for, her elderly father who has a number of illnesses, largely relating
    to his heart.  The Respondent continues to live in Dagenham  where  has
    been told to remain by immigration services and where  he  is  able  to
    comply with the reporting  restrictions  attached  to  his  immigration
    bail. They manage to see each between 3-4 times per month.  He  travels
    to Glasgow to see her and sometimes she comes down. She  describes  the
    Respondent as a "very kind person" who gives her a lot of support. When
    they are not together they speak by telephone, often  every  day.  They
    want to live together permanently but at  present  are  prevented  from
    doing so by circumstance. I heard impressive  and  persuasive  evidence
    from C1. She told me about how her little  brother  has  suffered  from
    racially-motivated bullying at school in Glasgow and how the Respondent
    has supported the family through this. It has  necessitated  C2  moving
    schools. The Respondent has been able to talk to  C2  and  provide  him
    with guidance. The children have not had any contact with  their  birth
    father for about 9 years. C1 told me that the  Respondent  has  "helped
    her a lot" and is "generous and friendly". She thinks  of  him  as  her
    father and has no contact with her own.   I  accept  that  there  is  a
    genuine and substantial commitment between the Respondent  and  P  such
    that they can be said to share an Article 8 family life. I  am  further
    satisfied that his relationship with C1 and C2 could be  said  to  fall
    under the rubric of the Article.

18. The Respondent's removal to Nigeria would  interfere  with  the  family
    life he shares with P and her children.  I find as fact that  she  will
    not travel to Nigeria because of  her  commitment  to  caring  for  her
    father. Although much of the relationship is conducted by telephone and
    in that respect could be expected to continue, an important  aspect  of
    this family life is the weekly direct contact that  the  parties  enjoy
    with each other. This would not be possible between Glasgow and Nigeria
    on a regular basis.

19. The decision is one that was lawfully open to the Secretary of State to
    take and I accept that the removal of persons without a right to remain
    in the United Kingdom under the Rules is rationally  connected  to  the
    legitimate Article 8(2) aim of protection of the economy.

20. In considering proportionality I must have regard to all of the factors
    set out in s117B:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

21. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest. This Respondent arrived in the UK as a visitor in  2002,  and
    made an asylum claim which was found to be without merit.  In  2004  he
    made a further claim for asylum, which was again rejected. This  was  a
    decision upheld by the First-tier Tribunal. The Respondent has  not  at
    any time had leave to remain.

22. The Respondent speaks fluent English. This is not  therefore  a  factor
    that weighs against him.

23. There is no evidence that the Respondent has ever had any  recourse  to
    public funds to which he was not entitled. I accept his (oral) evidence
    that if allowed to remain in the  United  Kingdom  he  would  work  and
    provide for himself and his family.  I give no positive weight  to  the
    fact that the Respondent has already been working in the United Kingdom
    since he never had the requisite permission to do so.

24. The Respondent has been in the UK since 2002. That is a long time and I
    accept that during that time he will have  developed  a  private  life.
    There was some evidence of this before me in the form of  letters  from
    his counsellor at 'Body & Soul' and his doctors. He attends church  and
    receives support from friends living  in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  is
    however the case that during the entire  time  that  he  was  here  his
    immigration status was either "precarious" or  "unlawful".  As  such  I
    should attach only little weight to that private life.

25. It has been accepted that the Respondent has a family life  in  the  UK
    but that too has been established when his  status  was  unlawful.   As
    such I should attach little weight to it.

26. Having had regard to all  of  these  factors  I  further  consider  the
    submissions  made  on  the  Respondent's  behalf.  I  accept  that  his
    relationship with P, as presently constituted, would break down  if  he
    were to be removed.   I am not however satisfied that this would result
    in a violation of the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  8.
    There is a family life in this case, but it is not - at  present   -  a
    family life of such substance that an interference  with  it  could  be
    said to be disproportionate.  The  parties  to  this  relationship  are
    committed to each other but not to the extent that they are willing  to
    rearrange their lives to live together. The Respondent told me that  he
    could not move because of his signing-on requirements at  Becket  House
    but admitted that he had made no enquiries about having  his  place  of
    reporting moved to Glasgow.  They hope to live together in  the  future
    but appear to have made no preparations for doing  so,  nor  even  have
    they made any tentative plans.  I accept that both P and the Respondent
    would like the relationship to continue  if  possible,  but  I  am  not
    satisfied  that  their  separation  would  have   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences for either of them. I do not doubt that  the  Respondent's
    removal would be upsetting for the children but it could not be said to
    be to  their  detriment  to  the  extent  that  the  need  to  maintain
    immigration control is outweighed.  As I have set out above the matters
    set out in section 117B do not lend support to the  Respondent's  case.
    In all the circumstances I am not satisfied that the Respondent's claim
    under Article 8 'outside of the Rules' can succeed.

    Decisions

27. The determination contains an error of law and the decision, insofar as
    it relates to Article 8, is set aside.

28. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is dismissed on protection grounds.

    The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

    The appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed."

29. In view of the fact that this appeal raises health issues and  concerns
    a minor I am satisfied, having had regard to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders that it  would  be  appropriate  to
    make a direction for anonymity and do so in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Respondent (Appellant) is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
         proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member
         of his family.  This direction applies both  parties.   Failure  to
         comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
         proceedings".


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             8th August 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt on the 12th
February 2015
[2] A support worker from 'Body and Soul' reported in November 2013 that
the Respondent had been referred to a psychologist; on the 16th April 2014
North East London Mental Health services wrote a letter to the Respondent's
GP confirming that he had reported symptoms of depression and anxiety.
There is no formal diagnosis provided; nor is there any evidence from a
psychologist.
[3] See for instance Sales J (as he then was) [at 29 of]  R (Nagre) v SSHD
[2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Beatson LJ [at 40] in Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014]
EWCA Civ 558
[4] MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192,  Singh and Khalid v SSHD
[2015] EWCA Civ 72


