
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/05778/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 March 2015                              |On 28 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                     BD
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaj, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal against a decision  by  a  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal SPJ Buchanan dismissing an appeal on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds.  The judge did not find the appellant's evidence credible.

 2) The appellant is a national of Guinea.  The basis of his  asylum  claim
    was that he worked as an IT technician with the  Gendarmes  in  Guinea.
    In the course of his work  he  came  across  confidential  information.
    This included a list of names of people accused of being accomplices in
    an attempted coup.  The appellant saw that the list of  names  included
    his uncle and a friend of his uncle.  He sent them texts to  warn  them
    but was discovered and arrested.  He remained in detention for two  and
    a half years and was mistreated.  His escape from prison  was  arranged
    by his uncle's friend to whom the appellant had texted a  warning.   He
    was then helped to leave the country and travelled to the UK.

 3) The judge did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  worked  as  an  IT
    technician for the Gendarmes.  In the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal it was contended that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account
    material evidence in relation to this.  The determination recorded that
    there were two bundles of documents  submitted  as  evidence  and  this
    included an ID badge, a payslip from the appellant's claimed employment
    and photographs of him at work with a colleague  in  military  uniform.
    Nevertheless  the   determination   gave   no   indication   that   any
    consideration was given to  this  evidence  in  assessing  whether  the
    appellant was employed as he claimed, or in assessing credibility.   In
    considering these issues the judge referred  only  to  the  appellant's
    oral evidence.  The judge commented that it was difficult to comprehend
    why  the  authorities  in  Guinea  would  have  appointed  "an  unknown
    individual to carry out services associated with maintaining a computer
    system".  The application for permission to appeal recorded that  pages
    19 to 27  of  the  appellant's  bundle  of  1  December  2014  included
    photographs and other documents said to support the  appellant's  claim
    that he was engaged by the Gendarmes as an IT technician for  a  period
    in 2011.  Had the judge examined the evidence submitted and not  relied
    solely on the appellant's oral evidence, he might not have rejected the
    appellant's claim to have done this  work  and  his  conclusions  would
    arguably have been different.  The judge  used  conjecture  instead  of
    having regard to the documentary evidence.  Permission was  granted  on
    the basis that this was arguable.

 4) A rule 24 notice on behalf of the respondent stated that the judge  was
    aware of the supporting documents and mentioned them at  paragraph  3.2
    of the determination.  It was not  material  that  the  judge  did  not
    mention them in his reasoning.  The judge gave  detailed  and  thorough
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to have  worked  in  an  IT
    role and found that the claimant possessed only basic knowledge  of  IT
    matters.  It was unlikely the judge would  have  come  to  a  different
    conclusion even taking into account the photographs or ID badge.

Submissions

 5) In her submission at the hearing before me Mrs Brakaj pointed out  that
    at paragraph 3.2 of the determination the judge referred to two bundles
    having been submitted on behalf of the appellant.  The  judge  referred
    to "additional pages of photographs" but it  was  not  clear  to  which
    photographs he was referring.  The judge  made  no  assessment  of  the
    documentary  evidence,  including  the  payslip,  badge  and   relevant
    photographs, together with the DHL envelope in which  they  were  sent.
    If the judge had looked at the whole of  the  evidence  he  might  have
    reached a different conclusion.

 6) Mrs Brakaj continued that in relation  to  credibility  the  judge  had
    asked at paragraph 6.26 why  the  Gendarmes  would  have  employed  the
    appellant.  This documentary evidence went to this central issue.   The
    appellant's evidence was that large numbers of the officers  with  whom
    he worked were not computer literate and their knowledge of IT was very
    limited.

 7) For the respondent, Mrs Rackstraw relied on the rule 24 response.   She
    submitted that it was clear from the determination that the  judge  was
    not convinced by the appellant's claim to have worked as an IT  expert.
    The judge referred at paragraph 6.10 to the  appellant's  payslips  and
    badge although no findings were made on these parts of the evidence.

 8) Mrs Rackstraw continued that the appellant was unable to  persuade  the
    judge he had any IT expertise and at paragraph 6.26 the judge explained
    why he rejected the appellant's evidence in this regard.  At  paragraph
    6.27 he further questioned the appellant's level of  expertise.   There
    was no error in the determination.  The nature of the evidence produced
    was not sufficient to  alter  the  judge's  findings.   There  were  no
    security features on the badge produced by  the  appellant,  which  was
    just a laminated piece of  paper.   The  wage  slips  could  have  been
    manufactured.  The judge was aware of the documentation, which was  not
    of sufficient weight to overcome the  deficiencies  identified  in  the
    appellant's evidence, which was found  by  the  judge  to  be  of  poor
    quality.

 9) Mrs Rackstraw further submitted that the judge had  asked  whether  the
    circumstances which supposedly led to the  appellant's  detention  were
    credible and found that they were not.  The appellant had  set  himself
    up as an expert.  The judge found the evidence given by  the  appellant
    in relation to his expertise to be superficial.

10) In response Mrs Brakaj stated that although at paragraph 6.10 the judge
    referred to the payslips and badge he made no findings  in  respect  of
    them.  The  judge  commented  on  the  alleged  superficiality  of  the
    appellant's claimed expertise but  did  not  look  at  whether  he  was
    employed as he claimed.  The judge commented  at  paragraph  6.27  that
    anyone would know how to use anti-virus software but  the  evidence  of
    the appellant was that those with whom he was worked were not  computer
    literate.  The assessment made by the judge about the appellant's level
    of expertise, for example in relation to  encryption,  was  unclear  in
    that the judge did not set out what information he  was  expecting  and
    whether the appellant was unable to answer  questions  or  whether  the
    judge expected something more.

Discussion

11) In my view the adverse credibility  findings  made  by  the  judge  are
    unsound and cannot be sustained.  This is partly because the judge  has
    failed to have regard to  relevant  evidence  and  partly  because  the
    judge's reasoning is inadequate.  In  particular,  the  judge  made  no
    specific findings in respect of the documentary  evidence  relating  to
    the appellant's employment, in the form of  the  payslips,  a  security
    badge and certain photographs.  The judge does not appear to  have  had
    regard to the appellant's explanation of how he obtained a job as an IT
    consultant.   The  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  6.26  that  it   was
    "difficult to comprehend why the authorities in Guinea would appoint an
    unknown individual to carry out services associated with maintaining  a
    computer  system"  but  appears  to  have  neglected  the   appellant's
    evidence, although it was recorded at paragraph 6.1, that he found  his
    work with the help of his uncle, who introduced the  appellant  to  the
    commander-in-chief.  In addition, although the judge commented  on  the
    appellant's seeming lack of  specialised  knowledge,  for  example,  in
    relation to encryption or to anti-virus software, the point was made by
    the appellant in his evidence that he was working with people  who  had
    very little knowledge of computers.  The judge appears to have used his
    own knowledge of how a software specialist would  approach  matters  in
    the UK as a comparison for the appellant's evidence about his role with
    the Gendarmes in Guinea.  In concluding on the basis of his  experience
    of software specialists in the UK that the evidence  of  the  appellant
    was not plausible, the judge further erred in law.

12) I am satisfied that the unsound nature of  the  findings  made  by  the
    judge require that the decision be set aside and remade.   In  view  of
    the extent of the judicial fact finding required, I am  satisfied  that
    this is an appropriate appeal to remit to the First-Tier  Tribunal  for
    the decision to be re-made at a hearing before a judge other than Judge
    SPJ Buchanan.  None of the findings of fact made by Judge Buchanan  are
    preserved.

Conclusions

13) The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

14) I have set aside the decision.

15) The appeal is remitted to the  First-Tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings
    preserved for the decision to be re-made at a hearing  before  a  judge
    other than Judge SPJ Buchanan.

Anonymity

16) The First-Tier Tribunal did make an order for anonymity and I  continue
    that order pending the further proceedings.



Signed      Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal
