
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/05070/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     KH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Switalskis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, KH, was born in 1987 and is a male citizen of Iran.  The
    appellant appealed against the decision of a respondent  dated  10  May
    2013 to remove him from the United Kingdom having refused his claim for
    asylum.  The First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Moore)  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 15 July 2013, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are three grounds of appeal.  The appellant claims to  have  been
    the co-editor of an anti-regime blog concerning  Iran.   His  co-editor
    (ME), although living in the United Kingdom, did not provide a  witness
    statement or attend the First-tier Tribunal hearing.   The  judge  gave
    some weight to the failure of this possible witness  to  give  evidence
    [35].  The appellant asserts that the judge failed to consider extracts
    from  ME's  Home  Office  interview  (SEF)  which  confirmed  that  the
    appellant and ME had been involved with the same blog.   Secondly,  the
    judge accepted that the blog exists and that the appellant  appears  to
    be the  co-author/editor  [35].   However,  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider that finding against the background evidence  which  indicated
    that some bloggers are at risk in Iran.  Thirdly, it is  asserted  that
    the judge did not make any reasoned finding as to whether the appellant
    had attended demonstrations in Iran.

 3. As regards the appellant's alleged blogging activities, the judge deals
    with these at [35]:
         "From documents provided  there  would  appear  to  be  a  blog  in
         existence and despite the fact that some of these blog screen shots
         appear to show the appellant together with his  friend  ME  as  the
         editors and publishers of the blog, the  voluntary  absence  of  ME
         from this hearing and the lack of any witness  statement  from  him
         either together with the lack of clarity as to the name of the blog
         and the specific blog  address  does  not  persuade  me  that  this
         appellant had an association with the blog as he claimed.  I  would
         have expected the co-blogger to have at least  provided  a  witness
         statement in support of the appellant's claim but he has  not  done
         so.   I  find  the  appellant's  explanation  with  regard  to  the
         variation of the blog address to be convenient as  opposed  to  any
         translation or any other similar error.  Even as  recently  as  the
         witness statement of the appellant  he  was  unable  to  provide  a
         correct blog address despite the fact that  the  witness  statement
         had been read back to him in Farsi.  I am also unclear as  to  what
         the blog was called.  In  his  witness  statement  [the  appellant]
         claimed that the blog was called 'Small Hands of  Little  Children'
         and that it  was  created  in  November  2012.   In  his  interview
         (question 84) the appellant claimed that the  blog  was  called  'A
         Small Hands of Street Children'.  In his evidence at  this  hearing
         he called the blog 'Helping Working Kids.'  Three different  titles
         and whilst I accept there is some  commonality  between  all  three
         titles I would expect this appellant who had set up and was  editor
         and publisher of the blog to be exact and particular with regard to
         the name of the blog and he was not."

 4. The judge had made it clear elsewhere  in  his  decision  that  he  had
    considered the evidence of the appellant in the round and by  reference
    to the totality of each and every item of evidence adduced.  The  judge
    has given a number of for finding that the appellant was not a credible
    witness.  It was apparent from any reading of the decision  that  those
    findings have informed his view of  the  appellant's  claimed  blogging
    activities.  In my opinion, the appellant has  dealt  head  on,  so  to
    speak, with that evidence before him which  seemed  to  show  that  the
    appellant and ME were co-editors and publishers of the  blog.   It  was
    accepted by the Secretary of State that the blog may be  considered  by
    the Iranian authorities as anti-regime.  However, I find that the judge
    has given  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that,  notwithstanding  the
    presence of that evidence, the appellant did not "have  an  association
    with the blog as he has claimed."  I consider it likely that the  judge
    has  had  in  mind  relevant  country  guidance,   in   particular   BA
    (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  36
    (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal, noting the "inability of the Iranian
    government  to  monitor  all  returnees  who  have  been  involved   in
    demonstrations" (Facebook is specifically  mentioned),  still  makes  a
    distinction between those who are leaders and mobilisers of anti-regime
    sentiment, whether it be demonstrations or on line  or  otherwise,  and
    those who do not have a significant political profile and  who  may  be
    described as "passive" rather than "active".  In the present case,  the
    judge's finding that as to the extent of the appellant's involvement in
    the anti-regime blog (which went no further at all than  the  existence
    of his name on a number of blog pages describing him  as  a  co-editor)
    clearly indicates that the judge believed that the  appellant  did  not
    have, as he  claimed,  a  significant  profile  of  which  the  Iranian
    authorities would be aware, but was  rather  that  he  is  a  "passive"
    individual who could demonstrate involvement  in  no  activities  which
    might attract  the  interest  of  the  Iranian  authorities.   In  that
    context, the judge's observation that the appellant was even unable  to
    state consistently the name of the blog of which he claimed to be a co-
    editor was significant to his assessment of the  appellant's  political
    profile.

 5. As regards the involvement of ME, given that he  was  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom and appeared to have been in a  position  to  provide  a
    witness statement and to attend the hearing, the  judge's  observations
    are valid.  As regards ME's SEF interview, I have no reason to  believe
    that the judge did not consider this document given that he has  stated
    clearly that he considered all the evidence which had been  put  before
    him; there is no need for the judge to refer to each and every item  of
    evidence in reaching his findings.

 6. As regards the appellant's claim to  have  attended  demonstrations,  I
    find again that the judge has not erred in law in  his  analysis.   The
    judge deals with  and  dismisses  the  appellant's  account  of  having
    attended demonstrations at [33 - 34] and  supports  his  findings  with
    clear and cogent reasons.

 7. The judge has written a detailed and  well-reasoned  decision  although
    there are a number of unfortunate "template" errors  in  the  decision;
    for example at [43] where he refers to the appellant as  female  and  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka and not Iran.  Such errors can indicate an absence
    of anxious scrutiny on the part of the judge but,  in  this  particular
    case, I find that the judge is guilty only of poor proof reading; I  do
    not find that the errors have infected his reasoning  or  rendered  his
    conclusions untenable.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 20 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 20 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

