
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05966/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 May 2016                                 |On 18 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     j s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquat, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J C Hamilton, promulgated on 15 February 2016, in  which
    he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been against the Respondent's decision of  20  March  2015
    refusing to grant the Appellant asylum.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim  was  essentially  as  follows.   He
    stated that he had assisted the LTTE in Sri Lanka for some three  years
    between 2004 and 2007 it was said that he had been detained in 2007 and
    2009.  Upon his release in September 2012 the Appellant eventually left
    Sri Lanka and came to the United Kingdom.




The judge's decision

 3. In a lengthy and generally well-structured decision the judge sets  out
    the evidence, the positions of both parties, relevant legal  provisions
    and then goes on to state his findings and reasons  from  paragraph  60
    onwards.  A number of adverse points are taken  against  the  Appellant
    and it is fair to say that the judge regarded some  of  them  as  being
    more significant than others.  Indeed, in  paragraphs  64  and  65  for
    example, the judge expressly states that the adverse findings contained
    therein would not of themselves  have  led  to  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's account.

 4. For the purposes of this appeal the core passages in the  decision  are
    at paragraphs 89 to 91. Therein, the judge considers the medical report
    of Dr A  Martin  prepared  in  respect  of  scarring  apparent  on  the
    Appellant's body.  The  judge  makes  a  number  of  criticisms  of  Dr
    Martin's report and as a result places  "very  little  weight"  on  the
    conclusions reached.  The judge stated that he did not believe that the
    report was prepared in an adequately professional manner.   One  reason
    for this is said to be that Dr Martin failed to use the terminology set
    out in the Istanbul Protocol, part of which is cited at  paragraph  89.
    It is also said that no reasons were given for why Dr Martin thought it
    "extremely likely" that the scars were caused by torture rather than by
    some other deliberate act by a third party.   It  is  said  that,  "the
    Appellant's injuries are consistent with his  account  but  they  could
    also be consistent with an attempt to create the false impression  that
    he has been tortured" (paragraph 90).  A final criticism is set out  in
    paragraph 91 in which the judge says that  Dr  Martin  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons purporting to date the  scarring  on  the  Appellant's
    body as being over two years old.   After  dealing  with  this  medical
    report the judge goes on and considers a  psychiatric  report  from  Dr
    Dhumad.  He had a number of criticisms of this medical evidence as well
    (see paragraphs 92 to 98).

 5. At paragraph 99 the judge states that he has considered the evidence as
    a whole.  At paragraph 100 he states as follows:

         "For the reasons set out in some detail above I  do  not  find  the
         Appellant to be a credible or reliable witness.  Almost every  part
         of his account contains significant inconsistencies and implausible
         aspects that cannot be  explained  away  by  misunderstanding  poor
         communication or faulty recollection."

 6. At paragraph 101 he states, "In particular I do not accept his  account
    of detention, torture or how he left Sri Lanka."

 7. As a result of this the appeal was dismissed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. The grounds focus almost entirely upon the  judge's  assessment  of  Dr
    Martin's report.  It is said that  the  judge  has  misapprehended  the
    contents of that report, attributing criticisms  to  the  author  which
    were not justified on the evidence.  In respect of the  possibility  of
    the injuries having been caused as a result of  what  is  termed  self-
    infliction by proxy (SIBP), it is said that this matter  had  not  been
    raised at the hearing, nor by the Respondent in her  initial  rejection
    of the protection claim.  In granting  permission  to  appeal  on  21st
    March 2016, First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin deemed it to be  arguable
    that the judge had indeed misapprehended the contents of  the  scarring
    report.




The hearing before me

 9. Mr Muquat relied on the grounds.  He submitted that the judge had  been
    factually wrong in his first criticism of Dr Martin. Dr Martin  had  in
    fact applied the correct terminology from the  Istanbul  Protocol.   In
    addition, he reiterated the fact that the possibility of SIBP  had  not
    been raised at any stage at the hearing before the judge. In any  event
    Dr Martin had adequately addressed this point in his  report.   It  was
    submitted that the  errors  in  respect  of  Dr  Martin's  report  were
    material to the outcome of the appeal as a whole because the scars were
    part and  parcel  of  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
    account, and a core element of that account was that the Appellant  had
    been detained and tortured.  Therefore if an error had  been  committed
    in respect of Dr Martin's report it potentially contaminated  the  rest
    of the decision and on that basis it  was  submitted  that  the  appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a compete  rehearing.



10. Mr Bramble referred me to the Presenting Officer's note of the  hearing
    before the judge in which it states that the issue of SIBP  was  raised
    both in submissions and questioning. The case of KV (scarring - medical
    evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 (IAC) was before the  judge.   Mr
    Bramble accepted that  Dr  Martin  had  used  the  terminology  of  the
    Istanbul Protocol in his report, but if one were to  view  the  judge's
    decision as a whole any errors were not material.

11. In reply Mr Muquat submitted that it would be  artificial  to  try  and
    sever the detention torture issue from  all  of  the  other  issues  in
    particular when the judge himself  had  said  that  he  had  considered
    credibility on the evidence as a whole.

Decision on error of law

12. In my view, and with some hesitation given the other adverse  findings,
    there are material errors of law in the judge's decision in respect  of
    the assessment of Dr Martin's report.

13. The judge was factually wrong to have stated that Dr Martin  failed  to
    use appropriate terminology in his report. In fact it is clear  from  a
    proper reading of the report that the term "typical" is employed  on  a
    number of occasions in respect of causation of the scars and that  term
    is of course second only to a diagnostic indicator within the structure
    of the Istanbul Protocol as that relates  to  scarring.   That  factual
    error it seems to me must be  material  for  two  reasons:  first,  the
    judge's criticism of Mr Martin's report was wrong in this  respect  and
    that a reduction  in  weight  placed  upon  the  report  was  therefore
    erroneous; second, whilst the judge  appears  to  say  that  Dr  Martin
    thought the scars were "consistent" with  the  Appellant's  account  of
    torture, Dr Martin had in fact stated that they were "typical" of being
    caused in a way described by the Appellant and there  is  a  clear  and
    material difference between "consistent" and "typical" within the terms
    of the Istanbul Protocol.

14. It is unclear to me that the issue of SIBP was  properly  canvassed  at
    the hearing or dealt with by the judge in his decision.  It is  unclear
    from paragraph 90 as to whether the judge is in fact making  a  finding
    that the injuries were caused by SIBP.  Furthermore the judge has  made
    no reference to the fact that Dr  Martin  himself  addressed  the  SIBP
    issue, albeit briefly, in his report.   If  the  judge  was  implicitly
    rejecting this part of the report he has not given specific reasons for
    doing so, and as I have already found other criticisms of  Dr  Martin's
    report were not well-founded.  There is a material error here.

15. In respect of the age of the scars once again the judge appears  in  my
    view to have misapprehended Dr Martin's report.  He was not as  I  read
    it purporting to state with any accuracy the age of the scars:  he  was
    giving an opinion which is in line with the general observations of the
    Upper Tribunal in the case of KV.  The  judge  has  misapprehended  the
    report.

16. A central element of the Appellant's account was that he  was  detained
    and tortured.  If this issue has not been properly considered  (due  to
    the erroneous consideration of Dr Martin's  report)  there  is  a  real
    danger that this infects other findings  within  the  decision  itself.
    This is  particularly  so  given  the  judge's  own  perfectly  correct
    statement that he had considered the evidence as a whole.

17. Mr Bramble urged me to, as it were, sever certain adverse findings from
    the issue of Dr Martin's report.  In my view that would be something of
    an artificial exercise. It would involve attempting to work through all
    the other findings one by one and assess to what  extent,  if  at  all,
    they were connected to the core issue of  the  detention  and  torture.
    Whilst that might possibly be acceptable in respect of one  or  two  of
    the other findings, in my view it is not the appropriate  way  forward,
    particularly in a protection claim.

18. Thus, despite the conscientious effort made by the judge to  provide  a
    detailed and thorough decision  on  the  Appellant's  case,  given  the
    errors I have identified and their  materiality,  I  set  the  decision
    aside.







Disposal

19. Given the nature of the judge's findings and the errors of law above in
    my view the appeal needs to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a complete rehearing with no findings preserved.  In so  concluding,  I
    have had regard to paragraph 7 of the relevant Practice  Statement.   I
    issue directions below.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Directions to the Parties:

(1)  This appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
    rehearing with no preserved findings of fact;

(2)  If the Respondent wishes to rely on the SIBP issue she must  state  her
    case in writing, with particular reference to the Appellant's evidence,
    no later than 16 June 2016;

(3)  If the SIBP issue is indeed raised by the Respondent, the Appellant  is
    then at liberty to adduce whatever additional  evidence  he  wishes  in
    rebuttal. Any such evidence must be served on the Respondent and  filed
    with the First-tier Tribunal no later than 4 August 2016;

(4)  Both parties are to comply with any further directions  issued  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to Administration

(1)  This appeal is remitted to the Hatton Cross Hearing Centre to be  heard
    at 10am on 1 September 2016;

(2)  The remitted hearing shall not involve First-tier Tribunal  Judge  J  C
    Hamilton;

(3)  There is a three-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing;

(4)  A Tamil interpreter is required.





Signed                                  Date: 16 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
