







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
AA/05173/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |              Decision and Reasons      |
|On 2 February 2016                    |Promulgated                             |
|                                      |On 29 February 2016                     |
|                                      |                                        |

                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between


                                   Mr F B
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the Appellant:       Ms K Wass, Counsel (instructed by Barnes Harrild
and Dyer)
For the Respondent:      Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. I continue the anonymity direction made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge. No report or other publication of these proceedings or any part
      of them shall name or directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant.
      Failure by any  person,  body  or  institution  whether  corporate  or
      unincorporated, including a party to this appeal, to comply with  this
      direction may lead to proceedings for contempt of court. The direction
      shall continue in force until another appropriate Court shall lift  or
      vary it.


   2. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on 2 May 1998. His appeal
      against the decision of the  respondent  to  remove  him  to  Albania,
      having refused his application for asylum, was dismissed by the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge in a decision promulgated on 17 September 2015.


   3. The appellant claimed that he was a victim of  domestic  violence  and
      had been kidnapped by persons who owed his father money. He  contended
      that he was unable or too fearful to avail himself of  the  protection
      of Albania. The Judge found that the central issue between the parties
      related to the credibility of the appellant's account [28].


   4. She did not  find  that  the  core  of  the  appellant's  account  was
      credible. She found it to be "extremely unlikely" that the appellant's
      teachers would not take any action to protect him if, as he stated  in
      his oral evidence, he had attended school on  various  occasions  with
      marks on his face.


   5. In his evidence, he stated that he told five of his teachers what  had
      happened and that "they did nothing." Although he  had  seen  teachers
      hitting pupils at school, the Judge found that  it  was  not  credible
      "....that him (sic) reporting serious abuse within his family home  on
      numerous occasions, resulting in him often missing school,  would  not
      be taken seriously and acted upon."  This  she  found  undermined  the
      credibility of the appellant's account [32].


   6. On 6 November 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted the appellant
      permission to appeal on the basis that it is arguable that at [32]  in
      assessing how Albanian  teachers  would  react  to  a  child  alleging
      violence from his father, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  "speculated".
      There was arguably no evidence to support the observation. He referred
      to the decision in Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 at [20] and [25].  As
      this finding was central to the adverse findings of credibility, Judge
      Rintoul found that it was arguable that the findings as  a  whole  are
      undermined.


   7. Ms Wass, who did not represent the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, sought permission  pursuant  to  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008, to admit a research report sponsored  by  Unicef
      Albania, entitled "Violence Against Children in Albania."  The  report
      addresses an issue relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
      credibility.  The  conclusions  regarding  violence  against  children
      addressed in the Report have a direct bearing on matters raised by the
      appellant in evidence, the effect of which is to undermine  the  basis
      of the Judge's credibility findings on this particular issue.


   8. As this was not anticipated at or before the hearing, Ms  Wass  sought
      to rely on the main findings contained in the report  as  set  out  at
      paragraph 3.1 of the  Executive  Summary.  There  it  is  stated  that
      research, sponsored by Unicef Albania, concluded that even  though  it
      is commonly held that violence should only be used when necessary,  in
      day to day practice, physical and psychological violence are the chief
      means of ensuring discipline, both at home and in school.


   9. It is also noted at page 10 of the report that  female  teachers  more
      commonly resort to physical and psychological violence in schools than
      male teachers.  Male  teachers  exercise  harsher  forms  of  physical
      violence,  whereas  female  teachers   exercise   harsher   forms   of
      psychological violence. At page 25 of the report,  it  is  noted  that
      children reported  many  cases  where  parents,  keen  to  demonstrate
      "ownership" of their own children,  went  to  school  and  beat  their
      children in front of other students. On one occasion it  was  reported
      that a mother beat her daughter in front of the whole class because of
      a poor grade. On another occasion the father, a policeman,  turned  up
      in his uniform and beat his son in the schoolyard,  in  front  of  the
      other students, because the boy had  failed  to  tell  him  about  the
      parents' assembly in the school. There are also many reported cases of
      parents authorising teachers to beat their children,  when  necessary.
      Page 26 of the report sets out the  forms  of  violence  used  against
      children at home and in schools.


  10. Ms Wass noted that the report, dated 2006, was not before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, as the question of  whether  the  appellant's  teachers
      would have failed to report evidence of his having been  subjected  to
      physical abuse, was only raised at the hearing and thereafter  in  the
      Judge's decision.


  11. Mr Walker did not oppose the admission of that evidence.


  12. Ms Wass  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  began  her
      "negative credibility findings" when referring to  the  issue  of  the
      appellant's teachers at  [32].  She  submitted  that  the  finding  is
      flawed, having regard to the  background  material  contained  in  the
      research report dated 2006.


  13. Ms Wass submitted that in paragraphs 15 and following in  the  reasons
      for refusal the respondent did not raise as part  of  her  credibility
      assertions, any issue regarding a lack of involvement at the school.


  14. In her consideration of the merits, the respondent noted at  paragraph
      17 that the appellant claimed in his witness statement  that  he  told
      his teachers what happened but  that  nothing  had  happened.  In  the
      remaining paragraphs, the respondent rejected his contention  that  he
      had been forced to work and that he had been mistreated by his  father
      in Albania (paragraph 19).


  15. The respondent having considered the credibility points in  the  round
      concluded that he had failed to substantiate his  claim  that  he  had
      been abducted on two occasions by unknown people in Albania.


  16. Ms Wass thus submitted  that  the  issue  referred  to  by  the  Judge
      relating to the lack of involvement by the school, was not one of  the
      "credibility points" that was considered by the respondent.


  17. At [8] the Judge recorded that the appellant stated in  evidence  that
      he had told his teachers on various occasions what was  happening  but
      they failed to take action. This then became  a  distinct  core  issue
      which had not been raised beforehand. The  appellant  had  been  cross
      examined on the issue [16]. There he stated that he told his  teachers
      on five occasions about his problems because they had noticed marks on
      his face when he had been going  to  school  but  they  had  not  done
      anything to assist him. The appellant also stated  that  he  had  seen
      teachers hit pupils at school in Albania.


  18. Ms Wass submitted in the  alternative  that  in  the  absence  of  the
      report, the Judge had impermissibly speculated at  [32]  that  it  was
      "extremely unlikely" that the  appellant's  teachers  would  not  take
      action to protect him if he attended school on various occasions  with
      marks on his face. That was despite the fact  that  he  had  told  his
      teachers what had happened and that they did nothing.


  19. The Judge noted at [32] that although the appellant stated that he had
      seen teachers hit pupils at school, she did not find it credible  that
      his reporting of serious abuse within  his  family  home  on  numerous
      occasions would not be taken seriously and acted upon by  his  school.
      That she found undermined the credibility of the appellant's account.


  20. Ms Wass relied on the Court of Appeal's decision in Y  v  SSHD  [2006]
      EWCA Civ 1223 at [20-25]. There, the Court of Appeal had regard to  an
      earlier decision of the Court of Appeal in HK v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ
      1037 where Neuberger LJ stated at [28-29] that in  many  asylum  cases
      some of the appellant's story may seem inherently  unlikely  but  that
      does not mean it is untrue. The ingredients of the story  as  a  whole
      have to be considered  against  the  available  country  evidence  and
      reliable expert evidence. Inherent probability  can  be  a  dangerous,
      even wholly inappropriate, factor to rely on  in  some  asylum  cases.
      Much of the evidence will be referable to societies with  customs  and
      circumstances which are very different from those of which the members
      of the fact finding tribunal have any experience.


  21. At [22]of Y, reference was made to Chadwick LJ's  judgment  in  HK  at
      [72] where he stated that it was unsafe to reject facts  because  they
      are so unusual when they are said to have occurred in  an  environment
      and culture wholly outside the experience of the decision maker.


  22. At [25] of  Y,  Lord  Justice  Keene  set  out  the  legal  principles
      applicable  to  the  approach  to  be  adopted   towards   issues   of
      credibility. The fundamental one is that he should be cautious  before
      finding an account to be  inherently  credible,  because  there  is  a
      considerable risk that he will be over influenced by his own views  on
      what is or is not plausible, and those views will have inevitably been
      influenced by his own background in this country and  by  the  customs
      and ways of our own society. It is therefore important that he  should
      seek to view an appellant's  account  of  events  in  the  context  of
      conditions in the country from which the appellant  comes.   That  did
      not mean, however, that a Judge is required to take at face  value  an
      account of facts proffered by an appellant, no matter how contrary  to
      common sense and experience of human nature the account  may  be.  The
      decision maker is not expected to suspend his own judgment.


  23. In an appropriate case, he is entitled to  find  that  an  account  of
      events is so far fetched and contrary to reason as to be incapable  of
      belief. At [27] Lord Justice Keene agreed with that approach,  stating
      that a decision maker is entitled to regard an account  as  incredible
      by such standards, but he must take care not to do so  merely  because
      it would not seem reasonable if it had happened in  this  country.  In
      essence,  he  must  look  through  the  spectacles  provided  by   the
      information he has about conditions in the country in question.


  24. In Y, the Judge had regard to the information about conditions in Iran
      provided by the Home Office CIPU report. Nor could it be said that  he
      fell into the trap of merely asserting that  the  appellant's  account
      was incredible without giving reasons for such a finding. He had given
      a number of reasons.


  25. Ms Wass submitted that it is apparent that the First-tier Judge in the
      appellant's appeal was influenced by the standards in  a  UK  society,
      regarding the approach of schools where there  have  been  reports  of
      violence.


  26. She contended that the admission  of  new  evidence  showed  that  the
      findings were not supported by any "objective evidence."  Even in  the
      absence of the report, it is clear that the Judge speculated and  gave
      no appropriate reasons for the  adverse  finding  of  the  appellant's
      credibility.


  27. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Walker submitted  that  the  complaint
      made with regard to [32] was only one of the credibility points  made.
      It was not however the core point.


  28. Mr Walker submitted that even if the Judge had the  whole  report  she
      would not have come to the conclusions she reached at [32], there  are
      nonetheless  other  credibility  findings  she  made  justifying   the
      credibility conclusions she reached. It is accordingly severable  from
      the other findings.


  29. He also submitted that the documents should have been put  forward  at
      the hearing as this is what the case was based on.


  30. In reply, Ms Wass submitted that  the  subsequent  assessment  of  the
      feasibility of internal relocation has to be viewed in  the  light  of
      the credibility findings.


     Assessment


  31. The respondent in the reasons for refusal letter  had  not  sought  to
      rely on the  asserted  failure  of  the  school  teachers  to  respond
      appropriately to reports made by the appellant of  violence  that  had
      been taken against him.


  32. The appellant gave detailed evidence before the Judge and stated  when
      cross-examined what he had told his teachers on five  occasions  about
      his problems, when they had noticed marks on his face when he had been
      going to school;  however,  they did nothing to assist him [16]. In re-
      examination he stated that he had seen teachers hit pupils  at  school
      in Albania [17].


  33. Whilst it might have been prudent for the  appellant's  solicitors  to
      have obtained  the  background  report  which  has  subsequently  been
      produced, the respondent in the reasons for refusal had  never  sought
      to rely upon the claim made by the appellant in his witness  statement
      that he had told his teachers but that nothing had happened -  Reasons
      for refusal, paragraph 17.


  34. The First-tier Judge did not  simply  take  into  account  as  one  of
      several adverse findings relating to the appellant's credibility  that
      it was unlikely that his teachers would not take any action to protect
      him in the circumstances that he claimed. Instead she found  that  the
      core of his account was not credible. It was extremely  unlikely  that
      his teachers would not have taken any action to protect him.  Although
      the appellant stated in re-examination that he had seen  teachers  hit
      pupils at school,  she  found  that  it  was  not  credible  that  his
      reporting  of  serious  abuse  within  his  family  home  on  numerous
      occasions resulting in his often missing school  would  not  be  taken
      seriously and acted upon by the school. That she found undermined  the
      credibility of his account.


  35. Although she did not accept the appellant's claim  that  he  had  been
      kidnapped on two occasions by a criminal gang and that his account  of
      his journey from Albania was also lacking in credibility, she did  not
      find that these amounted to  "the  core"  of  his  account  not  being
      credible.


  36. Quite apart from the evidence subsequently produced, which  tended  to
      show that the attitude of the appellant's teachers might not have been
      unlikely, I find that the Judge's finding at  [32]  was  not  properly
      reasoned,  and  as  noted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Rintoul,   was
      speculative in the absence of evidence  to  support  the  observation.
      Moreover, it appears that her finding relating  to  the  core  of  his
      account was that it did not seem reasonable as it could not happen  in
      this country. There was no evidence before her as to the conditions in
      Albania in respect of the approach and attitude of reports of violence
      in Albanian schools, and the Judge did not remind herself of the  need
      to look at the issue in the foreign context. In the  event  the  Judge
      did not seek to provide any reasons justifying her finding  that  this
      undermined the credibility of the appellant's account.


  37. Although Mr Walker submitted that that was  a  finding  which  can  be
      separated from the rest of the findings relating  to  the  appellant's
      credibility, it is difficult to assume that even  in  the  absence  of
      such a finding, the same conclusion would  have  inevitably  resulted.
      The finding that the Judge made related to the "core" of his account.


  38. Insofar as internal relocation is concerned, the finding by the Judge,
      as  contended  in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  was  premised  upon  the
      appellant's ability  to  call  upon  his  wider  family  members  when
      internally relocating. However,  there  was  an  absence  of  evidence
      regarding contact between those  family  members  and  the  appellant.
      Accordingly the finding is based again on supposition.  The  appellant
      gave evidence as to the distance between his family home and  that  of
      his other family members. He was not asked by anyone whether it  would
      be feasible for him to go and live with these other family members.


  39. Moreover, the Judge found that it was  not  suggested  that  the  gang
      would have the means of tracing him if he moved to a  different  area.
      The appellant had however contended in evidence that his father or the
      gang could find him through the police, having regard to the fact that
      the police are corrupt.


  40. I am  accordingly  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal contained material errors of law. In the circumstances I  set
      it aside.  I consider that this is a case where the extent of judicial
      fact finding which is necessary for the decision to  be  re-made.    I
      have had regard to the Senior President's Practice Statement regarding
      the remitting an appeal and the overriding objective.  This is a  case
      where  there  will  be  extensive  judicial  fact  finding.    It   is
      accordingly just and fair to remit the case.










      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. It is  remitted
      to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for remaking before  another
      Judge.


      An anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date: 23 February 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

