

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05380/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th January 2016                    |On 27th May 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everritt;   Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Iveson;     Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal has made an  anonymity  order  and  for  the
       avoidance of  any  doubt,  that  order  continues.   PK  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   him.   This
       direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Taylor promulgated on 25th September 2015 in which he
       allowed an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of  State
       on 11th March 2015, to refuse the claim for asylum made by PK.


    3. The appellant before me, is the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the respondent to this appeal, is  PK.   However  for
       ease of reference, in the course of this decision I shall adopt  the
       parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.   I  shall
       in this decision, refer to PK as the appellant and the Secretary  of
       State as the respondent.


    4. The appellant is an Albanian national.  Borrowing from paragraph  [9]
       of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,  I  summarise  the
       background.  The appellant is married with  three  children.  On  7th
       April 2014 the appellant's 18 year old son, MK, was  involved  in  an
       argument and a fight, in which a one of the victims died  of  a  stab
       wound, and the appellant's son stabbed  another  several  times  such
       that he was in hospital for one and a half months.   On the same  day
       the appellant had travelled to Montenegro and only  became  aware  of
       the incident when his wife called and asked him to return because  of
       the fight. The appellant started to return  but  received  a  further
       call from his wife to tell him that his son had caused a killing  and
       wounding, and as a result, the  family  was  in  a  blood  feud.  The
       appellant therefore remained in Montenegro with his  sister  in  law,
       and had not returned to Albania since.     The  appellant's  son  was
       arrested on 8th April 2014  for  murder  and  causing  injury.    The
       Appellant had not personally had any contact with any member  of  the
       victims family, but the father of the deceased victim father had made
       threats, that he had nothing to lose after the death of his only son.
       The appellant believes that the deceased's  father  was  adamant  for
       revenge under Kanun law.   The appellant had asked his cousin to seek
       the assistance of the Peace  Reconciliation  Missionaries,  and  they
       visited the deceased's  family with the elders of the village on 24th
       or  25th  May  2014  but  were  told  that  there  was  no  hope   of
       reconciliation. The appellant stated that the remaining male  members
       of the family were currently in hiding in Albania  and  his  son  had
       been in prison since 8th April 2014. His son had one court appearance
       but had not yet been sent for trial.  The appellant had not seen,  or
       spoken to his son since his arrest. The appellant remained in  hiding
       in Montenegro until he travelled to the UK on 12th June 2014.  He had
       no problems in Montenegro.


    5. The respondent's case as set out in her reasons for refusal letter of
       11th March 2015 is set out at paragraph [7] of the  Judge's  decision
       and nothing is  to  be  gained  by  repeating  the  content  in  this
       decision.  At paragraphs [10] and [11] of  his  decision,  the  Judge
       sets out the appellant's evidence and at paragraphs [12] and [13]  he
       sets out the evidence of the two witnesses called by the appellant in
       support of the appeal. Neither of these witnesses were in Albania  at
       the time of the incident on 7th April 2014, but both had heard of the
       events.


    6. The submissions made on behalf of  the  respondent  are  set  out  at
       paragraph [14] of the Judge's decision.  In  very  broad  terms,  the
       respondent submitted that there was no trace in court records of  the
       appellant's son's claimed conviction  for  murder  and  that  in  any
       event, even if the murder  had  taken  place,  there  was  sufficient
       protection available to the appellant in the south  of  the  country.
       At paragraph [15], the Judge records the submissions made  on  behalf
       of the appellant.  In very broad terms, the appellant submitted  that
       there was overwhelming evidence that the murder occurred, and that  a
       blood feud would ensue as both families are  from  the  north.    The
       attempt at reconciliation had failed and  all  male  members  of  the
       family were in hiding. The deceased's family had  connections,  which
       made the appellant more vulnerable.  Both parties drew the  Tribunals
       attention to the decision of the Country Guidance case of  EH  (Blood
       feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC).


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor


    7. At paragraphs [16] and [17] of his decision, the Judge considers  the
       documents relied upon by the appellant and the respondent.  He states
       at paragraph [17]:


           "17.  ...Given the number of supporting documents from different
           sources, and the absence of evidence that any of them are  false
           or forgeries, I find that the weight  of  the  evidence  on  the
           lower standard of proof indicates that the murder took place  as
           claimed and that the appellant's son  was  currently  serving  a
           prison sentence for murder."


    8. At paragraph [18] of his decision, the Judge refers  to  the  country
       guidance case of EH (Blood feuds) Albania and states:


           "18.  ... The case of EH advises that the number of  blood  feud
           cases  was  decreasing,  however  in  areas  where   Kanun   law
           predominates, particularly?in northern Albania, the steps  taken
           by the state to improve state protections  do  not  yet  provide
           sufficient protection if an active feud  exists.  The  appellant
           accepted that his house received protection, but  only  for  the
           duration of the funeral of his son's victim. There is no dispute
           that Shkoder is in  the  far  north  of  Albania  and  therefore
           applying the guidance of EH, there would be a risk in that  area
           if there was an active blood feud. The appellant's  evidence  of
           the existence of a blood feud has been  supported  by  the  oral
           evidence of his supporting witnesses, as well  as  the  lawyer's
           letter, the priest letter and  the  certificate  in  respect  of
           reconciliation.   This evidence is also supported by EH and  the
           background information that blood feuds remain in the  north  of
           the country,  the  murder  and  the  individuals  concerned  all
           originate from the north of the country.  While the  certificate
           regarding reconciliation may not be reliable on its own, it  has
           to be considered in the light of all  of  the  other  supporting
           evidence of the murder and the blood feud. On the lower standard
           of proof I am satisfied that the appellant  is  a  target  in  a
           blood feud and would be at risk if he returned to  his  area  of
           Albania...."


    9. The Judge then considers internal relocation at paragraph [19] of his
       decision, and states:


           "19.  ...There is no dispute that the  appellant  had  lived  in
           Albania for all of his life, he spoke  the  language  and  could
           find work.   The issue is whether he could live in any  part  of
           Albania if the .... family came to know that  he  had  returned.
           The appellant and his supporting witness stated  that  his  wife
           and daughters were in hiding, and that  his  remaining  brothers
           had fled. I have found that the  murder  took  place  and  there
           seems little doubt that the fact of the murder was  well  known,
           it has been in the press and spoken about  in  the  local  area.
           Even if the appellant returned to the south of the country,  the
           murder took place in the north and a  feud  is  in  place,  both
           families are from the north and although the level of protection
           may change, the feud does not necessarily come to an end at  the
           border between north and south. The appellant gave  evidence  of
           danger living in the south, and that people had been  killed  in
           the south as a result of feuds. The appellant has given evidence
           that  the  .....  family  is  influential  and  very  likely  to
           aggressively pursue the feud, an attempt at  reconciliation  had
           failed. I am not satisfied  that  relocation  to  the  south  of
           Albania would provide the protection which the  appellant  would
           seek, I find that he was a well founded fear on return."


 The grounds of appeal and the hearing before me


   10. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Murray on 13th October 2015.  The matter comes  before  me  to
       consider whether or not the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Taylor involved the making of a material error of law.


   11. The respondent submits that the Judge failed  to  make  findings  on
       material matters and has given inadequate reasons for  finding  that
       the appellant would be unable to relocate to the south and seek  the
       protection of the authorities.


   12. First, the respondent submits  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  a
       finding as to whether or not he  accepted  or  rejected  the  report
       relied upon by the respondent, following the checks carried out with
       the Prosecution Office in Albania.  The  checks  had  revealed  that
       there were no records relating to the appellant's son.  Second,  the
       respondent had  referred  to  various  objective  evidence,  but  in
       reaching his decision as to whether the appellant could relocate  to
       the south, the Judge  failed  to  consider  the  objective  material
       and/or failed to provide adequate reasons for his finding  that  the
       appellant would be at risk of reprisals in the south.   Furthermore,
       the Judge failed to provide adequate reasons for  his  finding  that
       the family with whom the alleged  feud  exists,  is  influential  in
       Albania.


   13. Ms Everritt submits that the matters referred to in the  grounds  of
       appeal, were explicitly challenged in the respondent's  reasons  for
       refusal letter.  She submits that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  any
       findings as to the influence or reach of the  deceased's  family  in
       Albania,  and in the absence of reasons, it is  not  clear  why  the
       Judge came to the conclusion that the appellant could  not  relocate
       to the south.


   14.  In reply, Ms Iveson submits that the Judge carefully considered the
       evidence from the British  Embassy  that  was  relied  upon  by  the
       respondent, and it was properly open to  the  judge  to  prefer  the
       evidence of the appellant.   She submits that the  letter  from  the
       British Embassy is generic in nature, and as the  Judge  identifies,
       does not provide sufficient information as to the  search  that  was
       carried out.   She submits that it was open  to  the  respondent  to
       make a very specific enquiry in light of the information  available.
       She submits that the objective evidence that is referred to  in  the
       reasons for refusal letter is lengthy, but much of it is irrelevant.
        Ms Iveson submits that it was open to the Judge, having  considered
       the country guidance case, to reach the conclusion that  he  did  at
       paragraph [19] of his  decision.   She  submits  that  there  was  a
       considerable amount of evidence  before  the  Judge  and  the  Judge
       plainly has all of the evidence in mind in reaching his decision.


 Discussion


   15. As to the asylum claim, the issue for me to decide is whether or  not
       the Judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant has  failed  to
       demonstrate  to  the  required  standard,  that  he  is  in  need  of
       international protection.  In that respect I follow the  guidance  of
       the Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982.
       The Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set  aside  for
       error of law on the grounds of perversity if  it  was  irrational  or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is  "perverse"  embraces
       findings that are irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
       and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On
       appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a  judgment  at  first
       instance, unless it really could not understand the original  judge's
       thought process when he was making material findings.  I  apply  that
       guidance to my consideration of the decision in this appeal.


   16. I have also had regard to the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
       Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  IAC
       where it was stated in the head note that:


           "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief  explanation  of
           the conclusions on the central issue  on  which  the  appeal  is
           determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision
           as a whole makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted
           by the judge."


   17. It is useful at this stage to  also  set  out  the  headnote  to  the
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]
       UKUT 00348 (IAC) because it provides useful guidance as to the issues
       relevant in this appeal not only in relation to the  availability  of
       internal relocation, but also as to matters that  a  Tribunal  should
       consider in determining whether an active blood feud exists  and  the
       approach to be adopted to  attestation  letters  from  Albanian  non-
       governmental  organisations,  and  documents  originating  from   the
       Albanian courts, police or prosecution service.


           1. While there remain a number of active blood feuds in Albania,
           they are few and declining. There are a small number  of  deaths
           annually arising from those feuds and a small number  of  adults
           and  children  living  in   self-confinement   for   protection.
           Government programmes to educate  self-confined  children  exist
           but very few children are involved in them.


           2. The existence of a 'modern blood feud'  is  not  established:
           Kanun blood feuds have always allowed for the possibility of pre-
           emptive killing by a dominant clan.


           3.  The  Albanian  state  has  taken  steps  to  improve   state
           protection,  but  in  areas   where   Kanun   law   predominates
           (particularly in  northern  Albania)  those  steps  do  not  yet
           provide sufficiency  of  protection  from  Kanun-related  blood-
           taking if an active  feud  exists  and  affects  the  individual
           claimant.  Internal  relocation  to  an  area  of  Albania  less
           dependent  on  the  Kanun  may  provide  sufficient  protection,
           depending on the reach, influence, and commitment to prosecution
           of the feud by the aggressor clan.


           4.  International  protection  under  the  Refugee   Convention,
           Qualification  Directive  or  Articles  2  and  3  ECHR  is  not
           available to an appellant who is willing and intends to commit a
           revenge killing on return to his country of origin, by reference
           to that intention.


           5. Where there is an active feud  affecting  an  individual  and
           self-confinement is the only option, that person  will  normally
           qualify for Refugee status.


           6. In determining whether an active blood feud exists, the fact-
           finding Tribunal should consider:


           (i) the history of the alleged feud, including the notoriety  of
           the original killings, the numbers killed,  and  the  degree  of
           commitment by the aggressor clan toward the prosecution  of  the
           feud;


           (ii)  the  length  of  time  since  the  last  death   and   the
           relationship of the last person killed to the appellant;


           (iii) the ability of members of the aggressor clan to locate the
           appellant if returned to another part of Albania; and


           (iv) the past and likely future attitude of the police and other
           authorities towards the feud and the protection of the family of
           the person claiming to be at risk, including any  past  attempts
           to seek prosecution of members of the aggressor clan, or to seek
           protection from the Albanian authorities.


           7. In order to establish that there  is  an  active  blood  feud
           affecting him personally, an appellant must produce satisfactory
           individual evidence of its existence  in  relation  to  him.  In
           particular, the appellant must establish:


           (i) his profile as a potential target of the feud identified and
           which family carried out the most recent killing; and


           (ii) whether the appellant has been, or  other  members  of  his
           family have been, or are currently, in  self-confinement  within
           Albania.


           8.   Attestation   letters   from   Albanian    non-governmental
           organisations should not in  general  be  regarded  as  reliable
           evidence of the existence of a feud.


           9. Documents originating from the  Albanian  courts,  police  or
           prosecution service, if genuine, may assist in establishing  the
           existence of a blood feud at the date  of  the  document  relied
           upon, subject to  the  test  of  reliability  set  out  in  A  v
           Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (Pakistan)  [2002]
           UKIAT 00439 (Tanveer Ahmed).


           10.  Unless  factual,  prompt  and  consistent,  Albanian  press
           reports will add little or no evidential weight  in  considering
           whether a feud exists.


           11. Whether the feud continues and  what  the  attitude  of  the
           aggressor clan to its pursuit may be will  remain  questions  of
           fact to be determined by the fact-finding Tribunal.


   18. I deal first with the Judge's finding  at  paragraph  [17]  that  the
       weight of the evidence on the lower standard of proof indicates  that
       the murder took place as claimed and  that  the  appellant's  son  is
       currently serving a prison sentence for murder.   If  this  were  the
       only ground of appeal I would have no  hesitation  in  rejecting  the
       submission made on behalf of the respondent that the  Judge  made  no
       finding as to whether or not he accepts or rejects  the  contents  of
       the report relied upon by the respondent.  The  Judge's  decision  at
       paragraphs [16] and [17] should be read as a whole. He  set  out  the
       evidence relied upon by the respondent and notes at paragraph [16]:


           "... The document produced is a report of the search, it is  not
           a report compiled by the person who carried out  the  search  or
           the method of the search.   The document  does  not  record  the
           nature of the search, if it was made  against  the  case  number
           supplied, or the date of birth."


       The Judge weighed that  against  the  various  strands  of  evidence
       relied upon by the appellant from  different  sources.   It  is  the
       adequacy or sufficiency of the reasons given by the Judge  which  is
       crucial, and in my judgement there can be  no  doubt  that,  without
       expressly rejecting the evidence relied upon by the respondent,  the
       Judge was prepared to attach greater weight to the  evidence  relied
       upon by the appellant than the letter relied upon by the respondent,
       from the British Embassy in Tirana  for  the  reasons  that  he  has
       identified.


   19. Having found that the murder took place as claimed, the  Judge  found
       that the appellant is a target in a blood feud and would be  at  risk
       if he returned to his home area of Albania.  The question of internal
       relocation  arises,  and  despite  Ms.  Iveson's  arguments  to   the
       contrary, I am unable to discern any reasoning of significance in the
       Judge's decision as a basis for his finding at  paragraph  [19]  that
       relocation to the south of Albania would not provide  the  protection
       which the appellant would seek.  I accept, as Shizad points out, that
       reasons need not be  extensive  providing  that  they  give  a  brief
       explanation on the central issues and conclusions or findings made by
       a Judge. As is often said: a determination must  set  out  sufficient
       reasoning to entitle the parties (particularly the losing  party)  to
       know why they have won or lost.


   20. The case put by the respondent and appellant respectively is set  out
       in the decision  at  paragraphs  [7]  to  [15].  The  respondent  had
       expressly taken issue with the appellant's claim that the  deceased's
       family held high positions in Albania and were  influential,  because
       the appellant was unable to state which positions  he  believed  were
       held by members of  the  family.   Furthermore,  the  respondent  had
       maintained that there was no evidence that the appellant's family had
       taken  steps  to  inform  the  authorities  of  the  threats  to  the
       appellant, despite accepting that the appellant  could  approach  the
       police on the matter.   In my judgement, the Judge does  not  at  any
       point explain which of those submissions  he  accepts  and  which  of
       those submissions he rejects and, importantly, why he did so.  It  is
       not possible to say that the Judge has simply accepted all  that  the
       appellant put forward as the basis upon which a positive findings  of
       fact could be made.  I am simply  unable  to  discern  any  reasoning
       process indicating why the appellant's evidence that  the  deceased's
       family is influential and very likely to aggressively pursue the feud
       in the event that the appellant relocates  to  the  South,  has  been
       accepted such that relocation to  the  south  of  Albania  would  not
       provide the protection which the appellant would seek.  I  find  that
       the failure to make findings or to take account of those issues means
       that the Judge has not properly engaged with the principles  set  out
       in EH in terms of assessment of internal relocation.


   21. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge erred in law  by  failing  to
       give any or any  adequate  reasons  for  his  finding  that  internal
       relocation is available to the appellant.  In paragraph 2 of the head
       note in Shizad it is said as follows:


           "Although a decision may contain  an  error  of  law  where  the
           requirements to give adequate reasons are  not  met,  the  Upper
           Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of  the  First-
           tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of  law,  the
           fact-finding process  cannot  be  criticised  and  the  relevant
           Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,  unless  the
           conclusions the judge draws  from  the  primary  data  were  not
           reasonably open to him or her."


   22. Whilst I accept that the Upper Tribunal will not set aside a decision
       where the error was not material or could not have made any practical
       difference to the outcome of the appeal that  is  not  the  situation
       here. I would have to be satisfied that  the  only  factual  findings
       open to the Judge were those made in paragraphs [17] to [19]  of  the
       decision.  In my judgement this is not an appeal where the  decision,
       despite an error of law, would inevitably stand.


   23. A careful reading  of  the  evidence  and  the  parties'  submissions
       readily demonstrates that the Judge's findings were  not  necessarily
       inevitable.  The proper course in this appeal is that  it  should  be
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo re-hearing before a
       different  judge  who  can  consider  the  evidence  again  and  make
       appropriate findings with adequate reasons based upon  that  evidence
       without any findings of fact preserved.


   24. For the above reasons, in my judgement the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appeal on asylum grounds involved the making of
       an error of law. That decision is set aside.


   25. The decision needs to be re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;


            '7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
           proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting  the  case
           to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that;


            (a)   the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or   other
                 opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


            (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which  is
                 necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
                 made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the   overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
                 the First-tier Tribunal.'


   26. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(b) apply,  in  that  the
       nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary with  regard
       to the asylum claim will be extensive. The parties will be advised of
       the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


   27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law such that it is set aside.


   28. An anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                             Date 27 May 2016


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


   29. No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award


       Signed


       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



