
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05108/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 August 2016                             |On 8 August 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                     s T
                      (AN anonymity direction IS MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, who was born on [ ] 1973, is a national  of  Sri  Lanka.
    She previously visited the United Kingdom between 20 July 2003  and  28
    August 2003 and between 28 August 2005 and 19 February 2006.  She  last
    entered the United Kingdom on 3 March 2010 and applied for asylum on 19
    March 2010.  Her application was refused on 25 June 2010.  She appealed
    on 9 July 2010 but Immigration Judge Wyman dismissed her  appeal  in  a
    determination promulgated on 24 August 2010.  She became appeal  rights
    exhausted on 21 October 2010.

2.   Further submissions were made on her behalf of 6 January 2011  but  the
    Respondent decided they did not amount to a fresh claim on  16  January
    2012.  The  Appellant's  representatives  sent  a  pre-action  protocol
    letter to the Respondent on 9 March 2012 and on 26 March she agreed  to
    reconsider her decision.  The Respondent then refused  her  application
    for asylum for a second time on 9 May 2012.

3.   The Appellant appealed but  her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Black in a determination dated 2  September  2012.   The
    Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  but
    permission was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    on 21 September 2012.  However, Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  granted
    her permission to appeal on 20 November 2012.  On 8 February 2013 Upper
    Tribunal Judge Storey found that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Black  had
    materially erred in law in her treatment of the additional  documentary
    evidence which she had submitted after  her  initial  appeal  had  been
    dismissed.  On  14  August  2013  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gleeson  gave
    detailed directions in light of the country guidance case of GJ.  There
    were further directions and then the case was set down.

4.    The  appeal  came  before  me  on  18  July  2016  but  the  334  page
    consolidated bundle supplied to the Upper Tribunal only contained every
    other  page  and  no  bundle  had  been  served  on  the   respondents.
    Therefore, I had no option but to adjourn.

5.   Counsel for the Appellant provided me  with  a  complete  bundle  later
    that day.  Counsel for the Appellant  informed  the  Tribunal  that  in
    light of the report by Dr Persaud, dated 20 January 2016, she  did  not
    intend to call the Appellant.  She referred to the last  page  of  this
    report where Dr Persaud said that "in my opinion the client is not  fit
    to give evidence as she appears to be suffering from two  serious  sets
    of symptoms which leads her to be distracted and confused".   Therefore
    the hearing today proceeded on  the  basis  of  submissions  from  both
    parties.  I was also informed that the Respondent did not wish to cross-
    examine the only other witness.

6.   The Appellant submits that she would be at risk of persecution  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities if she were  removed  there.   I  have  reminded
    myself of the need to use the findings of  any  previous  judge  as  my
    starting point.  In this case there have been two previous hearings but
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Black was set aside by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Storey.   Therefore  I  have  considered  the  findings
    reached by Immigration Judge Wyman.  She  accepted  the  Appellant  was
    employed as a sports officer in Sri Lanka from August 2000 and there is
    a copy of her contract of employment in the consolidated  bundle.   She
    also accepts the Appellant was sponsored by the  Tamil  Schools  Sports
    Association to visit the United Kingdom on two occasions.  In  addition
    she accepted that when the team returned to Sri Lanka in 2003  she  and
    other  team  members  were  invited  to  meet  the  LTTE  leader,   Mr.
    Prabakaran, and that photographs were taken of him with  the  team  and
    that these photographs were used to accompany newspaper articles  about
    the team.  The Respondent's bundle  also  included  colour  photographs
    showing the team with the leader of the LTTE and  him  also  presenting
    the Appellant with a certificate and also posing with her on their own.
     The bundle also contained a photograph of the Appellant  receiving  an
    award from the second in command in the female brigade of the LTTE.

7.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wyman  also  made  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings in relation to the Appellant.   It  is  a  crucial
    part  of  the  Appellant's  account  that  on  5  November   2008   the
    Magistrates' Court issued a warrant for  her  arrest  because  she  had
    failed to attend court.  There was a  certified  copy  of  this  arrest
    warrant in the consolidated bundle.  The name  on  the  warrant  was  a
    slight misspelling of the Appellant's given name.  This led  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman to find  that,  as  this  arrest  warrant  was  an
    official document, such a fundamental mistake as  the  spelling  of  an
    Appellant's name would not have been made.   However  the  consolidated
    bundle contained an affidavit from a translator which postdates  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wyman's determination.  He has a  degree  in  Tamil
    with Economics and Western History and was also employed as an  Enquiry
    Officer to hold hearings in Sinhala by the government.  In addition, he
    has worked as an interpreter and translator both in Sinhala  and  Tamil
    from March 2002.  He explained that he provided the translation of  the
    arrest warrant which was written in Sinhala.  He  went  on  to  confirm
    that in the Sinhala alphabet the form "cha" is used and not  "sa".   He
    also confirmed that in the Tamil alphabet "sa" is used for the phonetic
    "cha".  In addition, he notes that because the differences between  the
    two languages and  alphabets  names  translated  from  both  the  Tamil
    language and  Sinhala  language  into  English  often  carry  different
    spellings because of a lack of equivalent letters and  sounds  in  each
    alphabet.  He also noted this is further complicated  when  a  name  in
    Tamil is translated into Sinhala script and then  onto  English  script
    and this led to numerous different spellings of  particular  sounds  or
    letters or combination of letters and  could  lead  to  there  being  a
    number of possible spellings of an appellant's name.

8.   I find this to be a very persuasive explanation  and  one  which  takes
    proper account of the difficulties translators  face  when  translating
    between languages which do not share the same alphabets and scripts  to
    signify similar sounds.  Therefore I  do  not  find  the  fact  that  a
    different spelling of the Appellant's name appears on  the  translation
    into English means that the warrant was not properly issued in relation
    to the Appellant.

9.   Immigration Judge Wyman also  stated  that  her  main  reason  for  not
    accepting the  arrest  warrant  was  genuine  was  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had said in her oral evidence  that  an  arrest  warrant  was
    issued if an interviewer failed to attend on three occasions.  She then
    notes the appellant had said that she had to report to the police on  a
    weekly basis and concludes that the warrant  should  have  been  issued
    around 2 August 2008, as opposed  to  5  November  2008.   However  the
    consolidated bundle contains translation of a copy of the records  kept
    of the Appellant's court appearance since she was first produced to the
    court on 7 May 2008.  It shows that  she  is  initially  remanded  into
    custody and was then granted bail on 4 June 2008 on the  condition  she
    report to a police station on a weekly basis and provided two sureties.
    She was released on bail on 11 June 2008 which  is  when  she  provided
    sureties which were accepted by the court.

10.  There is then a record of further court appearances in connection  with
    the offence or offences for which she had been charged.  When  she  did
    not appear at one of these hearings, the third hearing, on  5  November
    2008, a warrant was issued for her arrest.

11.  I have considered the provenance of this court record.  The  Respondent
    has admitted that further evidence submitted  by  the  Appellant  on  6
    January 2011 was mislaid.  Therefore, the Appellant had no  option  but
    to submit copies of these documents on 7 September 2011.

12.  There is a letter, dated 2 December 2010,  from  Mr  Elangkumaran,  the
    solicitor who represented the Appellant in Sri Lanka.  It  states  that
    the Appellant was arrested on the mere suspicion of being a  member  of
    the LTTE and was remanded.  He went on to state that she was on  remand
    for more than one month and that he secured her release on 11 June 2008
    on conditions.

13.  Those representing the Appellant in these  proceedings  wrote  to  this
    advocate requesting further information on 23 July 2012.  He replied on
    12 August 2012.  He confirmed that he previously obtained  a  certified
    copy of her case record at the Magistrates' Court and had forwarded  it
    to her.  He also confirmed that she was arrested  and  produced  before
    the Magistrates' Court on 4 April 2008 and remanded in custody for  two
    months.  He added that she was released on bail and provided  the  name
    of one of her sureties.  He also said that when he looked at the record
    he noted that the airport had been told to impound  her  passport.   In
    order to confirm that he was indeed  an  attorney,  the  Appellant  has
    submitted a copy of the Gazette of Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
    Lanka, dated 10 August 2007, which does confirm that he is an  attorney
    at law in that country.

14.  Furthermore there is a copy of an email dated 3 October 2012  from  the
    Appellant's UK solicitors to  Anton  Punithanayagam,  who  is  also  an
    attorney-at-law in Sri Lanka.  In his letter of reply, dated 5 February
    2013, he reported he had spoken with  the  Registrar  of  the  relevant
    Magistrates' Court and checked  the  case  record  bearing  the  number
    B/203/2008.  It confirmed that her lawyer had obtained bail for has, as
    stated, and that an arrest warrant was issued on 5 November  2008  when
    she did not attend court.  He also confirmed that  the  arrest  warrant
    was open and that the Department of Immigration and Emigration had been
    told to impound her passport.  There was also  a  copy  of  a  lawyer's
    directory which confirmed that he was a practising lawyer in Sri Lanka.
     In the light of this evidence and the low  standard  of  proof  to  be
    applied in asylum appeals, I find that there is an arrest warrant still
    open  in  relation  to  the  Appellant  and  that  the  Department   of
    Immigration and Emigration had been told to impound her passport.

15.  As noted by Counsel for the Appellant there is other  evidence  in  the
    consolidated bundle which shows that she did attend Maaveerar  Naal  in
    London in 2010, 2011 and 2012.  This is also  confirmed  by  a  witness
    whose credibility is not challenged by the Respondent.

16.  The Appellant also asserts that she who was very  active  in  the  LTTE
    and, as noted above her sporting activities tied her to the LTTE leader
    in articles in some newspapers in the past. However, it is my view that
    it is the arrest warrant which is the crucial  bit  of  evidence.  When
    considering this evidence I  have  also  reminded  myself  of  the  low
    standard of proof necessary to  establish  a  risk  of  persecution  in
    asylum appeals.

17.  I also note that paragraph 356(7d) of the country guidance case of   GJ
    & Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department (post-civil  was:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) states that:

         "A  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  'stop'  list
         accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those against  whom
         there is an extant court  order  or  arrest  warrant.   Individuals
         whose name appears on a 'stop' list will be stopped at the  airport
         and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
         pursuance of such order or warrant"


    and this sub-paragraph refers to people the country guidance case found
    were still currently at risk of persecution or serious harm  on  return
    to Sri Lanka.


18.  I am not going to speculate about what led to her being subject  to  an
    arrest 8warrant but the evidence clearly establishes that is subject to
    arrest warrant and that the Department for Immigration  and  Emigration
    has been asked to impound her passport. This  and  the  arrest  warrant
    indicated that she is likely to be on a stop list and will,  therefore,
    be at risk.

19.  The head note to GJ  and  others  also  finds  that  "if  a  person  is
    detained by the Sri Lankan security services there remains a real  risk
    of ill-treatment or harm requiring international protection".   If  she
    is stopped at the airport the country guidance indicates that she  will
    be detained by the security forces.

20.  I have also taken into account the fact that Dr Persaud identifies  her
    as somebody who is suffering from PTSD and depression and find that  it
    is very likely that a person in  that  condition  would  find  it  very
    difficult to withstand any kind of  interrogation  at  the  airport  or
    within Sri Lanka.

21.  For the reasons given above, I also find that there is a  serious  risk
    that she would suffer serious ill-treatment for the purposes of Article
    3 of the European Convention on Human Rights if removed to  Sri  Lanka.
    Therefore, I have not gone on to consider  any  risk  of  suicide;  for
    which there was not the strongest of evidence.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention  and  Article  3  of  the
European Convention on Human Rights.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 8 August 2016


Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
