
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05039/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th January 2016                 |On 27th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                            MR FADOL MOHAMED KABO
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Mensah, Counsel, instructed by AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, Mr Fadol Mohamed Kabo, date of birth 19th February  1979
    is a citizen of Sudan.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate or necessary to make
    an anonymity direction in these proceedings.  Having considered all the
    circumstances I do not consider it necessary to do so.

 3. By a decision made on 8th July 2014 the Respondent made a  decision  to
    remove the Appellant from the United  Kingdom  as  an  illegal  entrant
    after refusing the Appellant's claim to asylum, humanitarian protection
    or relief on the grounds of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 4. The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  the  appeal  was
    originally heard in the First-tier Tribunal in  August  2014.   However
    that decision was set aside by a decision of the Upper Tribunal on  3rd
    December 2014 and it was directed that there be a full rehearing of the
    appeal.  It was directed that the  hearing  take  place  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Thus the appeal was listed before me on 19th January 2016 as
    a full rehearing.

The Law

Law

  Asylum & Humanitarian Protection

 5. Asylum- Paragraph 334 of the Immigration Rules HC395  states  that  the
    appellant will be granted asylum if the provisions  of  that  paragraph
    apply.  The burden of proof rests on an appellant to  satisfy  me  that
    she/he falls within the definition of a refugee in Regulation 2 of  the
    Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection  (Qualification)
    Regulations  2006  (which  I  shall  refer  to  as  the   Qualification
    Regulations) as read with Article 1(A) of the Refugee Convention.

 6. In essence, an appellant will have to show that there  are  substantial
    grounds for believing that the appellant  is  outside  his  country  of
    nationality or, if applicable, where  an  appellant  does  not  have  a
    nationality his country of former habitual residence, by  reason  of  a
    well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and is
    unable or unwilling, owing to  such  fear,  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country.

 7. Humanitarian Protection-Paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  HC395
    states that an appellant who does not qualify  as  a  refugee  will  be
    granted humanitarian protection if the  provisions  of  that  paragraph
    apply.  The burden of proof rests on an appellant to satisfy me that he
    is entitled to humanitarian  protection  under  paragraph  339  of  the
    Immigration Rules. In essence, an appellant  will  have  to  show  that
    there are substantial grounds for  believing  that,  if  returned,  the
    appellant would face a real risk of suffering serious harm  and  he  is
    unable or, owing to such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of the country of return.

 8. The appellant also claims that  the  decision  breaches  his  protected
    human rights, under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR, in that if he were to
    be returned to his home country of Sudan he would be at risk of inhuman
    or degrading treatment or punishment contrary to Articles 2  and  3  of
    the ECHR to the lower standard.).



Factual Basis

 9. The Appellant claims to have been born on 19th February  1978  in  Wadi
    Salih, Darfur in Sudan.  There appears to be a  number  of  alternative
    dates of birth if one looks at the screening interview B  question  1.5
    and the asylum interview question 2.  The dates of birth vary from 19th
    February 1978 to 19th February 1979 to 1st January 1980.

10. The Appellant claims that he is  of  the  Tunjur  ethnicity.   He  also
    claims that both his parents were of the Tunjur.

11. When the Appellant was about 10 years old the family moved to  live  in
    Mayue in Khartoum and then moved to live in Salha  in  Omdurman  in  or
    about 2002.  The Appellant attended school to the age of 7 then  worked
    in a market and ultimately he with another owned a  shop  and  ran  the
    shop for eleven years. [ See asylum  interview  questions  29  to  43].
    Alternatively the Appellant was unemployed [see screening  interview  B
    question 1.9].

12. It has to be noted that there are two screening interviews one set  out
    at part B of the Home Office bundle and one set out  at  part  C.   The
    reason for that is that the Appellant has entered the United Kingdom on
    two occasions and has been interviewed  twice.   The  circumstances  of
    that will become apparent.

13. Again there are variations between the two versions  of  the  screening
    interview.  The first screening interview is  in  2010  the  second  in
    2014.  In the 2010 screening interview the Appellant stated  he  had  a
    passport and a  national  identity  card  in  Sudan  but  in  the  2014
    screening interview he stated he  never  had  a  passport  or  national
    identity card.

14. The Appellant and a colleague, Mr Bashir, ran a shop in Omdurman.   The
    Appellant claims firstly that he was detained by the authorities on the
    13th May 2008.  He alleges that this was after members of  the  Justice
    and Equality Movement (JEM)  carried  out  a  raid  on  Omdurman.   The
    alleged raid took place on 10th May 2008.  After the raid the  security
    service began to arrest those that were not of Arab origin in the area.
     The Appellant claims that  he  was  at  his  shop  when  the  security
    services came and arrested him.  The Appellant says that the  shop  was
    attached to his home address.

15. He says that he was arrested on 13th May and was detained for  a  total
    of 21 days during which time he was beaten and  subjected  to  electric
    shocks.  He claims to have been released on 3rd June.  A  condition  of
    his release was that he should provide information about his friend and
    co-owner of the shop, Mr Bashir, who was suspected of working with JEM.



16. The Appellant claims that he was due to report on 14th  June  2008  but
    that he did not do so and that he was again arrested.   It  is  unclear
    whether or not he had actually managed to go to  report  but  certainly
    the authorities came and arrested him again.  On this occasion  he  was
    detained for a period of seven days.

17. However the Appellant claims that he became  very  ill  with  vomiting,
    diarrhoea and malaria.  He could not eat and was near to collapse.   He
    says that he next found himself in a hospital in Omdurman.   He  claims
    that he was taken to the hospital.  Having been taken to  the  hospital
    the Appellant claims that he then escaped from the hospital.   He  went
    to Mayue.  At that point his friend organised  for  him  to  leave  the
    country.  He caught a bus and travelled by bus to Egypt.

18. He remained in Egypt for a period of two months  before  travelling  to
    Turkey.  He stayed in  Turkey  for  approximately  six  months  working
    occasionally cleaning in restaurants.  He states that he was trying  to
    travel at that stage to Greece.  It appears  that  the  Appellant  then
    went to Greece and was in Greece for some period of time.  He sought to
    claim asylum in Greece but his case was not processed.  Ultimately  the
    Appellant left Greece travelling through Italy and France and  came  to
    the United Kingdom on 24th June 2010.  He entered  the  United  Kingdom
    concealed in a bus. He was interviewed.

19. However his claim at  that  stage  was  dealt  with  under  the  Dublin
    Convention and the Appellant was returned to Greece  on  9th  September
    2010.  However the  Appellant  thereafter  was  not  granted  leave  in
    Greece.  He again claims to have travelled to the  United  Kingdom  via
    Italy and France again entering  the  United  Kingdom  concealed  in  a
    vehicle on 20th April 2014.

20. He was arrested by Surrey Police on 29th April  2014  on  suspicion  of
    being an illegal entrant.  At that stage the Appellant sought to  claim
    asylum.  The  decision  to  refuse  him  asylum  or  other  relief  was
    thereafter made.

21. As stated the Appellant has claimed to be a member of the  Tunjur  Clan
    from Darfur.  The Appellant in interview was asked a  large  number  of
    questions about the Tunjur.  At question 148 in interview he named  the
    places and areas within Darfur where the Tunjur lived.   The  Appellant
    was then asked about their traditional culture and customs and he  gave
    a number of answers relating to the musical instruments that they would
    play (question 149), the form of wedding ceremony that would take place
    in such tribal groups, he named the  leaders  of  some  of  the  tribal
    groups and the structure of the tribal  groupings.   He  named  various
    sultans that were claimed to be members of the Tunjur.   The  Appellant
    accepted that he could not speak any other languages other than Arabic.



22. Within the refusal letter it was accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    Sudanese national.  The refusal letter notes that the information given
    was consistent  with  external  information  but  other  parts  of  the
    information was not verifiable.   Nowhere  does  it  suggest  that  the
    information given by the Appellant was any way inaccurate  or  contrary
    to known practices of the tribal grouping of the Tunjur.  The basis  of
    the refusal of the Appellant's claim to  be  a  member  of  the  Tunjur
    according to the refusal letter is the fact that such information could
    easily have been obtained from other sources.

23. During one of his detentions the Appellant claimed  that  he  had  been
    beaten with whips or electric cords.  He claimed  to  have  a  specific
    injury on his leg  and  a  significant  scar.   There  was  no  medical
    evidence to confirm the causation of the scar but it was accepted  that
    the Appellant did have a scar.

24. The Appellant thus claims that he is at risk  on  return  to  Sudan  by
    reason of two factors.  He claims that he  is  a  member  of  a  tribal
    grouping from Darfur specifically the Tunjur and that by reason of that
    he would be at risk if returned to Sudan.  Further he claimed that  the
    authorities have already taken an interest in him and  an  interest  in
    his business partner, Mr Bashir, because Bashir was suspected of  being
    involved with JEM.

25. With regard to the Tunjur it has to be noted that parts of the Sudanese
    OGN have been submitted.  At paragraph 3.10.3 there is reference to non-
    Arabic tribal groupings from Darfur  or  African  tribal  groupings  in
    Sudan from Darfur.  Included in that list is the Tunjur.

26. At 3.10.4 the OGN also makes the following comment with regard  to  the
    distinctions and fighting between Arab and African tribal groups:-

         "They speak  the  same  language  (Arabic)  and  embrace  the  same
         religion (Muslim).  In addition, also due to the  high  measure  of
         inter-marriage, they can hardly be distinguished in  their  outward
         physical appearance from members of tribes that allegedly  attacked
         them. Furthermore, inter-marriage and coexistence  in  both  social
         and economic  terms,  have  over  the  years  tended  to  blur  the
         distinction between  the  groups.  Apparently,  the  sedentary  and
         nomadic character  of  the  groups  constitutes  one  of  the  main
         distinctions between them. It is also notable that members  of  the
         African tribes speak their own dialect in addition to Arabic, while
         members of Arab tribes only speak Arabic.

         The various tribes  that  have  been  the  object  of  attacks  and
         killings (chiefly the Fur, Massalit  and  Zaghewa  tribes)  do  not
         appear to make up ethnic groups distinct from the ethnic groups  to
         which the persons or militias that attack them belong.

         It is also notable that members of the African tribes  speak  their
         own dialect in addition to Arabic, while members of the Arab tribes
         only speak Arabic."

27. In that regard I draw attention to the background information contained
    in the case of MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 10.  In that  respect
    I point out the evidence of Mr Verney to the  Upper  Tribunal  in  that
    case in which at paragraph 7 the following is noted:-

         "(7) (i) The Sudanese authorities would treat the  Appellant  as  a
                  non-Arab Darfuri.  What would matter to them was  that  he
                  was a member of  a  non-Arab  tribe  who  originated  from
                  Darfur.  It would make no  difference  to  them  that  his
                  father had moved away from Darfur and that he himself  had
                  neither been born nor ever lived in Darfur."

28. It appears in the Upper Tribunal that Mr  Verney's  expert  opinion  to
    that end was accepted.

29. I have before me a report by Mr Verney.  There are a number of  matters
    of significance within that.  First  and  foremost  it  indicates  that
    those of Darfuri origin are put in a position that they are  forced  to
    prove their loyalty to the regime or they are suspected of being  rebel
    sympathisers.  It is noted that many of the ethnic African tribes  have
    lost their indigenous language and  have  adopted  Arabic.   Consistent
    with the Appellant's account of  the  incidents  after  10th  May  2008
    suspected  Darfuris  in  Omdurman  were  arrested  in  house  to  house
    searches.  That seems to have been occurring whether or not  there  was
    any basis for suspicion of the individual.  Consistent again with  what
    the Appellant says at 125 Mr Verney  points  out  the  conduct  of  the
    security  forces  in  arresting  and  detaining  individuals  and  then
    releasing them forcing them to be  spies  on  colleagues.   Arrest  and
    detention for short periods of time is commonplace.

30. Mr Verney in reporting on  the  Appellant's  claim  conducted  detailed
    enquiries with the Appellant.  Criticism was made of the fact  that  on
    occasions in the transcript of the interview with Mr Verney, Mr  Verney
    seems to  have  been  suggesting  the  answers  rather  than  eliciting
    information from the Appellant.  However even taking that into  account
    it appears that the points at which Mr Verney did promote answers  were
    not  of  significance  with  regard  to  establishing  the  Appellant's
    knowledge with regard to the Tunjur Clan.  The Appellant was asked with
    regard to places that were near to his place of birth Wadi Salih.   The
    Appellant correctly gave a number  of  places  which  Mr  Verney  could
    confirm were correct.  The Appellant also correctly named the clans  of
    the Tunjur.  He was asked his house clan and gave the response Krio and
    thereafter gave a number of other clans of the Tunjur.   The  Appellant
    was able to name the areas in which the Tunjur clan lived.

31. In his conclusions Mr Verney having set out that he is careful to  take
    account that individuals may be  reciting  learned  information  rather
    than information from personal  experience  he  does  however  say  the
    following:-

         "154.    On the basis of my interview, taking his evidence  in  the
             round, I think he has a fair claim to Tunjur ethnic identity."



         155. If returned to Sudan Mr Kabo will be regarded as a sympathiser
             with the band opposition and accused of  rebel  membership  by
             reason of his ethnic identity  and  the  fact  of  his  having
             claimed asylum abroad.

         156. This will put him at risk of persecution and physical harm."

Findings

32. It was accepted that if the Appellant was of  the  Tunjur  Ethnic  Clan
    then he would be at risk if  returned  to  Sudan.   In  line  with  the
    current country guidance cases those that are perceived to be  "not  of
    Arabic tribal origin" but of African tribal origin and to emanate  from
    Darfur are at risk if returned to Sudan.

33. First and foremost within the interview itself the Appellant has  given
    details which are consistent with  the  customs  and  practice  of  the
    Tunjur.  He has described not only wedding ceremonies  but  instruments
    and customs with regard to dancing.  Further within interview  with  Mr
    Peter Verney the Appellant has  otherwise  gone  on  to  give  specific
    geographical references for the place that he was born  and  references
    to the towns or villages that surrounded the place that  he  was  born.
    There is nothing on the basis of what he has said that is  contrary  to
    the known practices of the Tunjur Clan.  Mr Verney is satisfied on  the
    basis of the evidence that the Appellant has a  fair  claim  to  be  of
    Tunjur ethnicity.

34. The only factor that weighs against him in that regard is  the  general
    credibility of his account.  The inconsistencies are set out within the
    refusal letter from paragraph 17 onwards.  First  and  foremost  it  is
    suggested that the Appellant made a mistake with regard to the JEM raid
    in Omdurman having given two different dates.   However  the  Appellant
    did correct himself and does have the date accurately recorded.

35. With regard to the JEM raid  on  Omdurman  it  is  suggested  that  the
    Appellant failed to provide  a  detailed  and  coherent  account.   The
    Appellant himself seems to indicate that he was in his shop on the  day
    of the incident.  It suggested that there was some  discrepancy  as  to
    what he was saying with regard to how long the incident  occurred.   It
    suggested that the Appellant's knowledge of such is basic  and  generic
    and that the Appellant does not have sufficient knowledge of this event
    to indicate that he was  present  in  Omdurman  at  the  time  that  it
    occurred.

36. Whilst it is the suggested in the refusal  letter  in  the  Appellant's
    claim, that whilst he was arrested his brother  Suleman  was  not,  was
    inconsistent with the background information and that  if  Suleman  had
    been present he would have been  arrested.   Such  appears  to  give  a
    rational basis as to what the authorities were doing.  The  authorities
    were aware that the Appellant was the proprietor of the shop  and  that
    he was of non-Arabic origin.  That would  be  sufficient  for  them  to
    arrest him.

37. In paragraph 23 there is a suggestion that the authorities specifically
    targeted him and wanted information about Bashir but suggests that this
    is not credible.  However one only has to look  at  the  report  of  Mr
    Verney to see that that is exactly what the authorities  in  the  Sudan
    were doing at the time.  Whether or not there was any justification for
    suspecting Bashir was not the issue.  The  authorities  were  arresting
    individuals forcing them to sign papers  and  then  releasing  them  on
    their agreement to spy upon other individuals whether or not  such  was
    justified.

38.  I  have  considered  with  care   all   of   the   discrepancies   and
    inconsistencies that are submitted by the Respondent.  I  do  not  find
    that such details undermine or  go  to  the  core  of  the  Appellant's
    account.

39. I am satisfied on the basis  of  the  information  presented  that  the
    Appellant is of the Tunjur Clan.  I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    knew customs and practices of the Tunjur and was able to give  detailed
    geographical locations  for the clan and his  birth  place.  In  making
    that finding I take account of the interview record where the Appellant
    clearly gives some detail that is consistent with the known facts about
    the Tunjur and also the further interview with Mr  Verney  where  again
    the Appellant gives information specific to where he was born which  is
    consistent with known facts about the area and  the  Tunjur  that  live
    there.  I am satisfied on the basis of that evidence that the Appellant
    is genuinely an ethnic Tunjur.

40. On the basis of the country guidance case it is clear  that  non-Arabic
    tribal groups from Darfur are  at  risk  if  returned  to  Sudan.   The
    Appellant is clearly a non-Arabic tribal group member and  upon  return
    to Sudan would in accordance with the country guidance case be at  risk
    of being subjected to treatment that would  constitute  persecution  or
    inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.  I am satisfied that  the
    Appellant would be subject to such by reason of his ethnic origins as a
    member of the Tunjur Clan.  I am therefore satisfied that the Appellant
    is entitled to asylum or relief on the grounds of Articles 2 and  3  of
    the ECHR.

41. I therefore allow this appeal on the basis of the findings of fact  set
    out above.

Notice of Decision

42. I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

43. I make no finding on humanitarian protection.

44. I allow the appeal on Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR grounds.

45. I make no anonymity direction.

46. I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
