
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
AA/05930/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                       |Decision Promulgated           |
|On: 6th December 2017                      |On: 12th December 2017         |
|                                           |                               |
|                                           |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel instructed by Greater
                       Manchester Immigration Aid unit
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a female  national  of  Nigeria  born  in  1988.   She
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Tobin) to dismiss her appeal on human rights grounds.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal turns  on  the  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  the
    Appellant's  minor  children.  I  am  concerned  that  identifying  the
    Appellant could lead to the identity of the children being revealed  in
    the public domain.  Having had  regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate
    to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 3. The Appellant claims to have been in the  UK  since  2004.  Before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  she  advanced  a  protection   claim   based   on
    allegations of trafficking. These matters  were  all  rejected  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and no issue is taken with those findings.


 4. There was a second limb of the Appellant's case before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. That was one based on  the  Article  8  rights  of  her  four
    children, all born in the UK. Two of those children, the eldest aged  9
    and the second-eldest aged 7, were "qualifying" in the sense that  they
    met  the  definition  of  the  term  set  out  at  s117D(1)(b)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum act 2002: "has lived in the  United
    Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more".   It  was  the
    Appellant's case that  it  was  not  now  reasonable  to  expect  those
    children to leave the UK, and that as a consequence of section  117B(6)
    it would not therefore be in the public  interest  to  remove  her.  In
    making that case she relied  on  a  report  by  an  independent  social
    worker, Ms Christine Brown. In addressing that second limb of  argument
    the Tribunal said this:

         "So far as s117B(6) is concerned, I note the  appellant's  children
         are doing well at school in the UK. I have read the  report  of  Ms
         Christine Brown. I note her recommendations but I am not  impressed
         by the substance of this report nor am I persuaded by this.  I  can
         detect no compelling basis for me - as opposed to  Ms  Brown  -  to
         form the conclusion to say  that  it  is  not  reasonable  for  the
         children to return to Nigeria with their parents. This  would  keep
         the family intact and pursuant to s55 BCIA  2009  be  in  the  best
         interests of the children.  The  appellant  had  not  provided  any
         evidence which indicated that she would not be able to maintain her
         children in Nigeria or (save as to the FGM point, which  I  reject)
         that she would be unable to provide for their safety  and  welfare.
         The appellant's children would be able to go to school in  Nigeria.
         I believe that they would be familiar with  the  customs,  culture,
         language  and  social  norms  of  Nigeria  through  their  parents.
         Consequently, they would be able to adapt relatively easily to life
         in Nigeria, their parent's home country. I am not persuaded  by  Ms
         Brown's contention to the contrary, I determine that young children
         are typically very adaptable and are capable of making new  friends
         should they be required to  relocate  due  to  a  change  in  their
         parents' circumstances".


The appeal was accordingly dismissed.


    The Error of Law


 5. The appeal came before me on the 17th August 2017 sitting in Liverpool.
     The Respondent was that day represented by Senior  Presenting  Officer
    Mr Harrison.  In a written decision promulgated on the 18th August 2017
    I found it unnecessary to address Mr Nicholson's grounds in any  detail
    since I was satisfied that the determination contains  two  significant
    errors in approach such that the findings on Article 8, and whether  it
    would be 'reasonable' to  expect  the  qualifying  children  to  leave,
    cannot be sustained.


 6. The first error, accepted  by  Mr  Harrison,  is  a  manifest  lack  of
    reasoning in rejecting the expert evidence of  the  independent  social
    worker about the likely  impact  of  removal  on  these  children.  The
    Tribunal was by no means obliged to accept Ms Brown's conclusions,  but
    if it considered her evidence lacking, uninformative or plain wrong, it
    was incumbent upon it to explain why. There are no reasons at all as to
    why her evidence is given no weight.

 7. The second error relates to the way that the  Tribunal  has  approached
    the question of 'reasonableness'. The Tribunal did not need to identify
    a "compelling basis" to find it unreasonable  that  these  children  be
    removed.   All it had to do was the following.

 8. To begin with it needed to identify  what  "reasonable"  meant  in  the
    context of s117B(6). That matter is helpfully addressed by the Court of
    Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  In  that  case  Elias  LJ
    (albeit reluctantly) accepted that the  evaluative  exercise  does  not
    relate simply to the child. It must also encompass  matters  pertaining
    to the family as a whole, including the factors  at  s117B(1)-(5)  NIAA
    2002 as they relate to the parents.  The Court stressed, however,  that
    in that balancing exercise significant weight must be attached  to  the
    private life established by the child over the period of long residence
    in the UK. This much is made  clear  by  the  Respondent's  own  policy
    statement, the Immigration Directorate Instruction  'Family  Migration:
    Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life  (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10-Year Routes'  ("the IDI"), the relevant part of  which
    reads as follows:
         11.2.4. Would it be unreasonable to expect a non-British Citizen
         child to leave the UK?
         The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in the
         UK for a continuous period of at least the 7 years immediately
         preceding the date of application, recognises that over time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to the extent that being required to leave the UK may be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and strong reasons will be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence of
         more than 7 years.
         The decision maker must consider whether, in the specific
         circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable to expect the
         child to live in another country.
         The decision maker must consider the facts relating to each child
         in the UK in the family individually, and also consider all the
         facts relating to the family as a whole. The decision maker should
         also engage with any specific issues explicitly raised by the
         family, by each child or on behalf of each child.
    (emphasis added)

 9. This guidance recognises that after a period of seven years'  residence
    a child will have forged strong links with the UK to the extent that he
    or she will have an established private life outside of  the  immediate
    embrace of his parents and siblings. It  is  that  private  life  which
    should be the starting point of  consideration  under  this  Rule.  The
    relationships and understanding of life that a  child  develops  as  he
    grows older are matters which in themselves attract  weight.  The  fact
    that the child might be able to adapt to life elsewhere is  a  relevant
    factor but it cannot be determinative, since exclusive  focus  on  that
    question would obscure the fact that for such a child, his private life
    in the UK is everything he knows.  It will "normally be contrary to the
    child's best interests" to interfere with that private  life.  That  is
    the starting point, and the task of the Tribunal is  to  then  look  to
    other factors to decide whether, on the particular facts of this  case,
    these displace or outweigh the presumption in favour of granting leave.
    As Elias LJ puts it at paragraph 46 of MA:


         "Even on the approach of the Secretary of State, the  fact  that  a
         child has been here for  seven  years  must  be  given  significant
         weight when carrying out the proportionality exercise. Indeed,  the
         Secretary of State published guidance in August 2015 in the form of
         Immigration Directorate Instructions entitled "Family  Life  (as  a
         partner or parent) and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in which it is
         expressly stated that once the seven years'  residence  requirement
         is satisfied, there need to be "strong reasons" for refusing  leave
         (para. 11.2.4). These instructions were not in force when the cases
         now subject to appeal were determined, but in my view  they  merely
         confirm what is implicit in adopting a policy of this nature. After
         such a period of time the  child  will  have  put  down  roots  and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK. That may be less so when  the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be on  their  families,
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover, in these cases there must be a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
         his parents as part of a family unit,  and  that  must  rank  as  a
         primary consideration in the proportionality assessment".


10. So, the starting point for this Tribunal was that the eldest child  had
    spent the first 9 years of her life in this country. The  Tribunal  was
    obliged, by virtue of statute (s55 Borders Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009), policy (the IDI) and jurisprudence (MA (Pakistan)) to  treat
    that substantial private life as a matter attracted significant weight,
    and to then look to see if there were  any  countervailing  factors  of
    such weight that would justify dismissing the appeal.  It is not at all
    apparent from the reasoning in this  determination  that  this  is  the
    approach that has been taken.  The  Tribunal  has  given  several  good
    reasons why it would be reasonable  for  these  children  to  go  (they
    cannot "return" to a place  they  have  never  been)  to  Nigeria,  but
    nowhere has weight be attached to their long residence, or the  quality
    of their private life here.


11. For these reasons I find the reasoning to  be  incomplete  and  set  it
    aside.



    The Re-Made Decision

12. The matter came back before me on the 6th December 2017.  Mr  Nicholson
    informed me that the eldest of the qualifying children in  this  family
    was that day making an application for British citizenship, having been
    born in this country and having lived here continuously for  more  than
    ten years (he turned 10 in November of this  year).  Mrs  Aboni  agreed
    that pursuant to section 1(4) of the British Nationality Act 1981 there
    would appear to be no reason why that application would not be granted.
     She further agreed that the only matter that the  Secretary  of  State
    could point to as a counterweight to the children's long residence  was
    the fact that their mother is an illegal entrant who has never held any
    leave to remain in the UK.  I accept that is  a  matter  that  must  be
    weighed in the balance. I also give some weight to the  fact  that  the
    family would be returned to Nigeria together and  that  as  a  Nigerian
    national their mother could be expected to make some provision for them
    there.


13. Having applied the relevant guidance (see above) I am however satisfied
    that it would strongly be in the best interests of  these  children  to
    remain in the UK, where  they  have  significant  attachments  (as  the
    letters from their teachers and the social work report confirms) by way
    of relationships with friends and  teachers;  I  gratefully  adopt  the
    judgement of Elias LJ that it would likely be "highly  disruptive"  for
    these children if they were to be removed from  the  UK  today.   I  am
    satisfied that there are not "strong reasons" to remove  the  children.
    The fact that their mother is without leave is not determinative: if it
    were, the point of s117B(6) would be difficult to discern.

14. Having considered all of the relevant matters I am  satisfied  that  it
    would not be reasonable for either of the qualifying children  involved
    in this appeal to leave the UK. As Mrs Aboni  accepts,  the  result  of
    that finding is that the appeal must be allowed.


      Decisions


15. For the reasons I have given I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  involved  material  errors  in  approach  to  the
    question of Article 8. It is set aside to that extent.


16. The findings on asylum  are  preserved:  the  appeal  is  dismissed  on
    protection grounds.

17. The findings on human rights are re-made:  the  appeal  is  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.

18. There is an order for anonymity.

[pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          11th December 2017


