
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05085/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 7 January 2014                             |On 13 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 MEHDI ZYADI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:        Mr S Martin, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors,
Glasgow
For the Respondent:       Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant identifies  himself  as  a  citizen  of  Iran,  born  on  9
   September 1987.  He sought asylum in the  UK  on  29  January  2010.   He
   exhausted his appeal rights against refusal of that claim by 25  November
   2010.  On 7 September 2012 he made a further asylum claim.  He said  that
   he returned to Iran earlier in 2012 and was spotted in possession of CD's
   about the Azerbaijan Movement, and so fled back to the UK to  escape  the
   Etela'at and Basiji.

2) The respondent refused that claim  for  reasons  explained  in  a  letter
   dated 14 May 2013.

3) The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   By  determination
   promulgated on 15 July 2013 Judge McGavin dismissed his appeal, declining
   to accept that he had been back in Iran.

4) The appellant sought permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
   grounds set out in 8 paragraphs.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  his
   application, but on renewal permission  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge P Lane:

    ... with some reluctance, as many of the  grounds  strike  me  as  mere
    disagreements with the findings of the FtT Judge.  However,  the  judge
    was very arguably wrong to say that the name "Jaffar  Zyadi"  does  not
    appear in the  translation  of  the  envelope  allegedly  sent  to  the
    appellant: it occurs as part of the phrase  "Jaffar  Zyadi  Residence".
    It is also unclear what significance, if any,  was  attributed  by  the
    judge the fact that the  name  "Ali  Zeyadi"  did  not  appear  on  the
    translation of the envelope, given that the  name  is  written  in  the
    western alphabet  on  the  original.   Finally,  paragraph  25  of  the
    determination records the failure of  the  translator  to  certify  the
    translation, without explaining what significance, if any, this  played
    in the judge's conclusions on the issue  of  the  prescription.   These
    arguable errors are arguably material to the overall conclusions ...


5) At the outset of the hearing on 7  January  2014,  Mr  Martin  sought  an
   adjournment. He said that the appellant had been told  of  the  grant  of
   permission.  At some later date his NASS support was removed  because  he
   was not residing at the accommodation  provided.   Mr  Martin  understood
   that the appellant had moved to Crawley,  where  he  was  living  with  a
   girlfriend.  The notice of the hearing on 7 January 2014  was  issued  by
   the Upper Tribunal on 4 December 2013 and forwarded to the appellant on 6
   December 2013 at the new address he had given to his solicitors (although
   not to the UT, or to the respondent).  There had been no contact from the
   appellant since then until Mr Martin contacted him  by  mobile  telephone
   yesterday.  The appellant has now left the  address  in  Crawley,  having
   separated from his girlfriend.  He is in London but of  no  fixed  abode.
   He had asked his solicitor to seek an adjournment in  order  for  him  to
   attend the hearing.

6) Mr Matthews opposed that application.

7) I declined to adjourn.  The appellant is under an  obligation  to  notify
   the tribunal (and the respondent) of any change of address.  Any delay in
   his learning of the hearing was his own fault, and did not justify  waste
   of time and resources in fixing another hearing.   The  hearing  was  for
   submissions on error of law and not for  the  hearing  of  evidence.   It
   could readily proceed in the appellant's absence.

Submissions for appellant.

8) Mr Martin pointed out that the grant of  permission  is  not  restricted,
   and relied on all the grounds.  He submitted that the point identified in
   the grant of permission discloses inadequate consideration of documentary
   evidence  which  provided  material  corroboration  of  the   appellant's
   account, in a case where credibility was seriously in issue.  That  error
   was sufficiently material to require a fresh hearing.

Submissions for respondent.

9) Ground 1 is based on the judge saying at paragraph  24  that  neither  of
   the names Jaffar Zyadi and Ali Zeyadi appear on the  translated  copy  of
   the envelope.  Mr Matthews accepted that the translated copy does show as
   part of the sender's address "Jaffar Zyadi Residence" and that  the  name
   Ali Zeyadi does appear on the bottom of the  original  envelope  although
   not in the translation (as the judge said).  The only factual error  made
   by the judge was in wrongly thinking that the name Jaffar Zyadi  did  not
   appear in the translated copy.  That was a  matter  of  no  significance.
   The judge correctly went on to note that the appellant's name is not  Ali
   Zeyadi.  That name might have been  written  under  the  address  on  the
   original envelope after it was translated.  The judge correctly noted  at
   paragraph 25 that the translations were not signed by the  translator  as
   required by the Procedure Rules.  She did  not  go  on  to  say  that  it
   followed that the translations had to  be  disregarded  for  that  reason
   alone.  The envelope was produced to support the appellant's  claim  that
   he had been back in Iran.  By itself, it proved nothing.  It was said  to
   have contained a prescription issued to the appellant  while  he  was  in
   Iran.  That prescription, as the judge noted at paragraph 22, was  issued
   to "Shaharm Zyadi", again  not  the  appellant's  name.   The  judge  was
   entitled to reject his evidence that he used  another  name  because  his
   life was in danger,  for  the  reasons  given  at  paragraph  22  of  the
   determination.    The documentary evidence as a whole  lent  very  little
   support to the appellant's claim to have been back in Iran.  Any error by
   the judge, which went only to whether the name Ali Zeyadi  was  found  on
   the envelope, had no bearing on the outcome.

10) Ground 3 criticises the judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
   credibly explained how he would  have  retained  the  prescription  after
   receiving the drugs prescribed.  Mr Matthews pointed out that  the  judge
   was careful to observe that it could not be  assumed  that  practices  in
   other countries would be the same as in the UK, but that  it  was  to  be
   expected that a prescription would not be returned  or  if  so  would  be
   marked as having been filled.  That disclosed no inadequacy of reasoning.

11) Ground 4 criticises the judge's legal approach to documentary  evidence.
    Mr Matthews said that this is only the same criticism made under another
   legal heading.  It was for the judge to  show  that  the  documents  were
   reliable, and he failed to do so.

12) Ground 5 criticises the judge's finding that  the  appellant  had  given
   inconsistent evidence of how he came  to  be  in  Mianeh,  in  Iran.   Mr
   Matthews argued that these findings were not material, because the  judge
   had properly explained why she did not accept that he returned to Iran at
   all.

13) Ground 6 is that the judge applied the wrong standard of proof,  but  Mr
   Matthews said that this is only  another  form  of  insistence  upon  the
   appellant's case.

14) Ground 7 raises the criticism that the judge  looked  for  corroboration
   of the appellant's account of avoiding  military  service.   Mr  Matthews
   submitted that the judge had not required corroboration, but  had  simply
   commented on the unsatisfactory nature of the appellant's evidence.

15) Ground 8 is a summing up paragraph, which adds nothing further.

16) Overall, Mr Matthews submitted that the grounds disclose only a  trivial
   factual error with no bearing on the outcome.

Conclusions.

17) I indicated that the appeal would be dismissed.

18) The grounds of appeal disagree at some length with the findings  reached
   by the judge, but upon scrutiny they disclose nothing more  than  a  very
   minor slip about whether a particular name appears on an envelope as  the
   sender  from  Iran.   The  presence  of  that  name  does  not  take  the
   appellant's  case  forward.   The  evidence  of  the  envelope  and   the
   prescription it contained, taken together, added nothing of  significance
   to his claim to have returned to Iran.  A prescription issued to a person
   of another name during the time he said he was  in  the  country  is  not
   meaningful evidence that he was there.

19) The judge was entitled to find  the  appellant  an  unreliable  witness.
   Reading her determination fairly and as  a  whole,  she  gave  more  than
   adequate reasons to support that conclusion.  It  is  unnecessary  to  go
   further for present purposes, but this was a very flimsy case.

20) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

21) No anonymity order has been requested or made.



                               [pic]
                                7 January 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
