
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05406/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 21 August 2013                             |On 30 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     RC
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Z. Jafferji, Counsel
For the Respondent: Ms A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on  26  May  1975.  She
       arrived in the UK on 8 August 2002 as a visitor. An application  for
       further leave to remain was refused on 6 November 2003. On  3  March
       2009 she made a claim for  asylum  which  was  also  refused  and  a
       decision was made on 8 June 2009 to remove her to Zimbabwe.

    2. Her  appeal  against  that  decision  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge M.A. Khan after a hearing  on  3  November  2009.  An
       application for reconsideration was  granted  and  the  appeal  came
       before a Panel headed by Burton J, sitting as a judge of  the  Upper
       Tribunal. The appeal was again dismissed. Permission to  appeal  was
       granted by the Court of Appeal. The appeal was  allowed  by  consent
       and remitted to the Upper Tribunal.

    3. The remitted appeal was heard by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer
       on 24 February 2012 and again dismissed. Permission  to  appeal  was
       refused by a judge of the Upper Tribunal but granted by the Court of
       Appeal. By consent the appeal was remitted for a second time to  the
       Upper Tribunal and now comes before the Upper Tribunal for  a  third
       time.

    4. In the Statement of Reasons it is recorded that the Upper Tribunal

           "materially erred  in  law  by  failing  to  expressly  consider
           whether the Claimant may be required to demonstrate  loyalty  to
           Zanu PF when returning to  Masvingo  and  whether  it  would  be
           unduly harsh to expect the Claimant as a single mother with  two
           children as her dependents to relocate to  Harare,  an  area  in
           which she has not previously resided. The parties are  therefore
           in agreement that the matter should be  remitted  to  the  Upper
           Tribunal for consideration in light of the current case law."

    5. Before me the parties agreed that the hearing was to be  a  de  novo
       hearing.  Having  said  that,  it  was  also  agreed  that   certain
       paragraphs of Judge  Plimmer's  determination  could  be  preserved,
       being unaffected by the error of law. The extent to which  parts  of
       Judge Plimmer's determination can stand, as agreed  by  the  parties
       before me, is set out below under the 'assessment' heading.

    6. The following is a very broad summary of the appellant's  claim  but
       it by no means encapsulates the factual complexities involved in the
       appeal. She claims that she would be at risk on return  to  Zimbabwe
       from her husband, who has made threats  against  her  and  at  whose
       hands she suffered domestic violence. She would also be at  risk  on
       the basis that she would be required to demonstrate loyalty  to  the
       regime and because she  used  to  be  a  teacher  in  Zimbabwe.  Her
       brother, now deceased, was also a teacher and an active supporter of
       the MDC. The appellant's father-in-law used to be a Zanu-PF mayor in
       the area in which the appellant  lived  with  her  husband  and  the
       appellant's husband has influence in the area.

Oral evidence

    7. In examination-in-chief the appellant adopted her witness  statement
       dated 28 February 2012. She said that Veronica Chiromba and  Barbara
       Mutondo are not at the hearing because they are at  work  and  could
       not get the day off. Veronica lives in Stevenage and  Barbara  lives
       in Walsall. She had asked them to attend previous hearings. Veronica
       attended one hearing but could not attend the second because she had
       just started a new job. Barbara said that she  had  been  unable  to
       attend a hearing because she was working. They are both  aware  that
       she is relying on her statements.

    8. In cross-examination she said that she decided to work at a  nursery
       school in Zimbabwe because she  liked  working  with  children.  She
       worked at that particular nursery school because she wanted to be  a
       little bit away from where she lived with her husband.  Her  brother
       had free accommodation for her. Her husband  did  not  say  anything
       about her work because she thinks he  had  freedom  whilst  she  was
       away.

    9. At that time she had problems in her marriage  because  her  husband
       was a womaniser. She told him that  she  would  be  coming  home  at
       weekends. Her child was living with her at the time.

   10. She had no option but to leave her children with  her  husband  when
       she came to the UK. She was scared. She could not have brought  them
       with her because they did not have passports. He could easily see if
       she was going to try to bring them with her. She did not want to  be
       caught before she disappeared. If she had taken the  children  to  a
       relative her husband would wonder what was happening. They ended  up
       living with her half-sister. The children were scared, just  as  she
       was.

   11. When she found out that her husband was living with another woman it
       was easier to get them to her half-sister. He is not a caring man so
       he would not have cared about  them  moving  out.  He  has  lots  of
       children. She called Elizabeth, her  half-sister,  and  her  husband
       agreed to the children going there. He said that he  did  not  care.
       His family members believed the stories that her  husband  had  told
       about her so they did not want the children either.

   12. She was asked about [32] of her witness statement in which she  said
       that had she stayed in Zimbabwe the children  would  have  ended  up
       with their father for the rest of their lives because it would  have
       been impossible for her to keep custody of them in the  event  of  a
       divorce. As to  this  apparent  inconsistency  between  her  witness
       statement and her evidence, the appellant said that if she was there
       this would be the case because if they divorced she would  want  the
       children and he would want her to come back to him as his  wife.  He
       would want that because he is a man who is full of himself  and  no-
       one can walk away from him or can do anything unless he says so.

   13. As to how he let her go to work at the nursery and the  children  to
       live with her sister, being at the nursery gave him  freedom  to  do
       whatever he wanted, and she would come back  at  the  weekends.  She
       does not know what was in his mind regarding the children being with
       her sister, but maybe he thought that he would  see  her  again  and
       that if he lets the children  go  she  would  come  back.  What  her
       children tell her however, is that he threatens them saying that  he
       is just waiting for their mother to come back. They tell her not  to
       come back and that they would rather suffer in not going  to  school
       than that she should come back and die.

   14. Asked about her witness statement at [36] in which she  stated  that
       he threatened her through her sister, she said that she thinks  that
       that threat was made some time last year. He makes those  statements
       all they time when they meet or when he passes her  in  the  street.
       They live in the same town.

   15. In relation to her sister, Elizabeth's,  witness  statement,  saying
       that the children's father  does  not  bother  to  visit  them,  the
       appellant said that that is true. He would stand by the doorstep and
       shout and then go,  but  she  would  not  call  that  a  visit.  Her
       daughter's letter states that their father does visit, because maybe
       to the children they regard that as a visit; if someone comes to the
       doorstep, to her daughter, J, that would be a visit. The children do
       see him in town at "unintentional" meetings.

   16. She could not live in Chiredzi where her parents lived  because  her
       husband is a known man and  has  friends  and  relatives  who  could
       easily know where she is. His sister lives in Chiredzi and it is not
       far from there to Masvingo; about three hours' drive.

   17. In re-examination she said that her husband  has  never  beaten  the
       children although the way he speaks to them is violent.

   18. In answer to my questions she said that her  husband  used  to  work
       running his parents' business when they were still alive. As far  as
       she knows he is not working now as the business has  collapsed.  She
       does not know if he has any income because  he  does  not  help  the
       children to go to school. Sometimes her friends help them to pay the
       school fees. She has two children both girls. J is aged 17 and E  is
       14.

   19. She does not think that she would be able to live in Harare  because
       her husband is everywhere and so is his family. The  only  relatives
       she keeps in touch with are her half-sister and her children.

   20. In further cross-examination she said that she and  her  parents  do
       not talk because they blame her a lot for the death of her  brother.
       She had not mentioned that before because no-one had asked her.  She
       does not know how they saw it but they may think  that  her  husband
       was involved in her brother's death. Since she left Zimbabwe she had
       never heard of her parents visiting J and E.

   21. In further re-examination she said that  Janet  Hute  had  not  come
       forward to give evidence before because  she  did  not  mention  the
       matter to her. They had lived in the same town and she did not  want
       her to be involved.

   22. Janet Hute adopted her witness statement in examination-in-chief. In
       cross-examination she said that the appellant would be killed if she
       went back because the same government is in power and her husband is
       still the same. The children always say her husband says that if she
       comes back he would kill her.

   23. In answer to my questions she said that she does not  speak  to  the
       children at the moment. She knows  what  her  husband  says  to  the
       children because the last time she mentioned  the  children  to  the
       appellant she told her about it.

Submissions

   24. The parties made preliminary submissions which are reflected in  the
       following summary. Further reference to the submissions is  made  as
       necessary in the course of my assessment of the issues.

   25. On behalf of the respondent Ms Holmes relied on the  refusal  letter
       in so far as now relevant  to  the  issues  to  be  determined.  The
       appellant was not a credible witness. There was no real  explanation
       as to why she left the children with a violent man who did not  care
       about them. There was no explanation of why she did  not  take  them
       with her or leave them with a relative. Her husband allowed  her  to
       go and teach and let them go to another family member.

   26. The appellant's sister states that her husband does  not  visit  but
       her daughter says that he does. Her account of  his  coming  to  the
       door  and  shouting  is  not  a   credible   explanation   for   the
       inconsistency. Her sister does  not  refer  to  such  harassment  or
       violent conduct.

   27. She gave a vague account of her husband knowing  everything  and  is
       everywhere as an explanation for her inability to go to Chiredzi  or
       Harare. She had not mentioned that before, nor her parents' attitude
       to her in relation to the death of her brother.

   28. So far as the witness statements of other witnesses  are  concerned,
       it was submitted that for various reasons not much weight  could  be
       attached to them. Janet Hute's evidence was based on hearsay in many
       respects and she left Zimbabwe in 2002.

   29. There would be no risk to the appellant on return, from her  husband
       or from anyone else. Even if one were to accept  that  there  was  a
       degree of domestic violence there is no reason why she could not  go
       to Chiredzi or Harare.

   30. A nursery teacher is not the same as a senior  school  teacher.  She
       would not be perceived as an MDC supporter. It was a long  time  ago
       that she lived with her brother E.

   31. As regards Article 8, she has no family in the UK but has family  in
       Zimbabwe. Although she had been in the UK a long time  that  is  not
       enough to make her removal disproportionate.

   32. In relation to  the  argument  concerning  paragraph  395C  and  the
       decision in Okonkwo (legacy/Hakemi; health claim) [2013] UKUT  00401
       (IAC), that was a medical case and in any event, paragraph  395C  no
       longer applies to her.

   33. Mr Jafferi relied on the skeleton argument dated 21 March  2012.  It
       was submitted that the appellant's account had been  consistent  and
       was supported by other witnesses.  It  was  not  disputed  that  the
       appellant's husband's  father  had  been  a  Zanu-PF  mayor.  I  was
       referred to the evidence given at previous hearings.

   34. The appellant would not be able to relocate as she would  eventually
       be found by her husband, most likely through  her  children  or  her
       sister who live in the same town as her husband. The  reasonableness
       of relocation has to be considered in terms  of  whether  she  could
       relocate with her two children. That issue has also to be considered
       on the alternative basis that her fear it is  not  objectively  well
       founded but is a subjective fear, taking into account  the  fact  of
       domestic violence.

   35. Aside from her husband the appellant would be at risk  in  her  home
       area where she could be asked to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF.

   36. The decision in Okonkwo was relied on. The removal decision was made
       in this case in 2009 and throughout the appeal  process  the  asylum
       policy guidance in terms of legacy cases ought  to  have  been  take
       into account. Although this was not itself a legacy case  the  issue
       is relevant in '395C' cases. There was  a  delay  in  enforcing  her
       removal. She arrived in 2002 and further leave was refused in  2003.
       There was no removal decision. Although it was not culpable delay it
       was delay as  categorised  in  the  policy  guidance.  Although  the
       guidance was not in existence at the time of  the  decision  it  did
       exist at the time of the hearing before Immigration  Judge  Khan  in
       November 2009 and again when Mr Justice Burton  and  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Eshun heard the appeal in October 2010.

   37. This argument was not advanced previously but the case law  had  not
       been developed by the  time  of  the  hearing  before  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Plimmer in April 2012. Residence  of  6  years  would
       have been a relevant matter to take into account. The decision  with
       respect to paragraph 395C was unfair and  the  matter  needs  to  be
       remitted to the Secretary of  State.  The  'new'  immigration  rules
       would be applied but regard would have to be had  to  the  issue  of
       'unfairness' as set out in Okonkwo.

   38. So far as Article 8 is concerned, her length of residence was relied
       on. It was submitted that it would be open to me to find  that  even
       if there would not be a risk from her husband  but  there  had  been
       domestic violence, it  was  relevant  that  she  feared  return.  In
       addition it is relevant to take into account  that  during  a  large
       part of the appeal process Home Office  policy  suggested  that  she
       should be allowed to remain.





My assessment

   39. As already indicated, at the start of the hearing the  parties  were
       able to agree that it was not necessary  to  revisit  every  factual
       issue that had been considered by Judge Plimmer. It was agreed  that
       the findings at [15] and [42] of Judge Plimmer's determination could
       stand.  Neither party suggested that the  principles  in  Devaseelan
       [2002] UKIAT 00702 had any application to this appeal  in  terms  of
       revisiting findings that had already  been  made  in  the  light  of
       further evidence.

   40. It is as well also to state that whilst the appellant had previously
       raised concerns about  the  conduct  of  her  asylum  interview,  no
       submissions were made to me by  either  party  in  relation  to  the
       interview. I proceed on the basis that those issues are no longer of
       relevance to the issues left to be determined.

   41. Before elaborating on the further extent of  the  agreement  between
       the parties, it is worth recording that Mr Jafferji  submitted  that
       the main issue on which Judge Plimmer found  against  the  appellant
       was in terms of  the  "ongoing  threat"  from  her  husband  and  he
       suggested that the area of (factual) dispute could  be  confined  to
       that  matter.  He  accepted  that  on  that  basis,   the   negative
       credibility findings would also have to  be  accepted,  for  example
       that the appellant's husband had no part to play in the  appellant's
       brother's death. Ms Holmes  indicated  that  she  had  doubts  about
       whether the issues could be confined to the question of  the  threat
       from the appellant's  husband  unless  I  suggested  that  that  was
       appropriate.

   42. However, I indicated  that  it  was  for  the  parties  to  come  to
       agreement on the areas of dispute, albeit that if the  issues  could
       be narrowed so much the better. I adjourned for a  short  period  to
       allow the parties to discuss the matter further.

   43.  It  was  ultimately  agreed  that  [42]-[45]  of  Judge   Plimmer's
       determination could stand and that the  matters  determined  by  her
       from [47] onward, that is [47]-[52], were to be revisited. A further
       refinement was that it was agreed  by  Mr  Jafferji  that  the  risk
       factor advanced at [10v)] of the skeleton argument was  not  settled
       and would have to be the subject of a  finding  by  me.  That  'risk
       factor' as set out in the skeleton argument is that  "The  Appellant
       is known as an MDC supporter, and is known to have  lived  with  her
       brother, [E], who  was  an  active  MDC  member."  It  was  accepted
       however, that there was no finding in the  appellant's  favour  that
       the appellant is a known MDC supporter. The risk to the appellant in
       this respect was said to be on the basis of having  lived  with  her
       brother which would lead to a perception of being a supporter.

   44. To make clear the context of my  conclusions,  I  now  set  out  the
       findings of Judge Plimmer that are agreed between the parties do not
       require revisiting:

         . The appellant's husband's father was the Mayor representing Zanu-
           PF in Masvingo in the period prior to 2001 [15].

         . The appellant was a nursery school teacher in Zimbabwe [42].

         . It is reasonably likely that the  appellant's  brother,  E,  was
           harassed on account of his MDC/anti-Zanu-PF activities,  and  he
           has died. The appellant's husband did  not  play  "any  material
           role" in his death. The appellant's husband was  not  interested
           in trying to persuade the appellant to support Zanu-PF [43].

         . The appellant may have been subjected to some pressure from  her
           husband regarding her brother's affiliation with the MDC but the
           appellant has accepted that she has never  played  any  material
           role in supporting the MDC [44].

         . E's political activities have not led to other  members  of  her
           family being targeted for a long period of time.  The  appellant
           accepted in oral evidence that she did not have any  information
           that anyone from her family may have been targeted  since  2006,
           when she claims that her brother died. She no longer regarded  E
           as a reason to have  subsisting  fears.  It  is  not  reasonably
           likely that anyone would continue to regard the appellant  as  a
           person who may be associated with her brother's  MDC  activities
           "when he died in 2005 and when her other family members have not
           suffered in any way because of this since at least  2006"  [45].



   45. The conclusions at [47]-[52], which were agreed between the  parties
       were matters that needed to be considered afresh, are:

         . The appellant is reasonably likely to have suffered violence  at
           the hands of her husband and  that  this  led  in  part  to  her
           departure from Zimbabwe [47].

         . Her  claim  to  be  scared  of  her  husband  has  been  largely
           consistent and is supported by her  sister  and  her  daughter's
           school [47].

         . The appellant's husband may have some  influence  in  his  local
           community [47].

         . The evidence regarding alleged threats (from her husband) is  so
           inconsistent,  vague  and  implausible  that  they   cannot   be
           reasonably likely. It  is  not  credible  that  the  appellant's
           husband has shown any  continuing  interest  in  her  since  her
           departure from Zimbabwe [51].

         . The claim that her husband would remove the children from her or
           her sister's custody if she were to return is not credible [52].



   46. Although not specifically canvassed at the  hearing,  the  following
       further findings are consistent  with  those  referred  to  in  [44]
       above, and thus do not require to be revisited.

         . Although the appellant may have been aligned to her brother  and
           his MDC activities this was a long time ago and she has shown no
           interest in pursuing MDC activities  over  the  course  of  many
           years [53].

         . The appellant's husband may have suspected her to have  been  an
           MDC supporter in the past [54].

   47. It is as well at this point to indicate  that  the  only  background
       material relied on behalf of the appellant, aside from that  in  the
       country guidance decision of CM (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)
       Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059(IAC) was a two  page  report  entitled
       Gender Equality and Social Institutions in  Zimbabwe  dated  January
       2012. It refers amongst other things to the prevalence  of  violence
       against women,  particularly  domestic  violence  and  the  lack  of
       protection afforded to  women.  It  also  refers  to  child  custody
       issues.

   48. The appellant's claim to fear her husband personally, is related  to
       what is said to be a risk to her on account of an imputed  political
       opinion  of  support   for   the   MDC.   Whilst   there   is   that
       interrelationship, those strands of the  appeal  also,  potentially,
       each stand alone. Whilst recognising therefore that  there  is  that
       connection between those aspects of her  claim,  a  useful  starting
       point is the claimed fear of her husband.

   49. Relevant preserved  findings  are  that  the  appellant's  husband's
       father was the Mayor representing Zanu-PF in Masvingo in the  period
       prior to 2001 and that the appellant may have been subjected to some
       pressure from her husband regarding her brother's  affiliation  with
       the MDC.

   50. The appellant says that she was the  victim  of  domestic  violence,
       including physical violence, whilst married to her husband.  I  have
       set out the appellant's evidence and the challenges to  her  account
       in cross-examination, as well as the submissions. In  short,  it  is
       not accepted that her husband was violent towards her.

   51. I note that on the Tribunal file is a statement dated February  2012
       in the name  of  the  appellant's  sister  Patricia.  However,  that
       statement was not  referred  to  by  Mr  Jafferji,  is  not  in  the
       appellant's bundle and was not the subject of any submissions at the
       hearing before me. I therefore proceed on the basis that it  is  not
       evidence that is relied on.

   52. Aside from the appellant's evidence there  is  a  witness  statement
       from Veronica Chiramba dated 29 February 2012. She states  that  she
       has known the appellant since 1988 in Zimbabwe, that her husband was
       known to be a violent person and that the  appellant  suffered  many
       years of domestic violence. The political tensions between  him  and
       the appellant's brother made the violence worse  although  she  only
       discovered the full extent of it when she discussed matters with the
       appellant in the UK.

   53. Ms Chiramba gave evidence before Immigration Judge  Khan.  There  is
       reference to her witness statement of 30 October 2009, which I  also
       have before me.  Materially, she said in evidence before Judge  Khan
       that she was aware that the appellant was in  an  abusive  marriage.
       Judge Khan's determination was ultimately set aside and was remitted
       for a de novo hearing. At  the  subsequent  Upper  Tribunal  hearing
       before Mr Justice Burton it was found that Judge  Khan  had  made  a
       factual error in his  assessment  of  Ms  Chiramba's  evidence.  The
       detail of that factual error is not relevant for  present  purposes.
       Although Judge Khan's determination was ultimately set aside,  there
       is no reason why the record of Ms Chiramba's evidence,  as  distinct
       from the conclusions on that evidence, cannot be taken into account.
       Mr Jafferji sought to go further, suggesting  that  at  the  hearing
       before Judge Khan there was no challenge to her  credibility.  I  do
       not  consider  it  appropriate  to  explore  that  assertion.   That
       determination having been set aside, all that the appellant can rely
       on from that determination on  this  distinct  issue  is  that  that
       witness gave evidence of domestic violence, which  appears  also  to
       have been contained in a witness statement of October 2009.

   54. Ms Chiramba did not attend to give evidence and therefore before  me
       at least her evidence has not been  tested.  Although  I  take  into
       account that she did in fact appear as  a  witness  at  the  hearing
       before Judge Khan, the fact that I have not had the  opportunity  of
       seeing and hearing the witness does affect the weight to be attached
       to her written statement. Mr Jafferji did not seek an adjournment to
       allow for the attendance of Ms Chiramba or Barbara Mutondo.  I  bear
       in mind the appellant's evidence which is set out above, as  to  why
       neither attended and why Ms Mutondo has never appeared as a witness.

   55. Ms Mutondo says in her witness statement that what she  knows  about
       the appellant's relationship with her husband she  has  learnt  from
       the appellant, not from first hand knowledge. She  states  that  she
       was told that she was badly beaten and abused  by  her  husband  and
       that her emotion at the time of telling indicated to her  that  what
       she was told is true.

   56. That Ms Mutondo's evidence on this issue is hearsay  does  not  mean
       that no weight can be attached to it; it is admissible evidence  but
       the weight to be attached to it is less than if it were  first  hand
       evidence of the facts. Further, because the evidence  has  not  been
       tested before me, that further reduces its weight.

   57. Janet Hutu's evidence supports the  claim  that  the  appellant  was
       subject to domestic violence whilst in Zimbabwe. Indeed, that aspect
       of her evidence as contained in her witness statement  was  not  the
       subject of any cross-examination.  I  note  that  Ms  Hutu  has  not
       previously given written or oral evidence in support of the  appeal.
       However, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant  gave  a  satisfactory
       explanation for that fact, as set out above.

   58. There is also a letter in the appellant's  bundle  from  J's  school
       which refers to her having revealed  physical  and  emotional  abuse
       against her mother by her father.

   59. The appellant has satisfactorily  explained  the  issues  raised  in
       submissions on behalf of the respondent in  terms  of  why,  if  her
       husband was violent towards her, he would have  let  her  work  away
       from home as a nursery teacher and why he  would  have  allowed  the
       children to be taken to the appellant's half-sister to live.   I  am
       satisfied that it is reasonably likely that in Zimbabwe she suffered
       domestic violence from her husband. On this she has been  consistent
       and, whilst the weight to be attached to the evidence in support  of
       that claim varies, I am satisfied that there  is  credible  evidence
       from other sources to the same effect.

   60. So far as the appellant's claimed present fear  of  her  husband  is
       concerned, the suggestion that threats have been made against her is
       again supported, to varying degrees, by other witnesses. Ms Chiramba
       states in her witness statement of 2009 that the appellant told  her
       that her friend Tsitsi, presumably from Zimbabwe, told the appellant
       that the appellant's husband had made threats against her to his own
       friends in Zimbabwe. Her latest witness statement  contains  similar
       information. In both statements she gives an account of having  gone
       to South Africa in 2009  on  holiday  and  meeting  the  appellant's
       children there. When she joked that the appellant would be coming to
       Zimbabwe to visit them they got upset and cried  saying  that  their
       father would kill the appellant if  she  came  back.  In  her  first
       statement she recalls that when she asked them why they  said  that,
       the appellant's daughter E told her of an incident when their father
       showed her a knife when she was misbehaving and said that  he  would
       use it to kill their  mother  if  she  came  back.  In  the  witness
       statement of February 2012 however, she said  that  the  explanation
       for the upset was that they had overheard him saying to people  that
       he would "see to mum" when she came back. The knife incident is also
       recounted but not in that context.

   61. Ms Mutondo's witness statement does not  significantly  support  the
       appellant's claim that she is at risk from her husband on return  in
       terms of threats that he is said to have made. The reference to  the
       risk to her on return from her husband is at [17] where  she  states
       that from what she knows of Zimbabwe and from what the appellant has
       told her about what her husband has been saying and  has  done,  the
       consequences of her return could be fatal. That  evidence  is  vague
       and could not be explored at the hearing as she did  not  give  live
       evidence.

   62. Janet Hutu's witness statement is recent. Although undated,  it  was
       sent to the Tribunal on the day of  the  hearing  and  she  had  not
       previously made a witness statement. The fact that the statement  is
       recent is relevant because in it she does not make  any  mention  of
       having knowledge of any specific threats made against the  appellant
       by  the  appellant's  husband,  albeit  that  she  states  that  the
       appellant's life would  be  in  danger  were  she  to  go  back.  In
       evidence, in answer to my questions, she said that the appellant had
       told her that her children say that her husband makes threats.

   63. There was inconsistency in the evidence in relation to  whether  the
       appellant's  husband  does  or  does  not  visit  the  children,  as
       submitted by Ms Holmes. Elizabeth, the appellant's half-sister, says
       in her witness  statement  that  she  looks  after  the  appellant's
       children. At [9] she says that even though their  father  can  visit
       them anytime he wishes, he does not bother. She  goes  on  to  state
       that on the occasions when they do bump into him he makes threats to
       kill her. The undated letter from the appellant's daughter J, refers
       to violence in the marriage but also states that she  is  scared  to
       see her father even though he visits them.  There  is  therefore  an
       evident inconsistency in relation to whether or not he visits.

   64. The appellant sought to explain the  inconsistency  by  saying  that
       although he does not visit he would stand on the doorstep and shout.
       I do not accept that this is  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the
       inconsistency. J's letter states that  she  is  scared  to  see  her
       father "even though" he visits them. On the basis of the appellant's
       explanation it is reasonable to have expected her to say that she is
       scared of him because he visits.

   65. Furthermore, the letter from J says nothing about any  threats  made
       when they occasionally meet their  father  in  the  street,  in  the
       context of the evidence from the  appellant's  half-sister  that  he
       does not care that the children hear  the  threats.  Elizabeth  also
       refers to an occasion when threats were made to J in  front  of  her
       friends and her coming back home terrified, saying that she did  not
       care if she never saw her mother again as long as she was  safe.  In
       her letter J gives her age then as 15 years. It is reasonably likely
       that if the threats as described by her aunt had  been  made,  there
       would have been some reference to  them  in  the  letter.  The  only
       reference to threats is made immediately after she  states  that  he
       visits, when she goes on to say that he talks about their mother and
       that he would catch up with her no matter how long it takes.

   66. The appellant left Zimbabwe in August 2002. Her account  is  of  her
       husband being a womaniser and having another woman at the time  that
       she left Zimbabwe. On one view, those facts suggest  that  he  would
       have no interest in the appellant sufficient  for  him  to  threaten
       her. It is relevant that he has a history of  violence  towards  the
       appellant and this is consistent with what is said, in effect, about
       his having a sense of self importance which may indicate a  wish  to
       harm the appellant because of the perceived slight  of  her  leaving
       him.

   67. However, in weighing up the evidence I have come to the view that it
       is not reasonably likely  that  the  appellant's  husband  has  made
       threats towards the appellant since she has been in the  UK  or  has
       threatened  to  harm  her  should  she  return.  The   evidence   is
       inconsistent or otherwise unsatisfactory for the reasons I have  set
       out. I do not accept as reasonably likely therefore, that she  would
       be at risk from him were she to return.  For  completeness,  on  the
       basis of that finding, I do not accept even that the appellant has a
       subjective fear of her husband.

   68. At this point it is convenient to  resolve  a  further  matter  that
       remains in issue (see [43] above), namely the claim that  on  return
       her children would be taken from her by her husband.  I  have  taken
       into account the one piece of background evidence  to  which  I  was
       referred and which has a bearing on this issue. However, there is no
       evidence that the appellant's husband has sought to gain custody  of
       the children whilst the appellant has been in the UK.  Her  evidence
       is that he did not care for the children in  any  event.  I  do  not
       accept that the appellant's claim in this respect  is  supported  by
       the evidence.

   69. The appellant would be returning to her home area of  Masvingo,  the
       place given as her home area in the skeleton argument and indeed, in
       her witness statement. I have considered the  question  of  risk  on
       return with reference to the  decision  in  CM  which  affirmed  the
       decision in EM  and  Others  (Returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]  UKUT
       98(IAC).

   70. The Statement of Reasons put before the Court of Appeal,  being  the
       basis for the Consent Order in the appeal before  me,  included  the
       question of whether the appellant would be required  to  demonstrate
       loyalty to Zanu-PF on return to Masvingo. The  appellant's  skeleton
       argument has not been updated for this appeal and is based on EM. Mr
       Jafferji, in opening  submissions  suggested  that  Masvingo  was  a
       volatile place which  added  to  the  risk  to  the  appellant.  The
       skeleton argument refers to [189] of  EM.  That  paragraph  in  full
       states that:


           "Although, as a general matter,  the  risk  of  persecution  and
           other serious ill-treatment in  Zimbabwe,  including  the  rural
           areas, has  significantly  declined,  as  at  28  January  2011,
           compared with the position under  review  in  RN,  the  evidence
           before us raises serious  concerns  as  to  the  position  of  a
           Zimbabwe citizen without ZANU-PF connections, returning from the
           United  Kingdom  after  a  significant  absence   to   live   in
           Mashonaland  West,  Mashonaland   Central,   Mashonaland   East,
           Manicaland, Masvingo  or  Midlands  province.   Such  a  person,
           returning to a rural part of such a province, where the chief or
           headman is likely to be an acolyte of ZANU-PF, may well find  it
           difficult to avoid adverse attention, amounting to serious  ill-
           treatment,  from  ZANU-PF  authority  figures  and  those   they
           control, unless, of course, the Immigration Judge is entitled to
           conclude that the returnee is likely to be associated with  such
           elements.  An Immigration Judge would be  so  entitled  to  find
           where  the  appellant's  evidence  of  past  history,  place  of
           residence and family and social connections is to  this  effect,
           or where a case has been rejected and the  proper  inference  is
           that the  denials  on  these  issues  were  untruthful:  see  MA
           (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49.  In these cases the Immigration  Judge
           is entitled to conclude that loyalty would not be challenged  or
           that it would otherwise not create a difficulty. Apart from this
           category, however, we conclude that  returnees  to  these  areas
           would face a real risk of persecution because  of  a  continuing
           risk of being required to demonstrate loyalty.  In the light  of
           the judgment of the Court of Appeal in RT (Zimbabwe) [2010] EWCA
           Civ 1285 we recognise it is no answer  to  a  loyalty  challenge
           that the returnees could be expected to mislead the inquirer  as
           to where loyalties lay."

   71. In submissions  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer,  Mr
       Jafferji accepted that the appellant would be returned  to  Masvingo
       City and not a rural part of Masvingo, and as such she would not  be
       in the category of persons who  would  be  required  to  demonstrate
       loyalty to Zanu-PF.  The skeleton argument relied on before me  does
       not contend that the appellant would be  subjected  to  any  loyalty
       'test' as envisaged in the CM. That said, in submissions Mr Jafferji
       did contend that, even putting aside  a  (direct)  threat  from  her
       husband, there was still a  risk  that  she  would  be  required  to
       demonstrate loyalty to the regime.

   72. I was not referred to any background evidence  in  support  of  that
       contention, aside from a general reliance  on  the  current  country
       guidance. The only background material put  before  me,  as  already
       indicated, was that in relation to Gender Equality in Zimbabwe.

   73. It was not contended that the appellant  would  be  returning  to  a
       rural part of Masvingo where, in accordance with CM, there could  be
       said to be a risk to certain persons. I bear in mind the  fact,  now
       accepted, that the appellant's husband's father  was  a  significant
       Zanu-PF figure in Masvingo, having been  the  Zanu-PF  mayor  there,
       albeit that that was prior to 2001. From the preserved  findings  of
       fact, it is also evident that the appellant's husband was  at  least
       associated  with  Zanu-PF.  He  has  plainly  been  hostile  to  the
       appellant in the  past  as  my  findings  in  relation  to  domestic
       violence make clear. The appellant would be returning after  a  long
       period of absence abroad but as I have already indicated, she  would
       not be returning to a rural area of Zimbabwe.

   74. Whilst relying on  country  guidance  evidence  which  the  skeleton
       argument  suggests  indicates  political  volatility   in   Masvingo
       Province, Mr Jafferji did not refer me to any  current  evidence  in
       relation to the extent of Zanu-PF's presence in  Masvingo  Province,
       or in particular in the city itself following the recent  elections.
       Even if Zanu-PF does have a significant presence in  Masvingo  City,
       it was not contended that that fact alone would  create  a  risk  to
       this appellant.

   75. Although I accept that on the facts  of  the  appellant's  case  she
       would not be able to demonstrate loyalty to Zanu-PF were she  to  be
       required to do so, on the basis of the evidence put before me  I  am
       not satisfied that it is reasonably likely she would be  subject  to
       any such requirement on return to her home area. She does not have a
       significant MDC profile. Whilst  her  brother  E  did  have  such  a
       profile, it is established  in  the  preserved  findings  (see  [44]
       above] that  the  appellant  did  not  play  any  material  role  in
       supporting the MDC and it is not reasonably likely that anyone would
       continue to regard her as a person who may be  associated  with  her
       brother's MDC activities.

   76. I do not find that the evidence establishes that her husband has any
       political or  other influence in his area such  as  would  create  a
       risk to the appellant, in terms of her having to demonstrate loyalty
       or  otherwise.  The  appellant's   father-in-law   was   undoubtedly
       influential at one time, and the evidence shows that the appellant's
       husband himself was associated with Zanu-PF when the  appellant  was
       in Zimbabwe. However, I have rejected the  only  evidence  that  has
       been put before me which is said to show ongoing contact between the
       appellant's husband  and  the  family  in  Zimbabwe,  that  evidence
       relating to the alleged threats. In addition, the appellant did  not
       appear to have much knowledge of his  circumstances  beyond  stating
       that she did not think he was working because his parents'  business
       that he used to be involved with had collapsed.  She  did  not  know
       whether or not he had any income.

   77. The appellant was a nursery school teacher, again a fact that is now
       established. According to her witness statement of February 2012  at
       [13], she started that work in  approximately  September  1996.  Her
       work as a nursery teacher in Chiredzi continued until 2002 when  she
       left the country. The period of her employment is referred to in her
       witness statement and in the letter from Triangle Limited  dated  28
       February 2012, which describes her as a pre-school teacher at Dunuza
       Primary School. Although I was not referred to the evidence that the
       appellant gave on this issue before Judge Plimmer,  at  [23]  it  is
       recorded that she said that she was not a qualified teacher and  she
       did not require any qualifications to work as a nursery teacher. Her
       brother had obtained the job for her. Those are relevant facts  that
       I have taken into account.

   78. CM reaffirms the assessment made in RN that those who  are  or  have
       been teachers are in an enhanced or heightened  risk  category,  the
       significance of which will need to  be  assessed  on  an  individual
       basis. Ms Holmes submitted that being a nursery teacher is  not  the
       same as having been a senior school teacher. However, in  the  first
       place, it does not seem to me that in  RN  a  distinction  was  made
       between teachers at different levels of the education system. It  is
       reasonable to be sceptical about whether those associated with Zanu-
       PF would be concerned with the subtlety of what level of teacher  an
       individual was. Secondly,  in  RN  the  teacher's  potential  as  an
       opinion former was referred to, as  well  as  the  fact  of  schools
       having been used as polling stations, as the appellant  also  points
       out in her witness statement at [28].

   79.  The  position  of  teachers,  more  specifically  in  terms  of   a
       geographical  assessment,  was  more  recently  considered   in   NN
       (Teachers: Matabeleland/Bulawayo:  risk)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
       00198(IAC), a decision not referred to by the parties in the  appeal
       before me. That decision reiterates the reasons  why  teachers  have
       been subjected to adverse treatment by  those  associated  with  the
       regime, including because of their  imputed  support  for  the  MDC.
       Again, it is clear that the mere fact of being, or  having  been,  a
       teacher would not be sufficient to establish risk on return.

   80. Whilst the appellant would not on the facts as found be regarded  as
       someone who would be at risk purely because  of  her  brother's  MDC
       activities, his background is a relevant consideration. Her  brother
       was also a teacher, at Dunuza Secondary School. That  has  not  been
       disputed. In her witness statement  she  refers  at  [56]  to  other
       teachers in the family. These were  I,  who  died  from  AIDS,   her
       brothers D and R, as well as her sister P, the latter  three  having
       left Zimbabwe  she  says  when  things  started  changing  and  when
       teachers were being harassed. She also mentions  another  sister,  A
       who was also a teacher and who  also  died  of  AIDS.  There  is  no
       evidence that the appellant suffered any difficulties as a result of
       those other family members having been  teachers  in  Zimbabwe,  but
       that family background is nevertheless a relevant consideration.

   81. The applicable country guidance cannot, and  does  not  purport,  to
       provide a checklist for the assessment of  risk  in  respect  of  an
       asylum claimant. Whilst the country guidance is not  to  the  effect
       that a person who is or was a teacher would be at risk on return for
       that reason alone, each case being fact  specific,  I  am  satisfied
       that in the appellant's case she would be at risk when that fact  is
       taken into account. She was a teacher. Her  brother  was  an  active
       member of the MDC, albeit some years ago and was also a teacher. The
       appellant has been out of the country for many years.  The  evidence
       does not indicate that she has any  affiliation  to  Zanu-PF  which,
       whilst that would not indicate a risk in terms of any loyalty  test,
       does mean that she would not be able to use any such connections  as
       a mechanism of protection against hostility from  Zanu-PF  or  those
       associated with them. Her family background includes the  fact  that
       other close family members were teachers.

   82. Whilst for the reasons I have given I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
       appellant would be at risk from her husband, it is reasonably likely
       that she would not be able to turn to him for any support  in  terms
       of deflecting adverse attention from her.

   83. In summary therefore, the conclusion I have  come  to  is  that  the
       appellant has established a well founded fear of persecution in  her
       home area on account of an imputed political opinion because of  her
       former  occupation  as  a  teacher,  combined  with  her  particular
       background and circumstances.

   84. The question of internal  relocation  therefore  arises.  I  do  not
       consider that she could go and live in Chiredzi, which I do not take
       to be her home area. Her evidence is that it is relatively close  to
       Masvingo and the map provided to me confirms  that.  In  any  event,
       Chiredzi is the place where her and her brother taught and it is  in
       Masvingo Province.

   85. The only other place of internal relocation advanced  on  behalf  of
       the respondent was Harare. The question is, would it  be  reasonable
       to  expect  the  appellant  to  relocate  to  Harare  without  undue
       hardship.

   86. It is not suggested that the appellant has  ever  lived  in  Harare.
       There is nothing to  indicate  that  she  or  her  family  have  the
       financial  resources  to  be  able  fund  the  costs   of   whatever
       accommodation could be found for her  there.  I  bear  in  mind  the
       evidence from the appellant that her husband has  not  provided  for
       her children's school fees and that sometimes friends provide  those
       funds. It is implicit in the findings I have made in relation to the
       lack of interest in the family or contact with  the  family  by  the
       appellant's husband that I accept that evidence.

   87. Mr Jafferji suggested that, realistically, the question of  internal
       relocation has to be considered on the basis  that  she  would  live
       with her children. On the  other  hand,  given  that  she  has  been
       separated from her children in the UK, she  would  be  in  no  worse
       position in that respect in Zimbabwe even if she lived in Harare and
       they continued living with her half-sister in Chiredzi. Indeed,  she
       would at least have a better chance of seeing them in Zimbabwe  then
       when living in the UK.

   88. I do not  consider  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
       appellant to relocate to Harare without her children. I  agree  with
       Mr Jafferji's proposition to the effect that the question should  be
       looked at on the basis that she would live with her children. Whilst
       they have been separated whilst the appellant has been in the UK, to
       some extent that has been an enforced separation in the  sense  that
       she is at risk in her home area, given my findings. In any event,  I
       consider that it is inherently unreasonable to expect the  appellant
       to live in Zimbabwe without her children.

   89. If her children are to live with her, they would have to  leave  the
       area where they were born and have been brought up. They are aged 17
       and 14 and will undoubtedly have settled lives in their  home  area.
       They would be moving to an area where they have not lived and  where
       accommodation would have to be found for the  three  of  them,  with
       limited  funds.  They  would  have  to  re-establish  themselves  in
       education. In all these circumstances, I am not satisfied  that  the
       appellant  does  have  available  to  her  the  option  of  internal
       relocation.

   90. In the light of my conclusions in respect of the  asylum  ground  of
       appeal, the appellant's removal would also constitute  a  breach  of
       her human rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.

   91.  Given  my  conclusion  that  the  appellant  has   established   an
       entitlement to refugee status, it is not necessary for me to  go  on
       to consider in detail the two other bases on which it  is  contended
       that  the  appellant  should  succeed  in  her  appeal,  namely  the
       'legacy/395C' point, and Article 8. The former does however, require
       rather more consideration than the latter.

   92. The 'legacy' argument runs thus: there was a policy between 2009 and
       2012 to the effect that residence of between 4-6 years and 6-8 years
       would be significant in terms of whether  it  was  right  to  remove
       someone under paragraph 395C. When paragraph 395C was considered  in
       this case, the policy had not yet been changed in a way  that  would
       favour her case. The policy changed in August 2009 and the  decision
       in her case was made in June 2009. The policy was never  applied  to
       her even though it was in existence throughout the  appeal  process.
       The point was not previously advanced on her behalf because the case
       law had not developed.

   93. The result, so Mr Jafferji contended, was that I  should  find  that
       the immigration decision which is the subject of this appeal,  is  a
       decision that  is  "unfair"  and  the  removal  decision  should  be
       remitted to the Secretary of State for fresh consideration.

   94. It  seems  to  me  that  this  submission  is  misconceived.  It  is
       acknowledged that the 'policy' that is relied on was  not  one  that
       existed at the date of the decision in  question.  The  'policy'  is
       presumably a reference to Chapter 53 of the Enforcement Instructions
       and Guidance ("EIG"), which  changed  in  August  2009  (see  Hakemi
       [2012] EWHC 1967 (Admin) at [7]). The decision  in  this  appeal  is
       dated 8 June 2009, being a decision to remove  the  appellant  as  a
       person subject to administrative removal under  section  10  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The policy contended for  in  terms
       of length of residence did not  come  into  existence  until  August
       2009.

   95. I do not see on those facts how it could be said that  the  decision
       is 'unfair', in other words, not in accordance with the law, when at
       the very least at the time it was taken it was a lawful decision. It
       could not  have  become  unlawful  because  subsequently  a  new  or
       different approach to removals was instituted. The argument is  more
       properly directed towards a proportionality argument  under  Article
       8, but for the reasons given below I do not find  that  it  has  any
       purchase on an Article 8 assessment either.

   96. Mr Jafferji conceded that the appellant's was not a  'legacy'  case;
       she did not apply for asylum until 3 March 2009 and  a  decision  in
       her case was made on 8 June 2009. I was not referred to any  of  the
       authorities on legacy cases, of which the most recent is now Geraldo
       [2013] EWHC 2763 (Admin), decided after the hearing  of  the  appeal
       before me.

   97. In Hakemi the terms of the applicable EIG are set out.  One  of  the
       factors to be taken into account is delay on the part of  the  UKBA.
       The delay relied on in this appeal is delay after the refusal of the
       appellant's application for further leave to remain  on  6  November
       2003. It is said that there was delay in that no steps were taken to
       remove the appellant after that decision.

   98. I do not accept that the  delay  contended  for  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant comes within the terms of the sort of delay  described  in
       the EIG as set out in Hakemi. There was no delay in dealing with the
       application by the appellant. When her application for further leave
       to remain was refused, she would have  been  told  that  she  should
       leave the UK. She made no further contact with the Home  Office  and
       only made further contact with the asylum application in March 2009,
       an application which was decided promptly.

   99. I do  not  consider  that  the  decision  in  Okonkwo  supports  the
       appellant's argument on this issue. That  case  concerned  a  wholly
       different set of factual circumstances and was a case in  which  the
       EIG was applicable at  the  date  of  the  immigration  decision  in
       question, unlike in this appeal.

  100. So far as Article 8 is concerned, a reasoned factual  assessment  is
       unnecessary in the circumstances, that  (alternative)  ground  being
       subsumed within the asylum and Article 3  grounds.  I  have  already
       made clear my views on the 'legacy/395C' argument.

Decision

  101. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the decision re-made, allowing the  appeal  on  asylum
       grounds, and on human rights grounds with reference to Article 3.

Anonymity

I make an order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to  protect  the  anonymity  of  the  appellant  and
consequently this determination identifies the appellant by initials only.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 8/10/13
