

                                [pic]


 Upper Tribunal

       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05845/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 Heard at Field House
                      Decision and Reasons Promulgated
 On 11 December 2015
                  On 23 December 2015



                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between

                                     KH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


             Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr D Krushner, counsel
 For the Respondent:   Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer



                         DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


  1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Davidge, promulgated on 3
     September 2015.

  2.  Permission to appeal was granted on 21 September 2015 by FTTJ Shaerf.


     Background


  3. The appellant was issued a visit visa for the  United  Kingdom,  valid
     from 1 November 2004 until 1  May  2005.  He  arrived  in  the  United
     Kingdom on 12 November 2004. The appellant applied to  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom on  human  rights  grounds  on  10  August  2010.  That
     application was refused with no right of appeal on 25 August 2010.  On
     27 July 2012, the appellant was arrested for  fraud  and  served  with
     notice of liability for removal  as  an  overstayer.  He  applied  for
     asylum on 13 February 2013.

  4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that in 1997 he  borrowed
     a million rupees from a wealthy man in order to set up  a  cashew  nut
     business. The appellant was unable to pay the balance of the loan when
     it was demanded and  the  lender  demanded  the  appellant's  land  in
     Pillawatta, which was worth  considerably  more  than  the  loan.  The
     appellant refused to give away his land. As a result the  lender  came
     to his house and threatened the appellant, his  former  wife  and  his
     mother. The appellant relocated to Negombo, where his uncle lived  and
     where he remained until 2004, without incident, until he came  to  the
     United Kingdom. Around two years ago, the appellant's friend told  him
     that the lender was still looking for him and that he had links  to  a
     member of the Sri Lanka National Political Party. The appellant  fears
     that he will be arrested at the airport or that the lender  will  kill
     him.

  5. The Secretary of State accepted that the appellant had a dispute  with
     the lender, however the police documents relied upon by the  appellant
     showed that the threat was investigated  by  the  Sri  Lankan  police.
     Furthermore, the politician the appellant claimed to  fear  was  being
     investigated for corruption and it was therefore not accepted that  he
     was a person with influence. The respondent considered that Sri  Lanka
     had a functioning police force; the police had afforded the  appellant
     assistance in the past and it was not unreasonable to  expect  him  to
     relocate as he had between 1997 and 2004 without problems. Regard  was
     also had to the  appellant's  9-year  delay  in  seeking  asylum.  The
     Secretary of State considered the appellant's application to remain on
     the  basis  of  Article  8  but  he  did  not  meet  the   suitability
     requirements owing to his conviction for fraud  on  12  October  2012.
     EX.1 of Appendix FM was also considered, however it was  not  accepted
     that the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  the
     child on the  birth  certificate  submitted.  Furthermore,  while  the
     appellant had married on 4 May 2014, this was at a time  when  he  was
     still married to his former wife, according to the divorce certificate
     and he had submitted no evidence of being in a  relationship  akin  to
     marriage for a period of 2 years. In terms of  private  life,  it  was
     noted that the appellant had lived less than 20 years  in  the  United
     Kingdom and had a son and sister in Sri Lanka. There were said  to  be
     no exceptional circumstances.

  6. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
     appellant and his current partner gave evidence. The appellant did not
     dispute the respondent's conclusions in the reasons for refusal letter
     and the  FTTJ  concluded  that  there  was  no  current  risk  to  the
     appellant's safety given that the perpetrator of the threats had  been
     prosecuted and convicted. In relation to Article  8,  the  FTTJ  found
     that EX.1 did not apply owing to the appellant's criminal record.  She
     considered  the  child's  best   interests,   including   his   likely
     entitlement to British citizenship but concluded that the family as  a
     whole could reasonably relocate to Sri Lanka.


      Error of law


    7.  Permission  to  appeal  was  sought  on  the  basis  that  the  FTTJ
       misdirected herself in finding that the  appellant  was  disqualified
       from EX.1 of Appendix FM on the basis of  his  conviction;  that  she
       erred in not recognising that the appellant's child  was  British  at
       birth; the FTTJ findings in relation to section 117 had no bearing on
       a parent-child relationship and that she provided inadequate  reasons
       in relation to her adverse credibility findings.

    8. The FTTJ granting permission considered  that  grounds  1,  3  and  4
       showed an arguable error of law. With regards to the  second  ground,
       the judge granting permission considered there was no evidence before
       the FTTJ to show that the child was British,  however  permission  to
       appeal was not expressly refused.

    9. The Secretary of State's response of 13 October 2015 stated that  the
       respondent opposed the application for permission to appeal as it was
       considered that the FTTJ appropriately directed herself. It was  said
       that the fact that "following the hearing the  child  was  a  British
       Citizen does not show any error on the part of the Judge."


 The hearing



 10. Mr Krushner took me to documents  in  the  appellant's  bundle,  which
     demonstrated that the child in question was born British, in that  his
     mother had been granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
     Kingdom prior to his birth. With regard to the FTTJ's findings  as  to
     the motivation for the appellant's offending,  he  argued  that  these
     conflicted with the respondent's understanding of the matter,  as  set
     out in the Notice of Immigration Decision.  Mr  Krushner  argued  that
     there was no need for the FTTJ to consider the  case  outside  of  the
     Rules, had she considered EX.1 of Appendix FM. He also criticised  her
     assessment of the relevant considerations under section  117B  of  the
     Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended). He accepted
     that the FTTJ had considered all the relevant issues but  it  was  not
     clear why she had reached the decision she had.

 11. Mr Walker confirmed the respondent accepted that  the  false  document
     was used by the appellant for the purpose of opening  a  bank  account
     and accordingly this was not something the FTTJ could take against the
     appellant. He argued that sections  117A  and  B  were  not  as  fully
     addressed as they should have been, however the judge had done  enough
     in coming to her conclusions.

 12. In response, Mr Krushner argued that the issue of  the  reasonableness
     of the child going to Sri Lanka, in view of the issue of the  disputed
     land, had not been addressed. Furthermore the FTTJ findings were based
     on a flawed understanding of the offence. In terms of materiality, the
     test in EX.1 was a slightly lower one that the sufficiently compelling
     test required for Article 8 outside the Rules.

 13. At the end of the error  of  law  hearing,  I  announced  that  I  was
     satisfied that the FTTJ had made a  material  error  of  law  for  the
     following reasons.

 14. The Notice of Decision dated 18 August 2014  states  as  follows;  "We
     note that you were convicted of using false documents to open  a  bank
     account on 12 October 2012 and spent 5 months in prison. You therefore
     do not meet Suitability S - LTR 1.6 of Appendix FM."  At [39]  of  the
     FTTJ's decision and reasons, she rejects the appellant's evidence that
     "he used a false passport to open a bank account." The FTTJ considered
     that the appellant would not have needed a bank account; proceeded  to
     attach no weight to what she  considered  to  be  his  mitigation  and
     concluded that he was seeking to "minimise his crime."

 15. In view of the Secretary of State's acceptance that the appellant used
     the false document in an attempt to open a bank account, I  find  that
     it was not  open  to  the  FTTJ  to  advance  an  alternative  theory.
     Furthermore, the FTTJ does  not  address  whether  the  appellant  was
     rightly disqualified from  consideration  under  EX.1  on  suitability
     grounds.



 16. The evidence contained in the appellant's bundle,  consisting  of  the
     partner's biometric residence permit and the child's birth certificate
     clearly demonstrated that the child  in  question  was  born  British.
     Therefore the FTTJ erred in finding that the child was "not  currently
     British."

 17. The two aforementioned errors cumulatively, led the FTTJ  to  conclude
     that EX.1 was not engaged and accordingly the  reasonableness  of  the
     British child's removal from the United Kingdom was not considered.

 18. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there  are  errors  of  law
     such that the decision be set aside to be remade. None of the findings
     of the FTTJ are to stand.

 19. Neither representative had any difficulty with my proceeding to remake
     the decision immediately. The appeal proceeded by way  of  submissions
     only.

 20. Mr Krushner invited me to allow the appeal under paragraph EX.1(a)  of
     Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and to find  that  appellant  was
     able to demonstrate that it was unreasonable to expect  his  child  to
     accompany his parents to Sri Lanka.  He advised  me  that  the  asylum
     matter was relevant only as far as it bears on family life.  The  only
     aspect of that claim he relied upon was that the existence of the land
     dispute was  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State.  Otherwise,  his
     arguments related solely to Ex.1 of Appendix FM. He did not  make  any
     freestanding Article 8  arguments.  In  relation  to  the  suitability
     requirements, Mr Krushner argued that the respondent had not explained
     why it was thought that the  appellant's  continued  presence  in  the
     United Kingdom was not conducive to the public good on the basis of  a
     single conviction, which attracted a low sentence.

 21. With regard to  EX.1,  Mr  Krushner  referred  to  the  land  dispute;
     asserted that the sponsor's parents were elderly  and  unemployed  and
     that there was no care work in Sri Lanka. He contrasted  that  to  the
     position for the family in the United Kingdom, where the sponsor,  who
     was long established in the United Kingdom, was employed as  a  carer.
     He argued that these  factors  made  it  unreasonable  to  expect  the
     British Citizen child to accompany his parents to Sri Lanka.

 22. Mr Walker relied on the Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter.  With
     regard to the appellant's offending, this had been at a time  when  he
     was already cohabiting with his  partner,  however  he  accepted  that
     there had been no further convictions. He further  accepted  that  the
     appellant's offending had not been at the higher  end  of  the  scale.
     With regard to the land dispute, it was open to the appellant to  live
     in another part of Sri Lanka.

 23. Mr Krushner had nothing further to add.

 24. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision,  which  I  now  give
     with my reasons.

 25. I start by considering the respondent's view that the appellant failed
     to meet the suitability requirements. The relevant  paragraph  of  the
     Rules states as follows;

      S-LTR.1.6. The presence of the applicant in the UK  is  not  conducive
to the public  good      because     their  conduct  (including  convictions
which do not fall within paragraphs  S-LTR.1.3.  to  1.5.),       character,
associations, or other reasons, make it undesirable to allow them to  remain
in the UK.

 26. The Secretary of state has made no link between the offence  committed
     by the appellant and conduciveness. In considering this aspect, I have
     had regard to the appellant's circumstances as a whole.

 27. The offence of using a false document is an isolated  offence.   After
     serving his sentence, the appellant has been living in  the  community
     since 2013 without further offending.  Furthermore,  he  has  complied
     with immigration conditions. I accept that he  attempted  to  use  the
     document in order to open a bank account. There was no evidence before
     me to suggest that such an offence was likely to recur. All  the  more
     so now that the appellant has married and become a  father  again.   I
     also note that he received a comparatively low sentence and that there
     was no indication that the offence was carried out for pecuniary gain.
     I find that the Secretary of State has failed to demonstrate that  the
     appellant's presence in the United Kingdom is  not  conducive  to  the
     public good. I find that he does not  fall  foul  of  the  suitability
     provisions.

 28. Paragraph EX.1(a) states as follows;

      EX.1. This paragraph applies if
      (a)
             (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
relationship with a child who-
                 (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age  of
18 years when the                       applicant was  first  granted  leave
on the basis that this paragraph applied;                           (bb)  is
in the UK;
                  (cc)  is  a  British  Citizen  or  has  lived  in  the  UK
continuously  for  at  least  the  7                     years   immediately
preceding the date of application ; and
            (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave
the UK;


 29. The child in question is male and was born in late December 2014.  His
     best interests are a primary consideration in this appeal. At the date
     of this hearing he was aged 11 months. I accept that the child resides
     with both his parents. I therefore accept  that  it  is  in  his  best
     interest to continue to be cared for by both his parents, whether that
     is in Sri Lanka or the United Kingdom.

 30. The appellant's principal ground for arguing that it is not reasonable
     to expect his child to leave the United Kingdom was that  his  account
     of being indebted was not in dispute. Indeed, the reasons for  refusal
     letter, at [24] "...it is accepted that you have had  a  dispute  with
     (S) and that he  has  made  threats  against  you  and  your  family."
     However, that was as far as the Secretary of State was prepared to go.
     It is apparent from [27] of the reasons letter that the respondent was
     of the  view  that  the  appellant  had  been  able  to  obtain  state
     protection, in that at [27] "You  have  submitted  police  reports  to
     confirm complaints have been made against (S) for his  harassment  and
     that these complaints have been followed up. The  documents  you  have
     submitted are originals and are accompanied by certified translations.
     I am satisfied that they are genuine  documents.  You  have  therefore
     demonstrated that the authorities of Sri Lanka are able and willing to
     offer you protection and have done so in the past."

 31. The appellant relied upon a document  in  which  the  police  provided
     information to Negombo Magistrates Court  magistrates.  That  evidence
     showed that  S  was  remanded  into  custody  pending  further  police
     investigation regarding the threats to  the  appellant.  Those  events
     occurred in 1997. It is now 2015 and, other  than  an  unsubstantiated
     claim that a friend told him people are looking for the appellant,  he
     does not assert that there was any recurrence of the initial threats.

 32. The issue of whether the appellant would be at risk elsewhere  in  Sri
     Lanka is also addressed in the letter which continues at [34]; "It  is
     noted that you have previously relocated to Negombo in 1997 where  you
     lived until  2004  when  you  travelled  to  the  UK.  You  claim  you
     experienced no problems during that  time  as  nobody  knew  you  were
     there.  "  At  [35],  the  respondent  concludes;  "it  would  not  be
     unreasonable to expect you to live in this area (or anywhere else)  in
     Sri Lanka."

 33. The appellant has not challenged  any  of  the  respondent's  negative
     conclusions regarding his asylum claim and no longer  argues  that  he
     has a well-founded fear of persecution.  Consequently, I do not accept
     that he would be  at  risk  of  persecution  anywhere  in  Sri  Lanka,
     including in his home area and nor would his  wife  and  child.  Given
     that the appellant's account is that he lived safely in Negombo for  7
     years between 1997 and 2004, I find that it  is  not  unreasonable  to
     expect him to relocate there, either temporarily or  permanently  with
     or without his family, should he wish to avoid S. The  appellant  also
     has the option of selling his land and repaying his  debts  should  he
     wish to do so. According to the appellant, the land is worth far  more
     than the debt.

 34. In assessing the reasonableness of expecting the appellant's child  to
     relocate with the appellant, I have taken into consideration that  the
     child and indeed his mother are British citizens. However the  child's
     citizenship is not a trump card. I have taken into consideration  that
     the sponsor works as a carer in the United Kingdom. It is claimed that
     there is limited care work available in Sri Lanka, however there is no
     evidence before me of what work is or is not available. I am told that
     the sponsor's parents are pensioners and unable to  provide  long-term
     financial support. There was no evidence before me as to  their  ages,
     financial circumstances and occupations.


 35. There was no evidence produced on behalf of the appellant showing that
     it was necessary for his British Citizen child  to  leave  the  United
     Kingdom in the event that the appellant left or was removed. It is  of
     course open to the appellant's wife to sponsor an application for  the
     appellant to re-enter the United  Kingdom  as  a  partner.  There  was
     equally no evidence produced showing that the appellant and  his  wife
     and child could not settle freely and safely in Sri Lanka.

 36. Should the appellant and his wife choose to relocate as  a  family  to
     Sri Lanka, I find that it is not unreasonable for such a  young  child
     to accompany his parents to their country of origin, where  they  have
     relatives who can provide short-term support at least until the couple
     find their feet. As indicated above,  the  appellant  is  not  without
     assets of his own. In addition to his  parents-in-law,  the  appellant
     has a sister, brother-in-law and a  son  aged  17  and  therefore  the
     family would not be isolated or without support.

 37.  I conclude that paragraph EX.1(a) of  Appendix  FM  is  not  met  and
     dismiss the appeal.

 38. An anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
     appropriate that this be continued and therefore  make  the  following
     anonymity direction:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
     making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be re-made.


     I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.



 Signed     Date: 13 December 2015


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





