
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05881/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 May 2019                               |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ML
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partner Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
        (SSHD) against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Beach (the judge), promulgated  on  1  March  2019,  allowing  ML's
        appeal (hereafter claimant) against the SSHD's decision,  dated  26
        July 2014, refusing the  claimant's  protection  and  human  rights
        claim.

   Background


     2. This appeal has a somewhat complex procedural history. What I  have
        to determine has however been narrowed to a single issue.  Did  the
        judge err in law in  her  assessment  of  the  internal  relocation
        alternative available to the claimant?


     3. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan born in  April  1995.  He
        entered the UK on 18 July 2008 aged 13 years old. He was placed  in
        the care of a Local Authority and claimed asylum on 24  July  2008.
        His asylum  claim  was  based  on  his  Hazara  ethnicity  and  the
        targeting of his father (a teacher)  by  the  Taliban.  His  asylum
        application was refused on 4 November  2008,  but  he  was  granted
        Discretionary Leave as an  unaccompanied  minor  until  3  November
        2011. He made an in-time application for further  leave  to  remain
        based  on  his  fear  of  persecution  in  Afghanistan   but   this
        application was refused on 26  July  2014.  He  has  been  lawfully
        present in the UK since at least 4 November 2008, a period of  over
        10 years.

     4. An appeal against the SSHD's decision was  allowed  on  28  October
        2014 but, on 15 January 2015, the Upper Tribunal  found  there  had
        been a material error of law and remitted the appeal  for  a  fresh
        hearing back to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
        subsequently dismissed the  claimant's  appeal  on  19  June  2015.
        Although he obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, in
        a decision promulgated on 29 December 2015 the Upper Tribunal found
        no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

     5. The claimant then sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
        Appeal and permission was ultimately granted  at  an  oral  renewal
        hearing on 18 October 2017. On 28 March 2018 the parties  agreed  a
        Consent Order remitting the appeal back to the  Upper  Tribunal  to
        determine whether there had been a material error  of  law  in  the
        First-tier Tribunal's decision. The Upper Tribunal found there  had
        been an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  the
        appeal was, once again, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
        fresh hearing. In the meantime, the claimant's representatives made
        submissions  to  the  respondent  regarding  his  10  years  lawful
        residents in the UK. On 17 December 2018  the  SSHD  wrote  to  the
        claimant accepting that he had completed 10 years lawful  residents
        in the UK and that he was prima facie entitled to be  granted  ILR.
        The claimant had not however received formal notice of a  grant  of
        ILR by 30 January 2019, the date of his 3rd de novo appeal  hearing
        before the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

     6. In her decision promulgated on 1 March 2019 the judge  set  out  in
        detail the claimant's immigration history, the basis of his  asylum
        claim, and the written and oral evidence from the claimant and  his
        three witnesses. The claimant maintained that he and his family had
        to flee Afghanistan  as  a  result  of  threats  from  the  Taliban
        directed to his father because his father was a teacher in a girl's
        school and because of their Hazara ethnicity.

     7. The judge set out her extensive findings from  [43]  to  [74].  She
        considered the claimant's nationality and ethnicity (which had been
        disputed) and concluded that he was of  Hazara  ethnicity  and  did
        come from Afghanistan ([46] to [48]). The judge next considered the
        claimant's credibility. The judge noted that the claimant was  only
        13 years old at the  date  of  his  asylum  claim  and  that  this,
        together with his  evidence  that  had  been  told  throughout  his
        journey to the UK to be selective in what he admitted to the  SSHD,
        may have contributed to  some  vagueness  in  his  recollection  of
        events and to inconsistencies in his account. Noting that the  core
        elements of the claimant's account had been  consistent  throughout
        the asylum process, and having  regard  to  the  claimant's  actual
        evidence in his asylum interview, and by reference to the  evidence
        given by the claimant's witnesses relating to  Ghazni  Province  in
        Afghanistan, the judge found that the claimant's father had been  a
        teacher in Afghanistan who believed in the rights of  girls  to  be
        educated and that he faced problems for the Taliban.

     8. The judge then considered with the  claimant  would  face  a  well-
        founded fear of persecution if returned  to  Afghanistan.  Although
        the judge concluded that the appellant was not at  real  risk  from
        the Taliban in Ghazni itself, she found that he would face  a  real
        risk of persecution during any attempt made to travel to  his  home
        area from Kabul, to  where  the  claimant  would  be  returned.  In
        reaching this conclusion the judge considered the Country  Guidance
        case of  MI  (Hazara  -  Ismaili  -  associate  of  Nadiri  family)
        Afghanistan CG [2009] UKAIT 00035 and the more recent  decision  of
        AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT  00118  (IAC).  The
        judge  additionally  relied  on  an  expert  country  report   from
        Professor William Maley. This expert report  considered  the  risks
        accompanying any  journey  to  Ghazni  and  the  current  level  of
        discrimination faced by Hazaras. The judge additionally  considered
        recent background materials relating to the position of Hazaras.

     9. The judge then considered whether the claimant  would  be  able  to
        avail himself of the internal relocation  option  by  remaining  in
        Kabul. From [68] to [74]  the  judge  explained  why,  despite  the
        claimant being an educated,  healthy  single  adult  male,  it  was
        nevertheless unreasonable or unduly harsh, applying AS, for him  to
        relocate to Kabul. In reaching this conclusion the judge took  into
        account the fact that the claimant left Afghanistan at the  age  of
        12, that he had been outside Afghanistan for more  than  10  years,
        that he had never lived in Kabul and  had  no  network  of  support
        available to him, that his  Hazara  ethnicity  (and  being  a  Shia
        Muslim) would expose him to  further  discrimination,  particularly
        given the findings in the unchallenged expert report  concerning  a
        sharp increase in sectarian violence, and that he may be considered
        as someone well-disposed to Western  values,  which  would  further
        increase the risk of ill-treatment.

    10. The judge then considered Article 8.  The  judge  referred  to  the
        SSHD's acceptance that the claimant had lived lawfully  in  the  UK
        for 10 years and that he was entitled to ILR. The judge found  that
        the claimant did fulfil the requirements of paragraph 267B and that
        it would be disproportionate to remove him from the UK.  The  judge
        consequently allowed the appeals on  both  protection  grounds  and
        human rights grounds.

The grounds of appeal and the parties' submissions

    11. It is unnecessary for me to set out the SSHD's full grounds in  any
        detail. This is because Ms Everett  sensibly  relied  on  a  single
        ground  challenging  the  judge's  assessment   of   the   internal
        relocation alternative. I nevertheless consider it  appropriate  to
        say a few words in respect of some of the grounds even though  they
        were not pursued at the 'error of law' hearing.


    12. The  original  grounds  challenged  the  adequacy  of  the  judge's
        findings relating to his Hazara ethnicity. The judge  however  gave
        rational and cogent reasons for concluding that the claimant was an
        Afghan Hazara. The judge was unarguably entitled  to  rely  on  the
        evidence from three witnesses whose credibility did not  appear  to
        be challenged by the Presenting Officer in his closing  submissions
        before the First-tier Tribunal. At [46] the judge was  entitled  to
        attribute vagueness in the claimant's account to his young age  and
        the fact that he lived in a rural area of Afghanistan and had never
        travelled outside that area prior to fleeing the country.  At  [47]
        the  judge  gave  rational  and  clearly  sustainable  reasons  for
        accepting  the  opinion  evidence  from   the   claimant's   Hazara
        witnesses. The grounds criticise the judge's  conclusion  that  the
        claimant  could   not   safely   journey   to   Ghazni   as   being
        unsubstantiated by evidence and insufficiently reasoned. The  judge
        however  relied  on  the  unchallenged  expert  report  and  recent
        background evidence which she  clearly  set  out  in  reaching  her
        conclusion. The grounds contend that the appeal before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal was 'spurious' because the claimant had already  been
        informed that a grant of ILR would  be  forthcoming  and  that  his
        continued prosecution of his appeal undermined his credibility. Not
        only is there no record of any such argument being advanced  before
        the First-tier Tribunal, but the claimant  was  fully  entitled  to
        pursue his appeal as the status of refugee  is  one  recognised  in
        international law and one that bestows  benefits  on  a  recognised
        refugee and further obligations on the  recognising  state.  It  is
        additionally concerning that the judge who  granted  permission  to
        appeal, whilst noting that the 'spurious' ground could  not  be  an
        error of law, expressed "some sympathy with that being asserted  by
        the Home Office."


    13. In light of the above summary Ms Everett  very  properly  abandoned
        all of the grounds of appeal save for the challenge to the issue of
        internal relocation.

    14. I pause to note that  the  SSHD  has  not  challenged  the  judge's
        Article 8 assessment. There has consequently been no  challenge  to
        the judge's decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

    15. Ms Everett submitted that, despite referring  to  the  need  for  a
        "nuanced" approach to internal relocation,  the  judge's  reasoning
        was  insufficient  and  incapable  of  sustaining  her  conclusion.
        Although the judge identified potential problems that the  claimant
        may face, her findings were overly speculative and could not,  even
        when cumulatively considered, render the possibility of  relocating
        to 'Kabul' unreasonable.

    16. Mr MacKenzie invited me to find  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
        internal relocation  was  sustainable.  AS  (Afghanistan)  did  not
        consider the position of ethnic minorities, including Hazaras,  and
        the judge was entitled to  rely  on  more  recent  evidence  of  an
        upsurge in the targeting of Hazaras. The judge  took  all  relevant
        matters into account, weighed up at those  matters  and  reached  a
        conclusion open to her.

Discussion

    17. I am satisfied, for the following reasons, that the  decision  does
        not disclose any error on a point of law requiring  it  to  be  set
        aside.


    18. The only challenge to the judge's decision advanced at  the  'error
        of law' hearing related to her assessment of  the  availability  of
        internal relocation. It has  not  been  suggested  that  the  judge
        misdirected herself in respect of the legal test for assessing  the
        internal relocation alternative. The judge demonstrably  considered
        and applied AS (Afghanistan), the most recent Country Guidance case
        dealing with the issue of safety of return to  Kabul  ([55],  [56],
        [57] and [68]). The judge was aware that, in general, it would  not
        be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single  adult  male  in  good
        health to relocate to Kabul even if he does not have  any  specific
        connections or support network in the city.  The  judge  was  aware
        that she had to consider the claimant's  particular  circumstances,
        including his age when he left Afghanistan and at the date  of  the
        hearing, the nature and quality of any  support  network  that  was
        available to him in Afghanistan, and his  language,  education  and
        vocational skills [55].

    19. The judge was entitled to attach  weight  to  the  absence  of  any
        support network available to the claimant in Kabul, and to the fact
        that the claimant had never lived in Kabul and had no contact  with
        anyone else in Afghanistan. The judge referred to paragraph  95  of
        AS (Afghanistan) which made, albeit fleeting,  reference  to  there
        being some  evidence  of  risk  to  Shia  Muslims.  The  judge  was
        demonstrably aware that MI  (Afghanistan)  found  that  persons  of
        Hazara ethnicity would not, by reason of being Hazara, be  at  real
        risk of serious harm in Afghanistan, but she was entitled to attach
        significant weight to the unchallenged expert report  by  Professor
        William Maley which detailed a  sharp  increase  in  discrimination
        against  Hazaras.  Whilst  it   was   not   suggested   that   this
        discrimination amounted to persecution, it was  a  material  factor
        that the judge was entitled to take into account when assessing the
        viability of the internal  relocation  option  to  Kabul  for  this
        particular claimant. The  judge  was  additionally  entitled,  when
        assessing the viability of internal relocation  (as  opposed  to  a
        risk of persecution), that the claimant was likely to be considered
        as someone disposed to Western  values  (in  AS  (Afghanistan)  the
        Upper Tribunal found that there was some  evidence  of  a  possible
        adverse social impact or  suspicion  affecting  social  and  family
        interactions in respect  of  those  who  were  perceived  as  being
        Western).


    20. I am satisfied that the  judge  carefully  considered  all  factors
        necessary for a lawful assessment of internal relocation. The judge
        weighed up these factors together and gave  clear  and  sustainable
        reasons for her conclusion in light of the expert  report  and  the
        background evidence before her. I find that the  challenge  to  the
        appeal on protection grounds is not made out and that the judge was
        rationally entitled to her conclusion.


Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the making  of  an  error
on a point of law.
The SSHD's appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the claimant and to the SSHD.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]                                15 May 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
