
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05472/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31 October 2013                            |On 11 November 2013          |
|Prepared 31 October 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                            ravishankar nadarajah

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Paramjorthy, Counsel instructed by Messrs
Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  6  May  1979,  appeals,
    with permission, against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Glossop who in  a  determination  dated  23  July  2013  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on
    23 May 2013 to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he had  helped  friends  of
    his uncle with the LTTE  between  2000  and  2010.   He  had  not  been
    arrested or detained or otherwise come into contact with the Sri Lankan
    authorities during that time.

3.   The appellant claimed that between 2007 his involvement with  the  LTTE
    had increased and he had worked with a man called Guna until  2010  and
    had taken items which had been  collected  and  leaving  them  under  a
    bridge in Pattiruppu.  He had never been stopped.  The goods  had  been
    handed over to fishermen who had ferried the goods to the other side of
    the river in a rowing boat.  He stated that he had  never  attended  an
    LTTE training camp and had only been a helper.  He had lived in Colombo
    between December 2009 and July 2010.  He said  that  he  had  not  been
    identified because he helped secretly and only his family, Guna and the
    fishermen knew what he was doing.  After the ceasefire  he  had  helped
    send three LTTE members to India in little boats.   He  had  only  done
    this once because his aunt told him not to do so.  He  had  helped  the
    LTTE only until July or August 2009 but had stayed in touch  with  Guna
    until February 2010.

4.    On 23 June 2010 he had received a student visa and  came  to  Britain.
    In October 2011 he made  an  application  for  leave  to  continue  his
    studies but that application was refused.  However, after appeal he was
    granted further leave to remain until 12 August 20103.

5.   On 4 April 2013 the appellant  returned  to  Sri  Lanka  to  visit  his
    mother using his own passport.  He returned  to  Britain  on  18  April
    2013, again on his own passport.  He applied for asylum on 22 April.

6.   When he had  returned  in  April  2013  he  had  visited  a  number  of
    relatives and had met up with two old classmates who had agreed to come
    round to his house.  He had decided not to go out  with  them  but  was
    talking with Guna as he passed the gate.  Guna  had  told  his  friends
    that they had previously helped the LTTE  and  about  their  activities
    delivering goods to  a  fisherman.   When  the  friends  had  left  the
    appellant and Guna had gone into the house and then  talked  about  the
    past.  The appellant had told Guna that he was involved  in  a  protest
    when the President was visiting Britain.  Two  hours  later  he  had  a
    phone call from Guna who had asked where he was.  He said that  he  was
    going back home from the market.  While doing so he was dragged into  a
    jeep by army officers and he  was  told  by  the  army  that  Guna  had
    informed on him.  He  believed  that  Guna  had  done  so   to  protect
    himself.  The appellant had been taken to the  army  camp  at  Kalmunai
    where he had been beaten with a baton and a rifle butt and kicked  with
    boots and fainted.  He was accused of starting the conflict again.

7.   He  was  then  taken,  he  claimed,   to  another  camp  where  he  was
    blindfolded and his fingerprints and photograph  were  taken.   He  was
    beaten and a chain had been put round his ankles.  His father  arranged
    with an agent for a bribe to be paid so that he could be released  from
    that camp.  Before he was released his signature was taken from him for
    a confession  that  he  was  a  former  LTTE  member.   He  was  driven
    blindfolded into the forest where he was left with an  agent.   He  was
    told that if he was seen again he would be shot.   He  was  accused  of
    being a Tiger and the army had  stated  that  they  had  destroyed  the
    Tigers but that he was involved in trying to "start it again".  He  was
    then blindfolded, then taken him to a second camp  where  he  had  been
    fingerprinted, photographed and kicked, shackled and that a  confession
    had been obtained from him in Tamil stating he was a former LTTE member
    and supporter.

8.     Bribes had been paid to secure his release.  He said  that  he  could
    not afford to repay his father who had paid the bribe.  He had bypassed
    immigration at the airport with the  aid  of  an  agent  where  he  was
    directed to a particular immigration agent.  He said it was  his  claim
    that  he  could  not  return  to  Sri  Lanka  because  they   had   his
    fingerprints, identity documents and photograph and he believed that he
    would be killed.

9.   The Secretary of State in the letter of refusal  set  out  reasons  why
    the appellant's claim was not credible.

10.  Judge Glossop heard evidence from  the  appellant  setting  it  out  at
    length.  In paragraphs 21 onwards he set out his findings of  fact  and
    credibility.

11.  He noted the appellant had given a consistent  account  of  persecution
    by the army in Sri Lanka  but  said  that  that  was  odd  because  the
    appellant had claimed to be only a low-level activist who had performed
    errands for the LTTE since leaving school and whilst working  and  that
    he did not fall into the category of persons about whom the authorities
    would nowadays be suspicious as set out in the country guidance case of
    GJ  ( a reference to  GJ & Others (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC)).

12.  Again he stated that it was odd that having assisted the LTTE  for  ten
    years the appellant should now be arrested and ill-treated  on  return.
    He stated that "it does not fit what one knows from background material
    nor does it truly fit the new GJ country guidance".

13.  The judge went on  to  describe  the  appellant's  "strange  tale"  but
    stated that  the  account  was  full  very  substantial  detail  "of  a
    plausible kind: the attitude of his parents and their advices  to  him,
    his ability to recall how, when and where he reached the river and  how
    the materials were carried over to the LTTE side."

14.  He went on to say that "postulating that the core  of  the  appellant's
    account is true I formed the view that his cross-examination tended  to
    establish his account more strongly.  To put it shortly I was impressed
    with the appellant as a witness".

15.  Having referred to the medical and  psychiatric  evidence  and  stating
    that he had examined the whole of the evidence to form  a  view  as  to
    credibility the judge went on, "at the very least  it  cannot  be  said
    that the conjectured involvement in  being  an  informant  against  the
    appellant is unlikely, it is I  find  plausible".   Although  he  later
    commented that "if the appellant had kept  his  association  with  Guna
    quiet all these years so that nobody else in the village knew it is odd
    that on a brief return to the UK that he should divulge the  activities
    undertaken for  the  LTTE".   The  judge  went  on  to  state  that  he
    considered that the medical evidence was crucial and  in  paragraph  27
    onwards set out his conclusions as follows:-

         "27. I look at all the evidence in the round and I find  it  likely
             that he was tortured by the army in Sri Lanka.  He was one  of
             the best witnesses I have seen for a long time.   I  am  aware
             that a witness may be rendered more  plausible  by  confidence
             and practice but the Appellant  could  not  have  known  which
             questions would be asked of him by the interviewing officer or
             Presenting Officer.  Therefore  despite  shortcomings  in  the
             material i.e. no  statements  from  Sri  Lanka,  no  proof  of
             involvement  by  relations   with   the   LTTE,   some   small
             exaggerations, allegations contrary to background material, an
             agent of many  abilities,  I  find  that  this  Appellant  was
             reasonably likely to have been persecuted  during  April  this
             year in Sri Lanka.


         28.  This conclusion is fortified by the psychiatric  report  which
             finds that the Appellant  is  suffering  from  PTSD.   It  was
             contended by the Presenting Officer that a psychiatric  report
             of a favourable kind to the Appellant could easily be obtained
             because the questionnaires which are  applied  are  well-known
             and the answers may be prepared.  I accept that that is so and
             do not attach great weight to it but it is further evidence in
             support of the Appellant's claim.


         29.  Considering risk to  the  Appellant  on  return  I  have  been
             referred to "Tamils against genocide"  who  responded  to  the
             country guidance case GJ & Others.  They made a point that the
             Tribunal  failed  to  correlate  instances  of  torture   with
             returnees who had protested in the UK.   This  Appellant  gave
             evidence that on two occasions he had appeared in protests  in
             the UK.  GJ accepted the prevalence of torture for persons  at
             real risk of persecution or serious harm on return, (7)(a) and
             (d).  In (d) a person  whose  name  appears  on  a  stop  list
             accessible at the airport would be a person against whom there
             exists a court order or arrest warrant.  It  is  said  at  (9)
             that the authorities maintain a computerised intelligence  led
             watch list and that their approach is based  on  sophisticated
             intelligence at (8).


         30.  This  means  that  the  true  level  of  involvement  of  this
             Appellant  would  be  known  to  the  authorities,  the   more
             especially so if he had been tortured and  given  his  limited
             involvement with the LTTE.  It is therefore unlikely that  the
             Appellant's name would be on a stop list.  As commented by the
             Presenting Officer the Appellant was as likely  to  have  been
             released because the army were done with him as because of any
             bribe.  The two possibilities are  not  inconsistent  and  are
             consistent with the small amount of involvement which could be
             proved against this Appellant.  It is not likely that he would
             be posted  as  escaped  in  the  circumstances  and  therefore
             unlikely that there would be a warrant issued against him, the
             authorities have not been round to his home.  I also note that
             he obtained an exit stamp in his passport,  left  on  his  own
             passport and  would  be  returning  with  a  UK  visa  in  his
             passport.  I therefore conclude that this Appellant would  not
             be at risk on return.  The ultimate  conclusion  therefore  is
             that he has been persecuted but would not be reasonably likely
             to be persecuted were he to return to Sri Lanka.   He  is  not
             politically active.  There  are  not  reasonable  grounds  for
             believing that he  would  be  subjected  to  serious  harm  if
             returned and he is not entitled to  a  grant  of  Humanitarian
             Protection or under Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR."

16.  The judge therefore dismissed the appeal.

17.  The grounds of appeal referred to the fact that judge  had  found  that
    the appellant was credible but stated that he had erred in  failing  to
    engage with the authority's perception of the appellant's  profile  and
    his risk on return as a result.  Having stated that the true  level  of
    the appellant's involvement would be  known  to  the  authorities  they
    alleged  that the authorities considered the appellant to  be  an  LTTE
    member and involved in LTTE resurgence.  It was claimed that the  judge
    had failed to engage with the evidence that the appellant was suspected
    of being an LTTE member and had been involved in an  LTTE  resurrection
    and that a confession had been obtained from  him   stating  he  was  a
    former member and supporter of the LTTE.

18.  The grounds them referred  to the appellant's statement at   paragraphs
    36 onwards where the appellant had set out what the Sri Lankan army had
    said to him.

19.  The grounds argued that the appellant's  actual  LTTE  involvement  was
    irrelevant to the appellant's risk on return to Sri Lanka and the  fact
    that he had been released on payment of a bribe could  rationally  mean
    that the previous record for the appellant would  demonstrate  that  he
    had no personal involvement with the LTTE.   Moreover,  the  judge  had
    accepted that the appellant had  admitted  to  UK  pro-LTTE  sur  place
    activity to Guna and  that  Guna  had  turned  informer  and  that  the
    appellant was therefore  suspected  in  the  resurgence  and  had  been
    released on payment of a bribe.

20.  The grounds then referred to paragraph  356  of  the  country  guidance
    case GJ where the relevant current categories of persons at  real  risk
    of persecution or serious harm in Sri Lanka were  set  out.   Paragraph
    356(7)(a) contains the category of:

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single
         state because they are, or are perceived to have a significant role
         in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within  the  diaspora
         and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka".


21.  The country guidance case had gone on to state  that  "the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities' approach is based on sophisticated intelligence,  both  as
    to activities within Sri Lanka and in the diaspora".  Sub-paragraph (9)
    referred to the "watch" list of those who would be  not  likely  to  be
    obtained at the airport to be monitored by the security services  after
    they returned.  The grounds went on to say that the appellant's account
    of leaving through the airport, undetected due to  corruption  airport,
    was corroborated by paragraph 394 in GJ.

22.   Permission  was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Macdonald on 14 August 2013.

23.  At the beginning of the appeal I confirmed with Mr  Saunders  that  the
    Secretary of State had not submitted a Rule 24 statement and that there
    was no challenge to the  Immigration  Judge's  findings  of  fact.   Mr
    Saunders confirmed that the findings of fact of the  Immigration  Judge
    at paragraph 27 were accepted. In his  submission he indicated would be
    that the appellant did not fall within the relevant risk categories  in
    CJ.  Mr Saunders and  Mr  Paramjorthy  agreed  that  should  I  find  a
    material error of  law  in  the  determination  I  should  re-make  the
    decision without the necessity of hearing further evidence.

24.  Mr Paramjorthy relied on the grounds of  appeal  and  stated  that  the
    issue was not, as the judge seemed  to  indicate  whether  or  not  the
    appellant would be on a "stop" or "watch" list but  the  central  issue
    was whether or not he would be perceived to have a profile which  would
    mean that he would be  likely  to  be  picked  up  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  The fact that he did not leave on his  own  passport  was
    not a determinative factor as the appellant had made it clear  that  he
    had left with the help of an agent - a process which had been  accepted
    as not uncommon in the determination of CJ.  He argued that  the  judge
    had misapplied the country guidance and indeed  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant's claim was stronger than that of the appellant in CJ  as  CJ
    had had no sur place activity here.

25.  In reply Mr Saunders argued that there was no basis on which  it  could
    be thought that the appellant had had a significant role with the LTTE.
     What he had done had been to help the LTTE for a period of time but he
    did not come within  any high profile category no reason to say that he
    would be on a watch or stop list.  He therefore stated that the judge's
    conclusion that the  appellant  could  not  benefit  from  the  Refugee
    Convention were correct.

26.  In reply Mr Paramjorthy emphasised  that  the  terms  of  sub-paragraph
    7(a) of paragraph 356 of CJ & Others.

Discussion

27.  This is a curious determination in which  the  judge  properly  pointed
    out issues of concern which might well have led him to  find  that  the
    appellant's claim about what had happened in Sri Lanka was not credible
    but nevertheless went on to  find  in  fairly  robust  terms  that  the
    appellant's evidence was accepted.  His findings of fact as to what had
    happened in the past have not been challenged  by  the  respondent  and
    therefore the starting point of any consideration of the appeal are the
    judge's findings of fact which included his acceptance  that  what  the
    appellant stated in his statement was true - that includes  the  claims
    that the appellant took part in sur place activities here, that he  had
    supported the LTTE between 2000 and 2010 and that he had been detained,
    tortured, a signed  confession had been taken from him and he had  been
    threatened that he would be killed if he was again picked up.

28.  It is of note that, although it is clear that the judge  had  read  the
    relevant country guidance determinations he focused  on  the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant would be on a "stop" or "watch" list.

29.  While it is arguable that the appellant would not be on a  "stop"  list
    because there was no extant court order or arrest warrant  against  him
    that does not answer the question of whether or not the appellant would
    be on a "watch" list of those who are likely to  be  monitored  by  the
    security services after their  return.

30.  The fact that the appellant has been told that he would  be  killed  if
    he were again picked up, that he had signed a confession  and  that  he
    has been detained in the relatively   recent  past  were  factors  with
    which the judge should have engaged and I find that there is a material
    error of law in the fact that he did not do so and did  not  show  how,
    given the factors which he had accepted, the appellant might not be  at
    real risk of persecution if again picked up on return and that,  having
    been picked up in the very recent  past  the  appellant  would  not  be
    picked up again given that he had been accused by  the  authorities  of
    being against a unified Sri Lanka.

31.  The reality is that there was a material error of law in the judge  not
    following through his findings of fact and placing them within relevant
    country guidance.

32.  Moreover, his reasons for not doing so - that the  appellant  had  left
    on his own passport ignored the fact that  he  had  accepted  that  the
    appellant had left with the help of an agent.

33.  Having found that there is a material error of  law  I  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Glossop but, based on his findings of  fact  now  re-
    make the decision as Mr Paramjorthy and Mr Saunders agreed I should do.

34.  The findings of the judge are clear and are as I have  set  out  above.
    I apply those findings to the relevant country guidance case  of  GJ  &
    Others.  The reality is that less than six months ago the appellant was
    considered to be a threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka.  Clearly  that
    is what the judge believed. The appellant had been told the reason  why
    he would be considered to be a threat  is  because  of  the  sur  place
    activities about which the authorities had been told by Guna as well as
    the appellant's history of  support  for  the  LTTE.   Clearly  he  was
    perceived to be someone who had been trying to re-kindle separatism  in
    Sri Lanka.

35.  I therefore consider that having set aside the decision  of  the  judge
    it is appropriate for me to re-make the  decision  and  for  the  above
    reasons  conclude   that  the  appellant  would  face  persecution  and
    treatment contrary to his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR on return.



Decision

36.  This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

37.  This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


