
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05720/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2017                         |On 18th January 2018          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S O]
                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr A McVitie, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    Mr J Nicholson of Counsel, instructed by
                           Greater Manchester Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This matter has a somewhat long and  complicated  immigration  history.
    The claimant was arrested entering the United Kingdom in November  2009
    and claimed asylum on the basis that he was a citizen of Somalia and  a
    member of the Midgan minority clan.

2.   In a decision dated 1st December  2009  the  respondent  rejected  that
    claim on the basis that the Sprakab  language  report  pointed  to  him
    being from Djibouti and that his  experiences  generally  as  described
    were not those commensurate with a minority clan.

3.    The  claimant  sought  to  appeal  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which appeal was dismissed as was any further  permission  to
    appeal upon it.

4.   Further submissions were made in April 2012,  November  2012,  December
    2013 and 16th May 2014 but all were refused.

5.   The claimant sought to renew his claim for asylum,  which  was  refused
    by the respondent in a decision of 2nd March 2015, essentially  on  the
    same grounds as it had been refused previously.  The claimant sought to
    appeal that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Law on 14th  January  2016.   On  that
    occasion a key witness for the claimant was  his  brother  [MO].   That
    brother had been admitted to the United Kingdom  for  the  purposes  of
    family reunion to join his wife [RA].  Seemingly he had married in 2011
    but had become separated from his wife and sought to enter  the  United
    Kingdom to be with her.   The  DNA  test  confirmed  that  he  and  the
    claimant were full brothers and he gave evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge concerning his nationality and  clan  membership,  which
    clearly, if correct, would also apply to the claimant.

6.   The Judge declined to give much weight to that evidence,  finding  that
    he should follow  the  findings  of  a  previous  Tribunal  as  to  the
    credibility of the claimant and the Sprakab Report.

7.   Upper Tribunal Judge Martin,  in  a  decision  at  a  hearing  of  20th
    September 2016, found that the  Judge  misapplied  Devaseelan  and  had
    given inadequate reasons for rejecting the brother's  nationality;  had
    not addressed his mind to the significance of the findings in  relation
    to the brother's identity . The decision of Judge Law was set aside  to
    be remade.

8.   Thus it  was  that  the  matter  came  for  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davies on 26th May 2017.  In a  determination,  notified
    on 8th June 2017, the appeal was allowed.  The Judge found on the basis
    of the relationship with the  brother  that  the  claimant  was  indeed
    Somali of the sub-clan Midgan and concluded that in the  light  of  the
    authority of MOJ and Others (Return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442 that he was indeed  at  risk  were  he  to  be  returned  to
    Mogadishu and accordingly his appeal was allowed on asylum grounds  and
    on human rights grounds.

9.   The Secretary of State, in the grounds of challenge to  that  decision,
    contends  that  the  Judge  failed  to   engage   with   the   previous
    determinations and had failed to engage with the issue  as  to  whether
    the brother had used proper documentation  to  secure  his  entry,  the
    suggestion being that the documents that the brother used may not  have
    been accurate and that there was a failure to engage with MA  (Disputed
    Nationality) Ethiopia [2008] UKAIT 0032.

10.  It seems to me, having heard Mr McVitie, that there is little merit  in
    such a challenge.  The respondent clearly had been satisfied as to  the
    nationality of the brother and of the documentation presented such that
    leave to enter the United Kingdom  to  be  with  his  wife  was  indeed
    granted.  The brother gave evidence.  Indeed  he  has  made  a  witness
    statement  in  which  he  confirms  his   nationality,   confirms   his
    association with the claimant in Somalia and confirms that he is of the
    sub-clan Midgan.  In those circumstances it was clearly open to a Judge
    to accept that evidence and to make the  findings  accordingly.   Those
    findings, and the reasons for those findings, are set out in  paragraph
    20 of the determination.  Though briefly stated I find it is  perfectly
    open to the Judge to have accepted that evidence and made the  findings
    upon it.

11.  At the hearing I raised, however, my concerns that  the  Judge  in  one
    brief passage seems to have  resolved  the  issue  of  risk  without  a
    detailed consideration of the elements in MOJ.

12.  In the head note  to  the  decision,  particularly  at  (1(x))  it  was
    accepted that in the case of a person  facing  a  return  to  Mogadishu
    after a period of absence, who has no nuclear family or close relatives
    in the city to assist him in re-establishing himself  on  return  there
    will be need to have a careful assessment  of  all  the  circumstances.
    Such considerations will include:- circumstances  in  Mogadishu  before
    departure;   length  of  absence  from  Mogadishu;   family   or   clan
    associations to call upon in Mogadishu: access to financial  resources:
    prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment or self-
    employment; availability of remittances from abroad; means  of  support
    during the time spent in the United Kingdom; why his  ability  to  fund
    the journey to the west  no  longer  enables  an  appellant  to  secure
    financial support on return.

13.  Significantly the Tribunal at (x) said as follows:-
         "Put another way it will be for the person facing return to explain
         why he would not be able to access the economic opportunities  that
         have been produced by the economic boom,  especially  as  there  is
         evidence to the effect  that  returnees  are  taking  jobs  at  the
         expense of those who have never been away".

14.  Although the Judge at paragraph 21 of  the  determination  purports  to
    apply such considerations, the Judge has not gone into  the  matter  in
    any depth nor set out clear reasons for coming to the various  findings
    which have been made.  As indicated to Mr Nicholson and  indeed  to  Mr
    McVitie I consider that the analysis of MOJ was inadequate and that  I
    was of the mind that that aspect of the findings should be reconsidered
    before the Upper Tribunal to make a full and careful  determination  as
    to risk on return and in light of the findings as to nationality.

15.  Mr Nicholson submits that that would be  fundamentally  unfair  because
    it was not a challenge raised in any stage in the  proceedings  by  the
    respondent.  The focus of the  challenge  and  repeated  challenge  has
    always been made that the appellant is not of the nationality and  clan
    membership as claimed.  It would have been open  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to challenge the substantive findings as to risk but no challenge
    has been made.   Mr  Nicholson  submits  therefore  that  it  would  be
    fundamentally unfair of me to take a point which the  respondent  could
    have taken.

16.  I note that at the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Davies  no
    Presenting Officer was present.  That having been said it was  entirely
    open to the drafter of the grounds of challenge to have  put  in  those
    grounds a challenge to the substantive  findings  of  fact  as  to  the
    safety of return which were set out by the Judge.

17.  Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge jumps quickly  from  identifying
    the factors to a conclusion that the appellant will end up  in  an  IDP
    camp, such had not found  favour  with  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the
    decision of Saeed.  It was held that in the case  someone  with  mental
    difficulties it would be simplistic to conclude without more that  they
    would end up in dire conditions.

18.  In one sense of course it is important, as a matter of principle,  that
    decisions on asylum are carefully taken so as to protect the public  as
    well as the individual seeking to claim asylum.  It must be  recognised
    that the Secretary of State has a function  to  safeguard  such  public
    interest. She could have been raised such a concern in the  grounds  of
    appeal but has not.

19.  My function is to determine those issues which  are  at  large  between
    the parties.  It is with some  reluctance  that  I  have  come  to  the
    conclusion that, as it is not a specific challenge raised in the course
    of this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State,  I
    should conclude  matters  in  this  appeal  on  such  issues  that  are
    expressly put in issue.

20.  For the reasons I have already set  out  I  find  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to accept the relationship as between  the  claimant  and  his
    brother and to consider that that establishes his Somali  origin.   The
    issue of risk of return was not something that was put onto the  agenda
    in the grounds of appeal.

21.  Consequently the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Davies of the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  in  respect  of  nationality  and  clan
    membership stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 17 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

