

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/05882/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th March 2016                       | On 16th May 2016                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                                     D N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Akther, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by D N a citizen of Albania born 18th February  1984.
    She appeals against the decision of the Respondent made on  20th  March
    2015 to refuse to grant asylum  and  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom by way of directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2  to
    the Immigration Act 1971.  The Appellant appealed against that decision
    and her appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal in August
    2015.  The Secretary of State appealed against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal  and  on  10th  December  2015  having  heard
    submissions, I found that there was a material error  of  law  in  that
    decision and I set it aside with no preserved  findings  of  fact.   My
    reason for doing this was that as was submitted by  the  Respondent  in
    the grounds seeking permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Iqbal had allowed the appeal on the basis  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    single woman with three young children who would be returning alone  to
    Albania.  At the date of the hearing before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Iqbal the clear evidence was that the Appellant was in  a  relationship
    with her partner, father of her three children, a  citizen  of  Kosovo.
    There was no statement from her partner and he did not give evidence at
    the hearing.  There was no information or evidence as to whether or not
    her partner would be able to live in Albania with her.   There  was  no
    evidence of his nationality.  There was no evidence of  his  status  in
    the UK.  There was no  information  about  his  relationship  with  his
    children or about how he would feel if the Appellant had to  return  to
    Albania. There was no information from him as to whether  he  would  go
    with her and if not why not. The Appellant simply said he could not  go
    as he is Kosovan although she did concede he can speak Albanian.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Iqbal failed to consider the reasonableness of  the
    Appellant's partner accompanying her to Albania  and  living  with  her
    there and although I accept that it is arguable that that is irrelevant
    as it is the Appellant  who  would  be  removed  and  it  is  only  her
    situation I am concerned with,   I  did  form  the  impression  that  a
    decision had been made, on  the  advice  of  legal  representatives  or
    otherwise, to leave the Appellant's partner entirely out of the  matter
    which meant that a full picture of the  Appellant's  circumstances  was
    not being given.

 2. Since the Appellant claims to have been a victim of trafficking and  as
    such may be particularly vulnerable an  Anonymity  Direction  has  been
    made.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the  UK  on  15th  October  2012  having  left
    Albania in August that year.  On 8th November 2013 she was referred  to
    the  National  Referral  Mechanism  (NRM)  as  a  potential  victim  of
    trafficking and on 13th June 2014 the Respondent made a  decision  that
    she was not a victim of trafficking.  On 20th March 2015 a decision was
    made to refuse to grant asylum  and  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4.  In summary the Appellant states that she  was  born  and  lived  in  a
    village in the north of Albania.  She went  to  visit  her  brother  in
    Italy in 2011 where she met an Albanian man who I shall refer to as LD.
    He offered to marry her.  Her brother overheard her speaking to LD  and
    so arranged for her to return to Albania to marry someone there.   When
    she got back to Albania she continued to be in contact  with  L  D  and
    eventually ran away, arriving back in Italy on 17th August  2011.   She
    was met by LD at the airport.  He took her to  a  room  on  the  second
    floor of a three-storey building where there were two men who  she  was
    forced to have sex with.  LD threatened to kill her if she did  not  do
    as he said.  She was kept in a house where she worked as a  prostitute.
    She had to have sex with nine or ten men a day.  LD took the money  she
    was given although she did sometimes get  tips.   Sometimes  other  men
    watched.  She then was able to persuade one of her clients to help  her
    escape.  I shall refer to him as K.  On 14th October 2011 K planned her
    escape with a friend who was to drive her away from the house  she  was
    working in.  She jumped out of the window.   She  came  to  the  UK  by
    lorry.  She met a man talking in the Albanian language.  She  told  him
    she had left her husband and fallen out with her family.  She  did  not
    tell him what had happened to her.  They stayed together and have three
    children now.  She claims to have had no contact with her family  since
    she left Albania.

The Decision of the Secretary of State

 5. The  Secretary  of  State  does  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was
    trafficked in Italy by LD.  She found that she  had  been  inconsistent
    with regard to her physical escape from her  traffickers  and  how  she
    kept possession of her passport to enable her to travel.  The Secretary
    of State did not accept that she was able to leave the house by jumping
    out of the window since she had said that she was always watched by  LD
    and the other men in the house.    The Secretary of State  went  on  to
    say that although she did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    trafficked, even if she had so found there would be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for her in Albania.  In any event LD lives in Italy  not  in
    Albania.

Evidence at the hearing

 6. The Appellant provided a statement in response to the  refusal  letter.
    She states that it may be that she could not describe things very  well
    hence the  discrepancies  in  her  evidence.   She  believes  that  the
    interpreter  made  a  lot  of  mistakes  during  the  interview.    The
    interpreter at her screening interview was an Albanian-speaking  person
    from Kosovo who had a Kosovan accent.  She has her own  accent  as  she
    came from a remote area of Albania.  There  was  some  confusion.   Her
    first child was born on 27th August 2012.  She was  not  pregnant  when
    she arrived here.  Her partner AM is the father of her  children.   She
    did not state that she stayed in Italy  for  twelve  months.   She  was
    there  for  two  months.   (This  is  in  response     to   claims   of
    discrepancies in the dates that she allegedly gave).  She says that she
    could not concentrate at the interview because her daughters were  with
    her and they were crying all the time.  She did her best but  may  have
    made some mistakes.  She managed to escape  from  the  house  in  Italy
    because it was the client she was with who helped her escape.  She  was
    not watched when she was with clients.  With regard to her passport she
    said she would not have submitted her passport to the  Home  Office  at
    all if she had had something to hide.  The Respondent did not know  she
    had it.  She used it to travel from Italy to the UK.  She took it  with
    her when she ran away because it was there.  She did not use it on  her
    journey.  She maintains that she would be a victim  of  honour  killing
    because of the shame she has brought on her family.  With regard to her
    current partner, he offered her support and they  fell  in  love.   She
    believes that there is a link between the gang operating in  Italy  and
    the gangs in Albania who traffic women.  There are killings in  Albania
    every day.  There is a great deal of organised crime.  Women  are  seen
    as second class citizens.  She does not believe that she would get  any
    protection.  She would not be able to relocate  because  Albania  is  a
    small country and LD, his gang or her father would be able to find  her
    wherever she went.  In any event her children have to go to school  and
    this would not be possible.

 7. Her children were born on 27th August 2012, 16th August 2013  and  18th
    June 2015.

 8. The Appellant gave oral evidence adopting her statement.

 9. I asked her if she had any information or statement  from  her  partner
    and she said she did not.  She  had  indeed  provided  a  supplementary
    statement  dated  14th  March  2016  in  which  she  states  that   the
    relationship they had was casual.  They were  not  in  a  long-term  or
    committed relationship.  He would come and go as and when he liked  and
    would see her when he liked.  Although she relied on him for  emotional
    support he never reciprocated the  feelings  in  return  and  he  never
    intended that they would live together permanently.  They  had  drifted
    apart over the last six months and gone their separate ways.  He  moved
    out and she no longer lives with him and  the  children.   The  primary
    cause of the separation was financial strain.  He had lost his job  and
    was struggling to support the children.  She goes on  to  say  that  he
    does remain in the children's lives but does not want to be with her in
    a long-term relationship.  In oral evidence she said she had phoned him
    and asked him why he was not coming home.  He told her that he had been
    laid off work and did not want to live with her.  He has given her only
    �100 for the children.  He is  in  dire  circumstances.   He  sees  the
    children once or twice a week.  She was asked if she had asked  him  to
    make a statement for the hearing and she said that she had but he  gave
    her no explanation.  He no longer lives with  her  and  they  have  not
    talked since then.

10. Mr Staunton in cross-examination asked her where her ex-partner is  now
    and she said she does not know.  She has no information.  I asked if he
    has a mobile phone and she said that he does but he changed the number.
     She confirmed to me that she does not have a number to contact him  if
    there is a problem with the children.  She had last seen him last week.
     She said he picks up her two older daughters and goes out for about an
    hour with them and then brings them back.  He does not speak to her  at
    all.  He wants nothing to do with her.  She has no other family in  the
    UK.  Mr Staunton asked her if she has discussed with her ex-partner the
    possibility of her being removed to Albania and her response  was  that
    he had said that he does not care what happens to her, he just wants to
    see his children.  Mr Staunton asked her how he would see the  children
    if she had to go to Albania and her response  was  that  they  had  not
    discussed it.  I asked her if she had discussed it prior  to  the  last
    hearing when they were still together and she said they  had  not.   Mr
    Staunton tried to get her to respond to the question of what  had  been
    discussed with her solicitor and what  her  understanding  was  of  the
    possibility of  returning  to  Albania  and  whether  or  not  she  had
    discussed this with her ex-partner.  She was quite simply not answering
    the questions.   I explained to her that what Mr Staunton was trying to
    say was  that  they  have  three  children  together  and  there  is  a
    possibility that the court would  say  that  she  has  to  go  back  to
    Albania.  She said the discussions they have had is that he is  Kosovan
    and he would not go to Albania.  She said that currently he has no clue
     what is happening.  She said that initially he told  her  he  had  two
    years' leave in the UK but she has never asked him about it since, this
    in response to a question of whether he has a visa to  be  in  the  UK.
    She was clear that her partner is not aware of her circumstances.

11. In his submissions Mr Staunton  said  he  would  rely  on  the  refusal
    letter.  The issue is what the Appellant's relationship is with her ex-
    partner and whether she is credible.  He questioned her assertion  that
    she does not have his mobile phone number.

12. Ms Akther in her submissions said that the couple were together at the
    time of the interview.  The relationship is now over.  She referred  me
    to  paragraphs 15 onwards of the new Country Guidance case  TD  and  AD
    (Trafficked women) CG [2016]  UKUT  92  (IAC)  and  in  particular  the
    references to the mores in  Albania  regarding  unmarried  women.   She
    would be at risk of  being  re-trafficked.   She  referred  me  to  her
    skeleton argument in which she states that  the  Appellant  is  from  a
    strict family background from a remote area of Albania in which  family
    honour is upheld.

Burden and Standard of Proof

13. The burden is on the Appellant to show with regard to the asylum appeal
    that returning him would expose him  to  a  real  risk  of  an  act  of
    persecution for reasons set out in  Regulation  6  of  The  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  With regard to Humanitarian Protection he  would  have  to  show
    substantial grounds for believing that he would face  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm as defined by paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  or
    face a real risk of a breach of his protected human rights.

The current Country guidance

14. The Upper Tribunal having considered at great length a vast  amount  of
    background information and evidence said that what they had  considered
    was the availability or otherwise of a safe internal flight  for  women
    who have been trafficked for the purpose of sexual  exploitation.  They
    said that this involved an assessment of  the  re-integration  services
    offered by the Albanian State, NGOs and civil society organisations  to
    such an individual. They summarised their conclusions as follows:


         i "a) It is not possible to set out a typical profile of trafficked
             women from Albania trafficked women come from all areas of the
             country and from varied social backgrounds.

             b) Much of Albanian  society is governed by a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally. Those  who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable. In extreme cases the close  relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.


         c) Some women are lured to leave Albania  with  false  promises  of
             relationships or work. Others  may  seek  out  traffickers  in
             order to facilitate their departure  from  Albania  and  their
             establishment in  prostitution  abroad.  Although  such  women
             cannot be said to have left Albania against their will,  where
             they have fallen under the  control  of  traffickers  for  the
             purpose of exploitation there is  likely  to  be  considerable
             violence within the relationships and a lack of freedom:  such
             women are victims of trafficking.


         d)  In  the  past  few  years  the  Albanian  government  has  made
             significant efforts to improve its  response  to  trafficking.
             This includes widening the scope  of  legislation,  publishing
             the Standard Operating Procedures, implementing  an  effective
             National Referral Mechanism, appointing a new Anti-trafficking
             Co-ordinator,  and  providing  training  to  law   enforcement
             officials. There is in general a Horvath-standard  sufficiency
             of protection, but it will not be  effective  in  every  case.
             When considering whether or not  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection  for  a  victim  of  trafficking   her   particular
             circumstances must be considered.


         e) There is now in place a reception  and  reintegration  programme
             for victims of trafficking. Returning victims  of  trafficking
             are able to stay in a shelter on arrival, and in 'heavy cases'
             may be able to stay there for  up  to  2  years.  During  this
             initial  period  after  return  victims  of  trafficking   are
             supported and protected. Unless the individual has  particular
             vulnerabilities such as physical or mental health issues, this
             option cannot generally be said to be unreasonable; whether it
             is must be determined on a case by case basis.


         f) Once asked to leave the shelter a victim of trafficking can live
             on her own. In doing so she will face  significant  challenges
             including, but not limited to,  stigma,  isolation,  financial
             hardship and uncertainty, a sense of physical  insecurity  and
             the subjective fear of being found either by their families or
             former traffickers. Some  women  will  have  the  capacity  to
             negotiate these challenges without undue hardship. There  will
             however be victims of trafficking with  characteristics,  such
             as mental illness or psychological scarring, for  whom  living
             alone in these circumstances would not be reasonable.  Whether
             a particular appellant falls into that category will call  for
             a careful assessment of all the circumstances.


         g) Re-trafficking is a reality. Whether that  risk  exists  for  an
             individual claimant will turn in part on the factors that  led
             to the initial trafficking, and on her personal circumstances,
             including her background, age, and her willingness and ability
             to seek help from the authorities. For a proportion of victims
             of trafficking,  their  situations  may  mean  that  they  are
             especially vulnerable to re-trafficking, or being forced  into
             other exploitative situations.

         h)  Trafficked  women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account  alone.  Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such  membership  and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the following:


                      1)       The social status and  economic  standing of
                         her family
                      2)       The level  of  education  of  the  victim of
                         trafficking or her family
                      3)       The victim of trafficking's state of health,
                         particularly her      mental health
                      4)       The presence of an illegitimate child
                      5)       The area of origin
                      6)       Age
                      7)       What support network will be available
My findings

15. I have given careful consideration to all the evidence put before me in
    this case.

16. There is no medical evidence before  me  and  no  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant has mental health or any other medical problems.

17. The Respondent does not accept that the Appellant has been a victim  of
    trafficking. She relied on inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  account
    of her escape from Italy. I have concerns about other  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's account.  I must question for example why LD  waited  until
    the Appellant had returned to Italy in August 2011 before  forcing  her
    into prostitution and why he did this in the knowledge that her brother
    lived not far away and had been responsible for sending her home in  an
    effort to put an end to  their  relationship.   I  note  too  that  the
    Appellant said that on her first visit to Italy in  April  she  met  LD
    about 20 times in the afternoon in the park when she was looking  after
    her nephew. This went on during the month she was there. She  does  not
    say what LD was doing at that time but later said that when  he  forced
    her into prostitution he had lots of girls working for him and  he  was
    rarely not around. He would follow her around the house and  constantly
    check up on her. He was there all the time. That  was  her  explanation
    for not being able to escape.  It may  be  that  he  only  started  his
    'business' after she had returned to Italy but if that is not the  case
    it is unlikely that he would be out in the afternoons  meeting  her  as
    she claims. It was she who phoned him when she returned to Albania. She
    said that she phoned her father when she arrived at LD's house in Italy
    on her return there and he threatened to kill her but there is  nothing
    to suggest that her brother, who clearly lives in the  same  region  of
    Italy as LD, made any effort to find her. There is nothing  to  suggest
    that the Appellant, when she escaped, or indeed  beforehand,  tried  to
    get in touch with her sister who also lived in  Italy.  She  claims  to
    have been forced to have sex with nine or ten men a day and not to have
    been given any money apart from occasional tips.  She claims  that  she
    could not go out. Even over a period of two months this must have  been
    a very traumatic experience for such a young woman.

18. The Appellant claims that when she arrived in the  UK  she  immediately
    started a relationship with AM and their first child was born  on  27th
    August 2012, just over 10 months after arriving here.  Her evidence  at
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was  that  she  and  AM  had
    fallen in love and he looked after her. I note that he attended at  the
    registration of the  births  of  their  three  children  and  that  the
    Appellant's occupation is given as 'full time housewife'. There was  no
    suggestion in  the  discussions  I  had  with  the  Appellant  and  her
    representative at the first hearing before me   in  January  2016  that
    their relationship was anything other than subsisting. We  had  a  long
    discussion about what was required from her partner and she at no point
    suggested he would not co-operate because the relationship was  falling
    apart.  Before me at the resumed hearing the Appellant  said  that  the
    relationship had been falling apart over the last six months.  If  that
    were so I am at a loss to understand why she did not tell  me  that  at
    the first  hearing.    I  have  set  out  above  the  contents  of  her
    supplementary statement and her oral  evidence  before  me.  I  do  not
    accept that evidence.  I do not accept that it was never a  serious  or
    committed relationship. I do not accept that it was 'casual'. She is  a
    young woman who claims to have been forced into prostitution,  to  have
    been held against her will and forced to have sex with 9 or  10  men  a
    day.  I do not accept that having endured what she  claims  and  having
    escaped and come to the UK she would choose to have three children in a
    short space of time in a relationship that she now  claims  was  always
    casual. Clearly her partner supported her emotionally  and  financially
    and indeed that was her evidence before the First-tier.

19. I do not accept that if the relationship is currently as she  says  she
    would not have a phone number for the father of her children.  He  must
    have to arrange to pick the children up. She must know how  to  contact
    him if there   is a problem with one of  the  children.   She  says  he
    comes to the house twice a week to collect the children but they do not
    speak to each other. I said in my previous decision  dealing  with  the
    error of law that I had concluded that either  on  the  advice  of  her
    representative or of her own volition the  Appellant  had  deliberately
    when presenting her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal ignored the  fact
    that she had a partner in the UK. I think too that she has deliberately
    concocted the account she  gave  me  of  the  current  state  of  their
    relationship. She said they had never discussed what  would  happen  if
    she had to return to Albania. She was unable  to  give  a  satisfactory
    response to a question of how her partner, who chooses to take his  two
    older children out twice a week,    would  react  to  the  prospect  of
    losing his children of she were returned. She maintained  her  position
    that he has no idea of her history and that they have  never  discussed
    her case and /or her possible removal from the UK. I do not accept  her
    evidence. They have been together for a long time and  have  had  three
    children. She could have provided a statement from him but did not. She
    claims not to know what his immigration status in the UK is although at
    the beginning of their relationship she got the impression  he  had  no
    status.

20. I have very carefully considered the  evidence  before  me.  I  do  not
    accept the evidence of the Appellant. I do not find her to have been  a
    witness of truth. I do not accept  that  she  is  no  longer  with  her
    partner.  I do not accept that she  was  forced  into  prostitution  in
    Italy. She was not trafficked from Albania. I appreciate that that does
    not mean that she could not have been forced to be a prostitute but for
    the reasons set out above I do not accept that she  was.  I  think  her
    account of that is a fiction. She went to Italy of her own volition and
    I believe she came to the UK of her own volition.

21. I have had a considerable difficulty with this case because it may well
    be argued that in the absence of any evidence from her partner that  he
    will accompany her to Albania the appeal should be  considered  on  the
    basis that she would be a single mother  of  three  children  returning
    alone. Given that her stated position until it became  clear  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal would be likely  to  be  overturned
    was that she lived with the father of her three children, a Kosovan who
    supported her and whom she loved, the onus is on her to show that  that
    relationship no longer subsists. She has failed to do that. The onus is
    on her to show that it would be unreasonable to expect him to accompany
    her and if there are obstacles to him  doing  so  to  show  what  these
    obstacles are. She has failed to do that despite having been given  the
    opportunity to do so. In any event  I  have  found  that  she  has  not
    established that she was a victim of trafficking. She has a sister  and
    other family in Albania and there is no reason  why,  on  the  evidence
    before me, she and her partner cannot make the  necessary  arrangements
    for him to join her in Albania where they can enjoy life as  a  family.
    There is no evidence that he has any right to be in the UK.

22. I have considered the best interests of the children but they are  very
    young and I find that their best interests are  served  by  being  with
    their parents. There need be no interference with their family life and
    any interference with any private  life  that  the  Appellant  and  her
    children have developed in the UK would in all  the  circumstances   be
    proportionate to the need for effective immigration control in the UK.

23. I have considered s. 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 but find that it does not assist the Appellant.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds

The Appellant has not established a right to Humanitarian Protection in  the
UK.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 4th May 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
