
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05668/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham ET               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                             MS THERESA SITHOLE
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman promulgated  on  13  July  2015,  in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on
    16 October 2015.

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 4. The appellant states that she  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  4
    September 2013, using  false  documents  provided  by  an  agent.   She
    applied for asylum on 27 January 2014. The  basis  of  the  appellant's
    asylum case is that she was a television presenter in  Zimbabwe  and  a
    lesbian who was in a long-term relationship with a woman.  When news of
    her sexuality emerged, the appellant had to  go  into  hiding  and  was
    dismissed from  her  employment.  Her  claim  is  that  Zanu  PF  thugs
    kidnapped the appellant, detained her on a farm and threatened to  rape
    her. The farm owner helped her to escape her captors and leave Zimbabwe
    the same day. Since arriving  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  appellant
    formed a relationship with a British citizen male, namely DS, and  they
    had a child on 12 July 2014, namely L. The  appellant  and  DS  are  no
    longer in a relationship, if they ever were.

 5. The Secretary of State  refused  the  application  on  15  March  2015,
    concluding that the appellant's claim to not be attracted  to  men  was
    inconsistent with her claim to have  had  a  relationship  with  a  man
    shortly after arriving in the United Kingdom.  The appellant's claim to
    be well known in Zimbabwe owing to being  a  television  presenter  was
    rejected owing to the lack of any supporting evidence. The  credibility
    of the appellant's claim was described as damaged owing to her delay in
    seeking asylum and use of false documents to enter the United  Kingdom.
    In addition, the  appellant  failed  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM, particularly under the  parent  route,  as  there  was  no
    evidence to support her claim that her child's  father  was  a  British
    citizen.  Consideration was also given to the appellant's private  life
    under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules,  exceptional  circumstances  and
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,  with
    the Secretary of State concluding that the appellant  did  not  qualify
    for a grant of Discretionary Leave to Remain.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  and  indicated  that
    she would be providing a birth certificate  showing  that  her  child's
    father was a British citizen.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant was unrepresented and was  the  only  witness.  The  FTTJ
    found  that  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a  lesbian  or,  as   she
    subsequently claimed, bisexual, was not credible. Nor was  it  accepted
    that she had a high profile in Zimbabwe. The  FTTJ  was  not  satisfied
    that DS  was  the  father  of  L,  notwithstanding  that  a  new  birth
    certificate had been produced which included his name  and  accordingly
    Appendix FM was not met in relation to the parent route.

 8. In considering the appellant's Article 8 claim outside the  Rules,  the
    FTTJ found that L was not a qualifying child, that DS  would  not  play
    any role in L's life and that she  could  accompany  the  appellant  to
    Zimbabwe.

The grounds of appeal

 9. The grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  written  by  the
    appellant, merely asked that her case be looked at again  and  referred
    to an intention to obtain a DNA test. In renewing her application,  the
    appellant referred to a letter before the FTTJ, said to be  written  by
    DS to the Home Office a month before the  appellant's  application  was
    refused, in which he stated that he was L's father. She said  that  she
    had now obtained DNA evidence.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that Upper Tribunal Judge
    McWilliam could not say with certainty that the FTTJ would have reached
    the same conclusion as to L's parentage if he had considered the letter
    from DS. If that evidence were accepted, this would mean that L  was  a
    qualifying child and an assessment of reasonableness would be required.
     The grant of permission was stated to be on this basis alone, with UTJ
    McWilliam finding that the FTTJ made "lawful and  sustainable  findings
    in relation to risk of return" and that the "many  adverse  credibility
    findings made  by  the  judge  (were)  grounded  in  the  evidence  and
    adequately reasoned."

11. The Secretary of State's response of 6 November 2015 indicated that the
    appeal was opposed. It was argued that there was no evidence to suggest
    that the FTTJ would have reached  a  materially  different  finding  on
    paternity on the basis of  a  handwritten  letter  with  no  supporting
    evidence. It was properly open for the FTTJ to find that DS was not the
    father on the basis of the limited evidence before him.

The error of law hearing

12. The appellant, Ms Sithole, attended the hearing. I explained  that  the
    appeal was limited solely to the issue of the parentage  of  her  child
    and that permission had not been granted  in  relation  to  the  FTTJ's
    findings on the asylum aspect of her appeal. When asked to explain  how
    she thought the FTTJ had erred, she stated that the FTTJ was  wrong  to
    say that she had only obtained the letter from DS after the refusal  of
    her application. That letter was written before  her  asylum  interview
    and they had also registered the baby before the said interview.

13. I asked  Ms  Sithole  about  her  reference  to  DNA  evidence  in  her
    application for  permission  to  appeal.  She  told  me  that  she  had
    submitted an original report  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  after  the
    hearing. That report had not made its way to the case file.

14. I was able to see parts, albeit not all, of the DNA report,  which  the
    appellant brought with her to the hearing. Briefly, that  DNA  evidence
    indicated that the father of her child was a Mr Lillywhite. I was  told
    that he was a British citizen.

15. Mr Diwnycz stood by his Rule 24  response.  He  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant had been candid in asserting that someone other than  DS  was
    the father of the child.  He advised me that there was evidence on  the
    Home Office file, which also showed that DS was not the father  of  the
    child.  That evidence consisted of a DNA report dating from April 2015,
    which stated that DS was not the father of the child and a letter  from
    DS to the Home Office in which he requested that his  name  be  removed
    from any parental acknowledgement.   Mr  Diwnycz  explained  that  this
    evidence had not been placed before the FTTJ owing  to  confidentiality
    issues.

16. Mr Diwnycz further argued that the FTTJ did not err in failing to  deal
    with a DNA report, which was not before  him.  If  the  FTTJ  had  this
    report, his decision would have been pronounced more  firmly.  The  new
    evidence bolstered the findings the FTTJ made and the result would have
    been the same.

17. In response, Ms Sithole stated that she did not know  until  after  the
    hearing what the DNA test results were. DS had obtained the DNA  report
    without her knowledge, by way of a home test. She  also  did  not  know
    that he had communicated with  the  Home  Office.  Ms  Sithole  further
    advised me that she  is  in  the  process  of  contacting  the  general
    registry office in order to place the  correct  father's  name  on  the
    birth certificate.

18. At the end of the hearing, I announced that I found no  material  error
    of law in the FTTJ's decision.  While it  was  not  apparent  from  the
    decision and reasons that  the  FTTJ  had  considered  the  handwritten
    letter from DS, which was dated 9  March  2015  and  contained  in  the
    respondent's bundle, I find that any error was not material in view  of
    Ms Sithole's acceptance that DS was not her  child's  father  and  that
    another man was.  It is, of course,  open  to  Ms  Sithole  to  make  a
    further application to the Secretary of  State  based  on  her  current
    circumstances.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.


Signed      Date: 7 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

