
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/05209/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 2 October  2013                     |On 7 October 2013         |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                         MR THAYANANTHAN KATHIRESAN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr. F Shibli, Counsel
For the Respondent:      Mr. D Deller, HOPO


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.      The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 9 February 1983.
    The appellant's asylum appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Napthine in a determination dated 12 July 2013.
2.      The brief facts of the appellant's case are set out at paragraphs 3
    and 4 of the Grounds of Application submitted by Counsel on 24 July
    2014.

3.      The respondent refused the appellant's asylum application on 17 May
    2013 and on the same date issued a reasons for refusal letter.  At
    Annex E1 of the respondent's bundle is a letter from the appellant's
    solicitors to the Home Office dated 23 May 2013 enclosing documents
    from the Magistrates Court in Sri Lanka with translations for the
    respondent's attention.  The documents formed part of the respondent's
    bundle at Annex E2 - E11.  However, there was no consideration of these
    documents by the respondent in the RFRL.  Indeed at page 2 of the
    respondent's bundle, under "Documents", it is stated that the further
    submissions were received too late.

4.      At paragraph 27 of the determination that judge said that he placed
    no reliance upon the documents which were served by the appellant in
    disregard of the directions issued on 17 June 2013.  At paragraph 28 he
    referred to two documents i.e. the letter from Muthusamy Pushparaj, a
    Sri Lankan lawyer and the sworn affidavit from the appellant's father.
    At paragraphs 29 and 30 the judge said he was in no position to assess
    the authenticity of these documents because the respondent had not had
    an opportunity to consider the genuineness or otherwise of the
    documents because of the late service of the documents.

5.      At paragraph 33 the judge said the appellant produced what
    purported to be a translation of a photocopy Sri Lankan Magistrates'
    Court record.  Again the judge said at paragraph 35 that he could not
    place any weight on the document because if it had been served on the
    respondent earlier, the respondent could have made investigations
    concerning the matters mentioned therein, which are said to have taken
    place in 2009 and 2013.  As it is there has been no opportunity for
    anyone to test what is stated in the letter.  The late production of
    the letter and the Magistrates Court record undermined their
    credibility.

5.      Mr. Deller accepted that ground one of the grounds of appeal lodged
    by Counsel disclose an error of law.  The error being that the
    Magistrates' Court record was not served late and that it formed part
    of the respondent's bundle, albeit it was not considered by the
    respondent.

6.      I also find that the judge erred in law in not considering the
    documents because they were submitted late submission and/or because
    the respondent had not had an opportunity to verify the authenticity or
    otherwise of the documents. The judge was required to consider the
    documents and come to his own conclusions.  His failure to do so was an
    error of law.

7.      As the documents form part of the appellant's core claim and they
    have not been considered by the judge, I find that it is appropriate in
    light of paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Directions to remit the
    appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing by a judge
    other than FtTJ Napthine.

DIRECTIONS

1.      The agreed date for the listing of this appeal is 6 December 2013
    at Hatton Cross.

2.      The appellant is required to submit 7 days before the hearing any
    further documents he wishes to rely on at the hearing.





Signed
       Date: 2 October 2013
Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

