
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05700/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 March 2014                              |On 25 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             DELSHAD KADIR AHMAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Turner, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

INTRODUCTION

 1. The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  has  been  granted
    permission to appeal the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pacey.  A reasons challenge had been made to the judge's  finding  that
    the respondent (whom I shall refer to as the claimant) could not obtain
    his own identity document nor obtain replacements in  order  to  enable
    his return to Iraq of which he is a national and where he was born on 1
    July 1985.  The judge concluded that the claimant would be undocumented
    and could not be returned. As a consequence, he would be left in  limbo
    and accordingly the  judge  concluded  the  claimant  must  be  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in order to  ensure  there  would  be  no
    breach of Article 3.  Furthermore she  found  there  would  also  be  a
    breach of the claimant's Article  8  right  to  private  life  if  such
    discretionary leave were not granted.  Although she considered she  did
    not need to consider humanitarian protection and Article 15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive, she explained that were  she  to  do  so,  she
    would take account of the country guidance  decision  in  HM  &  Others
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409.

 2. The claimant who is of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and  from  Kirkuk,  claimed
    asylum on 25 July 2007 after his clandestine arrival  the  same  month.
    According to the Secretary  of  State  he  was  placed  in  immigration
    detention on arrival and absconded on 3 August 2007.  He did not report
    thereafter until  March  2012  unprompted  by  any  procedures  by  the
    Secretary of State.  His asylum screening interview took place the  day
    he claimed.  His substantive asylum interview did not take place  until
    15 May 2012.  According to his asylum screening interview he arrived in
    Turkey from Iraq some 27 days previously.  Although unsure when he left
    Turkey, he thought it was 24 days prior to his interview and arrived in
    France two days thereafter.

 3. At the substantive interview the claimant explained that  he  had  left
    Iraq in February 2007 however he also gave a chronology indicating that
    he had left in November 2006.  In a statement relied on at the hearing,
    he explained that he left Iraq at the beginning of  November  2006  and
    apologised for lying to the immigration authorities.  This was  because
    he had had a very bad experience in Greece and because  he  was  scared
    that he would be sent back there.

 4. The basis of the asylum claim arises out of a fear of a colonel because
    the claimant's brother had eloped with the colonel's  daughter  without
    permission. The claimant believed his brother had  run  away  with  the
    colonel's daughter in September or October 2006.  It was  during  those
    months the  colonel  had  visited  the  family  home  looking  for  the
    claimant's brother and when he did not find him,  told  the  claimant's
    father he would kill all his children.

 5. The Secretary of State did not believe the claimant giving her  reasons
    in a letter dated 16  May  2012.   This  was  largely  because  of  the
    inability of the  claimant  to  give  certain  details.  This  included
    uncertainty over the colonel's name, not remembering  the  actual  date
    when his brother had run away with the colonel's daughter  and  because
    no mention had been made of this fear at the screening  interview  when
    he is stated to have said he had come to the United Kingdom to  have  a
    better life and for his family's life.  The threats  from  the  colonel
    had occurred whilst the claimant was in the KRG area in Iraq  where  he
    had stayed  for  a  week  before  leaving.   Based  on  the  claimant's
    explanation that he had left Iraq in February 2007,  some  five  months
    after the elopement, it was considered this undermined the  credibility
    of the claim.  In his screening interview the claimant had stated  that
    his siblings and parents were living in the family home  in  June  2007
    the month he had last seen them.  The claimant explained  at  interview
    that his parents had reported the colonel to the Iraqi  police  but  he
    did not know the outcome.  The Secretary of State considered this to be
    inconsistent with the claim that the colonel had bought Peshmergas with
    him who are part of the Iraqi police force to raid the house.   Further
    reasons given for disbelieving the claimant related to his  failure  to
    claim asylum in France and his initial denial that he had not  been  in
    Greece despite his fingerprints having been taken.  Regard was also had
    to the claimant having absconded from the immigration authorities.

THE DETERMINATION

 6.  The  claimant  was  cross-examined.   The  judge   recorded   in   her
    determination that the claimant's counsel stated at  the  hearing  that
    the asylum claim would not be pursued and that the issues  for  her  to
    determine  for  whether  he  could   be   lawfully   returned   raising
    consideration of Articles 3 and 8.

 7. The judge further  records  in  her  determination  that  the  claimant
    explained he had last had contact with a family member in 2006 when  he
    telephoned his maternal uncle who told him that his brothers and sister
    and sister-in-law had left Iraq and headed  for  somewhere  in  Europe.
    The claimant had left behind two brothers, a sister  and  his  parents.
    He had not sought to regain contact through friends because he did  not
    want to come to the attention of the immigration  authorities  and  had
    left his ID card in Iraq with his father.

 8. On behalf of the claimant, it was argued that he  is  undocumented  and
    hence  could  not  be  returned.   He   was   therefore   entitled   to
    discretionary  leave  under  the  Home  Office   policy,   chapter   53
    Enforcement Instructions Guidance.  As forced removals to Iraq posed  a
    risk of breach of Article 3, they were suspended.  The SSHD had  failed
    to consider paragraphs 353B and Chapter  53;  the  claimant  could  not
    voluntarily return with a laissez-passer since he had no  ID  card  and
    was not in contact with nor knew the whereabouts of any male members of
    his family.  He would thus remain in the United Kingdom at a real  risk
    of destitution.  Article 8 was argued on the basis that because of  the
    failure by the SSHD either to remove the claimant or grant  him  leave,
    he remained in limbo which amounted to a breach of his protected  right
    to a private life, reliance being placed on R  on  the  application  of
    Abdullah  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  42.   Counsel  for  the  claimant
    supplemented these points that had been  raised in a skeleton  argument
    at the hearing with a submission that the claimant had no access to the
    documents necessary in order to be documented by the Iraqi Embassy.

 9. For the Secretary of State it was argued that for the reasons  set  out
    in the refusal letter the claim was not credible.  Since  that  account
    had not been accepted, he would not be at real risk of serious harm  or
    death including consideration under Article 15(c).  The claimant was of
    Kurdish ethnicity, had family in the KRG and had  previously  relocated
    there an option that remained open to him.  It was argued that it could
    not be confirmed that the claimant had no access to his ID card.

10. In her findings and conclusions the judge set out  her  conclusions  in
    the following respects relevant to the challenge now made.   Under  the
    heading credibility she states:

         "20. The  appellant's  account  was  expressly  stated  not  to  be
             credible in the refusal letter.  Credibility is not,  however,
             a material issue in this appeal given that  the  appellant  is
             not pursuing his asylum claim, save in two related respects  -
             firstly, whether or not he is in possession  of  any  identity
             documents or whether as he claims he left his ID card in  Iraq
             with his father, and secondly whether or not he  is  still  in
             touch with, or could trace, male members  of  his  family  who
             could provide  the  documents  necessary  for  him  to  obtain
             identity documents.

         21.  The fact that the appellant lied in interviews with  the  Home
             Office, as it is specifically conceded he did, should  not  in
             my view lead inextricably to the conclusion that he  has  lied
             about every aspect of his claim.  He  has  explained  that  he
             told untruths because he was afraid of being returned to  Iraq
             and while such an explanation can in no way justify  lying  to
             the authorities, it is to my mind reasonable viewed  from  the
             appellant's perspective.

         22.  Moreover he has not only now admitted that  he  lied  but  has
             chosen to contact the authorities after five  years  in  which
             his whereabouts were unknown to them following his  absconding
             from detention.

         23.  Given this, it is in my view reasonable for the  appellant  to
             have left his identity documents in Iraq  given  that  he  was
             leaving the country clandestinely and under the control of the
             agent.  I accept therefore he has no identity documents."

11. After identifying the issues to be determined, the judge  proceeded  to
    consider the claim under Article 3 as follows:

         "25.  I  therefore  first  consider  Article  3  of  the   European
             Convention on Human Rights on the  basis  of  the  appellant's
             lack of identity documents.

         26.  I consider first if he can reasonably obtain such documents.

         27.  The appellant stated that he last had contact with his  family
             in 2006, seven years ago and that all  but  his  parents  have
             since left the country for unknown destinations  'in  Europe'.
             It is to my mind reasonable that he would seek to maintain  or
             restore contact with those members of his  family  who  stayed
             put, and hence in a settled place, mainly his parents.  He has
             not, however been able to do so.  I accept  as  plausible  his
             explanation that he did not want to endanger friends by making
             enquiries, or indeed himself.  Moreover  given  the  turbulent
             situation in Iraq, it is at least conceivable that his parents
             are no longer in their home and equally that his father  might
             not have retained his son's identity documents, given that  he
             would expect that the latter would not, having fled, return to
             Iraq.

         28.  I therefore accept that he could not obtain his  own  identity
             documents.  The other possibility  would  be  able  to  obtain
             replacements."

12. After directing herself in accordance with MK (documents -  relocation)
    Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00126, the judge concluded at [30]:

         "30. However, in this case the appellant  has,  I  have  found,  no
             family in Iraq, or at least no  family  with  whom  he  is  in
             contact, or  with  whom  he  could  establish  contact.   This
             option, therefore, is in my view not possible for him.

         31.  I note HM & Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012]  UKUT  00409
             (IAC) in which it was held, post MK, that the existence  of  a
             central archive provided  another  way  in  which  a  person's
             identity could be established.  Again, however, this appellant
             has no way of accessing this database from the UK."

THE GROUNDS OF CHALLENGE AND ARGUMENT

13. The grounds of challenge argued that the judge had misdirected  herself
    in law in her Article 8 assessment in failing to have regard to all the
    relevant sections of Immigration Rules.  That failure resulted  in  the
    decision being incomplete and unsustainable.  The second ground  argues
    that the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for  her  finding
    on the claim to have lost contact with his family and not  to  have  an
    identity document.

14. With the claimant having admitted lying to the Secretary of  State  and
    having absconded from detention without contact for five  years,  there
    was nothing credible at all about him and that his actions demonstrated
    he was one who was willing to deceive in order to benefit  himself  and
    only admits to the truth when all his options have been exhausted.

15. At the hearing before me, Mr  Saunders  accepted  that  unless  he  was
    successful on the second ground the claimant would  win.   He  did  not
    advance a perversity challenge but maintained the Secretary of  State's
    view that the judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  for  the  positive
    credibility findings.

16. Mr Turner relied on a  detailed  skeleton  argument,  oral  submissions
    which he then supplemented  with  further  written  submissions  served
    after I had reserved my decision.  In essence he  makes  the  following
    points dealing first with the skeleton argument:

      i) There was no requirement by the  judge  to  consider  the  case  in
         respect  of  the  new  Immigration  Rules   which   were   not   of
         retrospective effect as was clear from  MF  (Nigeria)  [2010]  UKUT
         00393 (IAC).

     ii) With reference to MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 it is incumbent
         upon a decision maker to carry out  a  two  stage  test  where  the
         exceptional circumstances established were that the claimant  could
         not be removed.

    iii) As to the second ground of challenge,  this  was  no  more  than  a
         disagreement, the judge having arrived at a legally sustainable and
         rational decision.

     iv) There was no evidence by the Secretary of State that there was  any
         realistic prospect of the claimant being able to  obtain  a  travel
         document.  The relevant threshold was  whether  it  was  reasonably
         likely someone would be able to return within a  reasonable  period
         of time.

      v) The Secretary of State had not acted with reasonable diligence  and
         expedition.

    And at the hearing,

     vi) The appellant had provided a detailed witness statement, had turned
         up for the hearing and was cross-examined.  It was not unreasonable
         that he did not want to return to Iraq.  What the judge  said  that
         it was reasonable to lie because of the claimant's fear.

    And as set out in the note provided subsequently,

    vii) It was not said that the  facts  had  underpinned  the  claim  were
         untrue merely that the case was being pursued on the basis that the
         claimant was not documented and that this effectively made him  un-
         removable which would place them in breach of his protected rights.

   viii) The judge's finding that he had  accepted  that  he  had  not  been
         truthful had to be seen in this light; it was  not  the  claimant's
         evidence that the entire case was a fabrication but merely are that
         issues raised in [9] are to the statement were relating to the date
         of departure from Iraq.

     ix) The claimant had provided a reasonable explanation why he  had  not
         told the truth about having been in Greece.

DID THE TRIBUNAL ERR IN LAW?

17. The judge explained in [20] that credibility was not a  material  issue
    in the appeal save in two related respects regarding the possession  of
    any identity documents and whether or not he is still in touch with  or
    could trace male members of his family. These were the core issues  she
    was required to decide.  In my view  credibility  remained  a  material
    issue regardless of the asylum claim having been  abandoned  since  the
    basis on which the claimant considered he could no longer make  contact
    arose out of the nature of his departure,  the  events  leading  up  to
    which had been comprehensively challenged.

18. The judge was entitled to express the view in  [21]  that  it  did  not
    inextricably follow from untruths that had been told, the claimant  had
    lied about every aspect of his  claim.   She  refers  to  the  claimant
    having explained he had told untruths because he was  afraid  of  being
    returned to Iraq.  This is not however the explanation given at [9]  of
    the witness statement where he states that the departure dates given in
    the screening interview and the substantive asylum interview  were  not
    correct because he had had a bad experience in Greece and was concerned
    that he would be sent back there.

19.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  the  judge's  reasoning  that   the
    explanation by the claimant was a reasonable one from the "[claimant's]
    perspective".  The task before the judge was not to forgive the lie but
    to make findings of fact.  In  her  conclusion  at  [23]  that  it  was
    reasonable for the appellant to have left his ID documents in  Iraq  as
    he was leaving the country clandestinely under the control of the agent
    appears implicitly to acknowledge the truthfulness of  the  account  on
    which the claimant no longer relied  in  order  to  seek  international
    protection.

20. It appears that at the hearing, the claimant explained  that  his  last
    contact had been with a maternal uncle by telephone  in  2006  who  had
    told him that his siblings and sister-in-law had left Iraq  and  headed
    for somewhere in Europe.  It is  not  clear  why  the  judge  therefore
    considered it reasonable for  the  claimant  to  seek  to  maintain  or
    restore contact with members of family who had stayed put as opposed to
    those who had left.  It may be that this aspect was not  the  focus  of
    any  cross-examination.   More  significantly,  the  judge   does   not
    particularise what the dangers were that the  claimant  considered  his
    friends would encounter by making  enquiries  on  his  behalf  or  what
    dangers were the claimant himself would face in the light of  enquiries
    that could be conducted from the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  no  doubt
    conceivable that the claimant's parents are no longer in their home but
    as it is the claimant's case that he has not  had  contact  with  them,
    there  appears  to  be  no  evidential  basis  for   this   speculative
    possibility.  Without making findings on the pre-flight events, it  was
    not rationally open to the judge to conclude that the claimant's father
    might not have retained his identity documents because his son had fled
    and would not be expected to return.

21. I am not satisfied therefore that  the  judge  has  given  adequate  or
    sufficiently clear reasons for the findings reached that  the  claimant
    could not obtain his own identity document and that he had no family in
    Iraq with whom he is  in  contact  or  with  whom  he  could  establish
    contact. Accordingly I am satisfied that the second ground of challenge
    is made out.  The extent of the error is such that the decision must be
    set aside and remade in its entirety.  As this will involve  a  further
    assessment of the claimant's credibility it  is  appropriate  for  that
    exercise to be undertaken by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey.

22. By way of conclusion therefore the appeal by the Secretary of State  in
    the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    is set aside.  Pursuant to s.12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007, I remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    its reconsideration by a judge of that Tribunal other than FTJ Pacey.

Signed                              Date 24 April 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
