

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05947/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At Field House, on papers                     |Decision Promulgated On      |
|18th October 2016                             |19th October 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                ABOLFAZL [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

        Rule 40 - The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

1.    The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision to  refuse  a
    protection claim.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Handley  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 01 June 2015.

2.    The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal on the ground that  it
    was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to  consider
    material evidence from the Stockton Parish Church.

3.    The appeal was listed for hearing  on  07  March  2016  before  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge  Archer.  The  judge's  note  of  the  proceedings
    indicates that he gave an oral decision at the hearing. He  found  that
    the First-tier Tribunal's failure to consider a piece of evidence  that
    was material to a proper determination of the  appeal  amounted  to  an
    error of law and remitted the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

4.    Unfortunately, the judge  died  before  he  could  prepare  a  written
    decision after the hearing.

5.    Rule 40 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  allows
    the Upper Tribunal to give a decision orally at a hearing.  Rule  40(3)
    states that the Upper Tribunal must  provide  written  reasons  with  a
    decision notice to each party as soon as reasonably  practicable  after
    making  a  decision  which  finally  disposes  of  all  issues  in  the
    proceedings. For obvious reasons it is not possible for a decision  and
    reasons notice to be sent out by the judge in this case.

6.    Rule 40(3) provides  exceptions  to  the  rule  if  the  parties  have
    consented to the Upper Tribunal not giving written reasons.

7.    The overriding objective  contained  in  rule  2  requires  the  Upper
    Tribunal to deal with  cases  fairly  and  justly,  including  avoiding
    delay. Both parties were represented at the hearing and should  have  a
    record of the oral decision given by the judge.

8.    Pursuant to the overriding objective the Upper  Tribunal  proposes  to
    treat this decision as a notice of  decision  confirming  the  decision
    made by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer subject  to  any  objections
    made by the parties within 14 days of the date this decision notice  is
    sent.

9.    If no objections are received after 14 days the  Upper  Tribunal  will
    treat the parties as having consented to the Upper Tribunal not  giving
    written reasons under rule 40(3)(b) and the appeal will be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

Subject to paragraph 8 above

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 18 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




