
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05350/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 25 November 2016                  |On 28 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Rashid [B]
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M D Templeton, of Quinn, Martin & Langan,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is by the SSHD, but the rest of  this  decision  refers  to
    parties as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD sought permission to appeal to the UT on two grounds, but  was
    granted permission only on the second:

         Failure to apply country guidance.

         Having found the appellant to be a Somali Bajuni, the  judge  finds
         that the appellant  is  a  refugee  based  on  membership  of  this
         minority clan. No mention is made of  MOJ  and  others  (return  to
         Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) ... which makes clear
         that there has been a significant change in the relevance  of  clan
         membership in recent years, and minority clan members are no longer
         at risk on that basis alone.

 3. Mr Mullen submitted as  follows.  He  accepted  that  the  respondent's
    refusal letter did not refer to MOJ. The record on file showed that  Mr
    Templeton had made submissions to the FtT based on MOJ. He had no  note
    of relevant submissions  by  the  respondent.  The  judge  cited  other
    country guidance cases to which he did not appear to have been referred
    and which although still listed were rather  dated  and  to  an  extent
    superseded by changes in country conditions in Somalia and by MOJ. Even
    in absence of submissions from the party who later sought to raise  the
    point, it was an error of law for a judge not to apply relevant country
    guidance. There was an absence of findings about  the  consequences  of
    return which went to the essence of the case.  The  matter  required  a
    fairly extensive and complex further consideration of the facts and  so
    could be put right only by a remit to the FtT. The respondent  did  not
    accept that even if the appellant might have to  pass  through  an  IDP
    that he would qualify for protection, being a fit and  able  young  man
    who could be expected to make his own way in Mogadishu.

 4. Mr Templeton said that submissions had  been  made  for  the  appellant
    based on MOJ, but unfortunately these were not reflected or resolved in
    the judge's  decision.  The  judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  at  sub-
    paragraphs 13 (i) and (m) that the appellant had only to establish that
    he is a Somali Bajuni. Mr Templeton  realistically  accepted  that  the
    judge's approach did not reflect country guidance, and that he  was  in
    difficulty in submitting that there was no error of law. He agreed that
    further resolution should be by way of remit to the FtT.  He  submitted
    that in principle the case should go back to Judge  Doyle,  or  at  any
    rate Judge Doyle should not be excluded, because this was not a case of
    revisiting credibility, but of an  objective  assessment  following  on
    from findings not subject to any legal error  and  which  ought  to  be
    preserved. Further consideration would begin from the  conclusion  that
    the appellant is a Somali Bajuni.   It  would  be  an  unnecessary  and
    perhaps a strained exercise to put a different judge in the position of
    taking up the chain of fact-finding and reasoning from that point.

 5. Mr Mullen in reply said that further consideration might raise a series
    of discrete credibility matters, which should not be  resolved  by  the
    same judge whose judgement might be affected by the conclusion  he  had
    previously reached.

 6. I reserved my decision only on the only  remaining  point  in  dispute:
    whether Judge Doyle should be excluded from  further  consideration  of
    the case.

 7. The factual findings of the FtT stand, to the  extent  that  the  Judge
    accepted that the appellant is a Somali Bajuni.

 8. The judge's conclusion that the said finding was decisive is excised.

 9. The FtT is to decide the case afresh from that point, in light  of  any
    further evidence which the FtT may  permit  parties  to  introduce;  by
    reference to the appropriate country guidance;  and  based  on  further
    submissions.

10. This is not a fresh appraisal of credibility, so I see  no  reason  why
    Judge Doyle should not  be  expected  to  complete  the  judicial  task
    involved.  The case should be listed before him for that purpose.   (If
    he is unavailable within a reasonable timescale (three months)  it  may
    be decided by any other judge.)

11. The decision of the FtT errs in law.  It is set  aside,  and  the  case
    remitted to the FtT, to the extent explained above.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]


            18 November 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




