
[pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05913/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 21 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                     SD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a married woman, a citizen if Iran, who was born on 22
    March 1959.  She is now aged 56.  She  appealed  against  the  decision
    made by the respondent to refuse her asylum claim which was made on  28
    March 2013.  The decision which was appealed against was made two years
    later on 23 March 2015 and was the subject  of  an  appeal  which  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer whose determination of 9 October
    2015 is presently under challenge,  leave  having  been  granted  as  a
    result of grounds of appeal that were settled by Mr Gayle.

 2. The broad circumstances of the case are that the appellant  arrived  on
    13 December 2012 under permission that was granted in the form of a two
    year family visit visa which had been issued  on  2  October  2012  and
    which would have expired and has now expired on 2 October 2014.  Events
    however predate the grant  of  that  visit  visa.   Her  son  had  been
    recognised as a refugee on 29 January 2010 in relation to a claim which
    he made following his departure from Iran in 2009.  It is not  disputed
    by the Secretary of State that the son was indeed politically  involved
    and is entitled to recognition as a refugee under the Convention.

 3. The key events in this appeal took place on 4 March 2013.  On that date
    the appellant's husband was involved in a road  traffic  accident.   He
    received serious head injuries and was in a coma.  Nothing that  I  say
    is designed to marginalise or minimise the impact of that life-changing
    event.  It was life-changing not simply for the appellant's husband but
    for the appellant herself whose life was undoubtedly entirely  upturned
    by the accident that unfortunately befell her  husband.   I  sympathise
    both with her husband and with the appellant in the tragic consequences
    of what occurred on that day.  However, according to the judge, it  was
    used as the basis for a claim for asylum.

 4. That asylum claim arose because the appellant alleged that on the  very
    day the accident occurred, in  fact  some  hours  before  the  accident
    according to one account, she received a telephone call from home  that
    the Iranian authorities had ransacked her home and this was as a result
    of interest that was shown, not simply in her husband but in her, which
    was interest arising from her son's accepted  claim  for  asylum.   The
    events of her son's claim arose in 2009 and before.  It was therefore a
    problem with such a claim to explain why it took until 4 March 2013 for
    the authorities to react.  This was doubly  difficult  considering  the
    fact that the appellant herself had  made  some  seven  visits  to  the
    United  Kingdom  between  2005  and  2012  and   had   experienced   no
    difficulties.  It was only, according  to  her,  that  she  experienced
    difficulties when she last departed on 13 or 14 December 2012 that  the
    authorities had become aware of her link with her son.   This  was  the
    basis of the claim that was advanced in the claim for asylum  that  was
    made on 28 March 2013.

 5. It goes without saying  that  in  view  of  the  appellant's  husband's
    hospitalisation on 4 March 2013 and the fact that his mental health has
    subsequently deteriorated that it was wholly  understandable  that  the
    wife would wish to remain with her son  and  that  her  husband  should
    continue to have the care that he  currently  receives  in  the  United
    Kingdom following that traumatic  injury.   He  was  at  one  stage  so
    seriously injured and his behaviour became so irrational that he was in
    fact sectioned under the Mental Health Act but currently  he  is  under
    the care of a care home in the United Kingdom.  The medical evidence is
    clear that he is suffering from dementia and he will never recover.  He
    needs constant care.

 6. There is of course an implausibility about  the  coincidence  that  the
    claim for asylum should be made  on  the  very  day  that  the  husband
    received his injuries but it is not a  question  of  plausibility  with
    which I am concerned.  It is whether or not the judge reached a  number
    of sustainable conclusions on whether this claim was credible.  She did
    not believe it.   She  rejected  this  as  a  genuine  claim  that  the
    appellant would face difficulties on return to Iran.  Needless to  say,
    one of the principal considerations was that,  if  there  were  such  a
    risk, then it was according to the judge incredible that it would  have
    arisen some four years after the events that caused her  son  to  flee.
    That featured heavily in the judge's reasoning.

 7. In the course of the determination the judge set out in  paragraphs  61
    to 72 a number of reasons why she did not  believe  the  account.   One
    method  of  determining  this  appeal  is  to  look  broadly  at  those
    conclusions and simply say  as  I  find  that  they  were  sustainable.
    Inevitably some may be stronger than  others.   There  may  even  be  a
    mistake in one such paragraph but broadly it was open to the  judge  on
    the material before her to reject the account provided by the appellant
    as to the risks she faced on the basis of  the  judge  simply  did  not
    believe it.  That was a finding that was  properly  open  to  her.   It
    would have been permissible for me simply to say  that  the  challenges
    made in the grounds of appeal are no more than  disagreement.   However
    out of deference to the detailed grounds of appeal and the  submissions
    that were made by Mr Gayle. I am going to deal with each of the grounds
    in turn.

 8. There is however one general point which is the  extent  to  which  the
    judge was required  to  put  her  concerns  about  credibility  to  the
    appellant during the course of her evidence.  The  challenge  which  is
    made on behalf of the appellant by Mr Gayle is in my judgment  answered
    by the sensible approach adopted by the Court of Appeal in the case  of
    Nageshwaran [2002] EWCA Civ 173 where distinctions  are  drawn  between
    those cases where the appellant, in order to avoid a charge that he  is
    not being dealt with fairly, should be confronted with the challenge to
    credibility and those cases where no such duty arises.   In  particular
    the Court of Appeal adopted the realistic approach that credibility was
    a matter which was not simply determined during the continuance of  the
    hearing but is often a matter which  arises  when  the  judge  has  the
    ability to consider the evidence and whether the claim  is  or  is  not
    credible.  In such circumstances it is not feasible for  the  judge  to
    recall the parties and put the matters that trouble him or her  to  the
    witness so that an answer can be provided.  I am satisfied that in this
    case the issues which were taken against the appellant were issues that
    the judge was not required to explore fully at the hearing and  to  put
    the appellant on notice and ask for her comments in  relation  to  each
    one of them.  I now turn  to  the  various  paragraphs  which  are  the
    subject of complaint.

 9. There was an issue as to whether the appellant herself was aware of her
    son's political activities.  This was not central to  the  case  itself
    but nevertheless there was evidence that was provided  in  relation  to
    it.  The appellant said that she was unaware  of  her  son's  political
    activity and this account was dealt with by her son who gave  evidence.
    He said that he had not informed his mother of his political activities
    but she would have been aware of them living in  the  same  house.   He
    gave evidence that she was aware of those activities to the  extent  of
    him taking part in demonstrations; leaflets being around the house  and
    length of time this continued for.  This could have had a part  in  her
    knowing about it.  The judge was entitled in my  judgment  to  conclude
    that his evidence was that circumstances in the house led her  to  know
    that he was involved in political activity and that was contradicted by
    the appellant's account that she did not know.

10. It was stated in paragraph 63 that one of the reasons  that  the  judge
    took into  account  was  that  the  appellant  did  not  encounter  any
    difficulties with the Iranian authorities prior to her son leaving Iran
    sometime in 2009.

11. There was a further discrepancy according to  the  judge  and  this  is
    referred to in paragraphs 63 to 65 in relation to whether  or  not  her
    husband had  been  arrested  on  one  or  two  occasions.   There  were
    different versions of that in the evidence.  It was a matter  that  the
    judge could take into account  and  she  did  so.   In  particular  she
    referred in paragraph 64 to the fact that the appellant's son  did  not
    make reference  to  a  second  claim  of  arrest.   That  was  not  the
    appellant's account which was that her husband had been arrested on two
    occasions.  It does not matter whether this was central to the case  or
    not, it was open to the judge to find that the evidence about what  had
    occurred to her husband was the subject of inconsistent accounts.

12. There was then a further inconsistency which was recorded in  paragraph
    65 in relation to whether or not the father of her daughter-in-law  had
    died as a result of the arrest of  her  daughter  and  her  husband  or
    whether it had taken place as a result of her father trying  to  secure
    her escape from Iran.  That,  too,  was  the  subject  of  inconsistent
    pieces of evidence.  The death certificate was dated  30  October  2009
    whereas the arrest was claimed to have taken  place  sometime  in  July
    2009 and accordingly it was open to the judge  to  determine  that  the
    appellant would have known that the cause of the death was  either  the
    arrest in July 2009 or events which subsequently transpired.

13. In paragraph 66 the judge deals with the claim that was  advanced  that
    the appellant and her husband had been released as a  result  of  their
    giving guarantees as to their son's  good  behaviour.   The  difficulty
    that the judge felt in relation to this evidence was that although  the
    son left in 2009 there were no problems until 2012,  according  to  the
    appellant.  There was no explanation that the judge accepted as to  the
    delay in  interest  shown  by  the  authorities.   The  judge  properly
    reasoned that if the son and daughter-in-law did  not  return  as  they
    were required to do if the appellant's evidence was truthful, there  is
    no explanation why the appellant and her husband were not  called  upon
    to make good the guarantee prior to December 2012.  The  appellant  had
    explained that this was because she had travelled under  her  own  name
    and that the authorities would not therefore have realised that she was
    travelling  (even  though  she  was  a  guarantor  in  relation  to  an
    obligation with which she had failed to comply) but the judge  did  not
    accept that this was the case.

14. Paragraphs 66 and 69 deal with the credibility of the evidence provided
    by the appellant that they had guaranteed their  son  and  daughter-in-
    law's return to Iran.

15. That was also supported by the judge's reasoning  in  paragraph  67  in
    that curiously, (and  indeed  as  the  judge  found,  incredibly),  the
    appellant's  account  was  not  that  she  and  her  husband  had  been
    threatened with any adverse consequences if they failed to comply  with
    the guarantee that they had given.  That was not the evidence that  she
    provided in answer to question 88 of the asylum interview.  Instead she
    said "No they did not, just they told us to bring our son and daughter-
    in-law back with us.  They said if they come back we will  exempt  them
    from what activity they have done.  Pardon  them".   The  judge,  quite
    properly in my judgment, did not accept that this was a likely response
    on the part of the Iranian  authorities  if  the  appellant's  son  was
    genuinely somebody  who  opposed  the  state.   Whilst  of  course  the
    appellant herself could not speak for the Iranian authorities,  it  was
    open to the judge to reject her evidence about the position adopted  by
    the Iranian authorities as a result of the answer that she  had  given;
    an answer which was thoroughly implausible and,  as  the  judge  found,
    incredible.

16. In paragraph 68 the judge then dealt head on with  the  fact  that  the
    Iranian authorities did nothing  between  2009  and  2013  and  it  was
    therefore not credible that suddenly they would  show  an  interest  in
    2013 as the appellant claimed, coincidentally happening at or nearly at
    the same date as the husband's accident.  It is  undoubtedly  the  case
    that the judge was fully entitled to treat that as an important  factor
    as to whether it was credible.

17. The judge continues in paragraph 69 dealing with the seven visits  that
    the appellant had made between 2005 and 2012.  The explanation that the
    appellant had provided was  that  her  husband's  family  name  on  his
    passport was the same as her son.  She herself had a different name  on
    her passport.  However the judge provided four separate reasons why  he
    rejected that account as credible.  Those are set out in detail on page
    13 of the determination and in each case they are findings  where  were
    properly open to the judge although in each case they are challenged by
    the grounds of appeal.

18. In  paragraph  70  the  judge  continues  to  analyse  the  appellant's
    explanation for not having claimed asylum upon arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 13 December 2012 if  she  claims  she  had  had  experienced
    difficulties before then.  Her explanation was that she hoped that  the
    authorities would have forgotten about the difficulties by the time she
    returned.  That is a classic example of a piece of evidence that it  is
    for the judge to make findings on.  She heard the witnesses.  She heard
    the explanation.  It was entirely a matter for her  to  decide  whether
    she believed it.  It is impossible to say as a matter of law  that  the
    judge was required to accept the appellant's explanation.  She did  not
    do so.  It cannot possibly be argued that she was  acting  irrationally
    or unlawfully in refusing to accept that explanation and indeed finding
    that it was not credible.

19. Further credibility findings were made in  relation  to  the  telephone
    call that she claimed the authorities made to her daughter's telephone.
     Once again that was factored into her eventual determination that this
    asylum claim was not credible.  In paragraph 72 she speaks of the  raid
    that took place and which prompted,  according  to  her  evidence,  the
    claim for asylum that was made on 28 March  2013.   In  particular  she
    refers to the fact that the appellant's evidence had been  inconsistent
    as to when this crucial telephone call had taken place.  In one part of
    the evidence she says that it was an event that took place on the  very
    day of her husband's accident.  On another occasion she  said  that  it
    had taken place four days before the accident.  It  is  said  that  the
    judge in making this adverse finding (and indeed others) failed to take
    into account the fact that the appellant was suffering from the  trauma
    of her husband's illness and therefore the  discrepancies  should  have
    carried less weight.  It is of course axiomatic in any asylum  case  or
    indeed in any case which requires a judgment to be made on the evidence
    that a judge must give due consideration to the  level  of  experience,
    understanding and intellectual capacity of a witness  as  well  as  her
    emotional state.  There is no obligation upon the part  of  a  decision
    maker to make in each case  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  appellant's
    ability to provide accurate evidence. It was not a requirement of  this
    judge to provide additional reasons why, notwithstanding  her  age  and
    the emotional trauma that she had obviously been through,  he  did  not
    accept her account as being true.  It was perfectly open to  the  judge
    to conclude that in this case, as in others, that she  did  not  accept
    the evidence of the appellant that, notwithstanding  her  own  frailty,
    the answers that she provided were not credible.

20. In subparagraph (ii) of paragraph 72  the  judge  refers  to  what  may
    appear to be a relatively minor matter but it was her  claim  that  the
    documentation had been taken from their home in the course of the  raid
    whilst at another stage in cross-examination she said that  there  were
    no documents to be found and therefore no  documentation  had  in  fact
    been taken.  This was a clear inconsistency and it was  one  which  the
    judge was entitled to rely upon.

21. For my part I place no weight on  what  the  judge  said  in  paragraph
    72(iii) which is a matter that concerns whether or not  the  amendments
    to the appellant's flight plan was altered prior to or after  the  raid
    took place on their home.  On the face of it, it would seem to me  that
    the judge may well have got it wrong but it was a minor matter  and  it
    cannot upset the other findings that were made.

22. In each of the matters to which I have  referred  in  some  detail  the
    challenge made is that the findings were wrong but in my judgment  they
    were findings which were properly open to the  judge.   She  was  quite
    entitled to reach the conclusion that  overall  the  claim  was  not  a
    credible claim.  Inevitably that  was  a  decision  taken  against  the
    background to which I have referred of a claim made late  and  arising,
    so it is said, on the very day that the appellant's husband suffered  a
    tragic road traffic accident.  In those  circumstances  I  dismiss  the
    appeal.  It was open to the judge to reach the conclusion that she  did
    and her determination shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appellant's appeal is dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
