
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05505/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  20th September 2013                       |On 30th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                    [G K]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Poynor, Counsel, instructed by Hammersmith &
                    Fulham Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer

Interpreter:

Ms Jocelyne Ngassa, in the Lingala language

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of the DRC born on [ ] 1962. She  arrived
       in the UK on 5th January 2007. On 24th March 2007 she  travelled  to
       Belfast on a false passport and was arrested,  and  claimed  asylum.
       She had her full asylum interview on 24th June 2010, and was refused
       asylum by the respondent on 21st July 2010. She  appealed,  and  her
       appeal was dismissed on all grounds by Immigration Judge Wallace  in
       a determination promulgated on 6th  September  2010.  The  appellant
       made a fresh asylum claim on 7th March  2011.  The  respondent  once
       again refused the appellant but accepted she was entitled to  appeal
       this decision on 16th May 2012. Her appeal against the fresh  asylum
       decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Balmain  in  a
       determination promulgated on  the  30th  July  2012.  The  appellant
       appealed to the Upper Tribunal, and an error of  law  was  found  by
       Upper Tribunal Judge Storey in a decision dated 22nd February  2013.
       This determination is appended as annex  A  to  this  determination.
       The determination of Judge Balmain was set aside.

    2. The matter came to me pursuant to a transfer order  to  re-make  the
       decision  de  novo.  The  appellant  confirmed  she  understood  the
       interpreter. Ms Poynor provided evidence  that  due  to  High  Court
       litigation that there were currently no removals to  the  Democratic
       Republic of Congo, and that this was likely to  be  the  case  until
       2014.

Evidence

    3. The appellant confirmed her name and provided her new  address.  She
       adopted her four witness statements (dated 29th July 2010, 3rd March
       2011, 3rd July 2012 and 31st May 2013 updated in July 2013)  as  her
       evidence. She confirmed that they were  true  to  the  best  of  her
       knowledge and belief.

    4. In summary in her statement's the appellant's claim is  as  follows.
       The appellant has a total of eight sisters and one brother living in
       the  DRC.   The  appellant  had  a  good  education,   and   studied
       accountancy at university. She worked for a company called [P]  from
       1986 to 2006 when she was forced to flee to the UK. She started as a
       secretary and became treasurer of what was the [P] group by the time
       she left the DRC. The appellant married and three  children  in  the
       DRC. She also took responsibility for her brother's two children and
       brought them up as her own. Her husband died in a  car  accident  in
       1999, and she brought her five children up alone from this time.

    5. From 2003 the appellant became a member of  an  organisation  called
       League of  Voters  (Ligue  des  Electeurs),  an  organisation  which
       challenged corruption and wanted more rights  for  the  people.  She
       attended meetings (particularly women's groups)  and  worked  as  an
       election  observer  for  this  NGO.  She  has  provided  documentary
       evidence of this work including her membership  card  and  a  letter
       from the vice president, Mr Sabin Banza, dated 19th  December  2006.
       She has also indicated that she knows [N], former president of  this
       organisation who now has refugee status and resides with his  family
       in Brussels. He now works for the International Federation of  Human
       Rights.

    6. On 26th October 2006 the appellant applied for  and  was  granted  a
       visit visa to come to the UK before  she  had  any  problems  there.
       She had a good job, money and wanted to travel. The  appellant  gave
       the impression on the visa application form  that  her  husband  was
       still alive as she believed it was difficult to obtain a visa if you
       did not do this.

    7. On 29th October 2006 the appellant witnessed massive  fraud  in  the
       second round of elections by the supporters of Mr Joseph Kabila. Her
       two fellow observers had taken money  from  the  Kabila  party.  The
       appellant was offered a bribe of 1000 US dollars by Francis Kalombo,
       a powerful person in Kabila's party whom  the  appellant  recognised
       from the television, to ensure that Kabila got more votes than Bemba
       (his opponent) at her polling  station.  There  was  footage  of  Mr
       Kalombo bribing people shown on the television, and everyone knew he
       was doing it. The appellant refused to take the  bribe,  and  called
       the vice president of her NGO, the League of Voters, Mr Sabin Banza.
       A complaint was lodged by Mr Banza; and the appellant was  told  not
       to worry but that she might have to give evidence before a tribunal.



    8. On the way home that night the appellant was stopped  by  the  armed
       soldiers of the presidential guard (who had been with Mr Kalombo) as
       she left the polling station. They found her voting calculations  in
       her bag and retained it. They were also threatening.  The  appellant
       called Mr Banza when she got home, and he said not to worry and  the
       matter would go to a tribunal.

    9. On 30th October 2006 the appellant went to  work  as  normal.  After
       work she took a taxi home, and sensed that a car was  following  her
       taxi. She got out of taxi, and  was  kidnapped  by  four  men  in  a
       Peugeot car with  blacked  out  windows.  She  was  hand-cuffed  and
       blindfolded and taken straight to  a  detention  centre,  which  she
       understood was Camp Tshatshi, a political  prisoner  camp.  She  was
       told she would be held there until "they made their  decision",  and
       understood she was likely to be killed.

   10. She was held in a cell with no light. There were about six to  eight
       women in the cell, and no toilet.  The appellant was severely beaten
       and not given food or water whilst in the cell. She was held in  the
       cell for a number of days and became disorientated. Whilst there the
       appellant was taken with another women to another cell and raped  by
       two soldiers. She finds it difficult to recall what happened to  her
       in Camp Tshatshi because she was tortured, and it brings  back  "bad
       memories".  Whilst she was in the cell, a guard asked her if she was
       related to a man who worked as a guard to the colonel  who  had  the
       same name as her. She said he was her cousin. Her cousin came to see
       her in the cell but said he could not help her except may be to  get
       her moved to another camp or get her  seen  by  the  doctor  at  the
       surgery. With persuasion from the cousin the leader  of  the  guards
       agreed to let the appellant go to the doctor's surgery.

   11. At the medical facility the appellant  waited  to  see  the  doctor.
       Whilst she was waiting the guards came and went,  going  outside  to
       smoke. At 5pm the appellant saw a group of women, and one gave her a
       piece of material (a pajne) to cover herself as she was shaking with
       cold. The women were leaving the surgery so the appellant  made  the
       decision to join them when her guards were not there. She then  went
       around the back of the surgery and  climbed  over  a  concrete  wall
       taller than herself; fled over a piece of land used  as  a  shooting
       range in the day; and escaped from the detention centre. She was  in
       a poor medical condition, but she managed to do this despite feeling
       extremely unwell and weak.

   12. The appellant escaped from camp Tshatshi on 5th November  2006.  She
       saw a Catholic church, St Cyprien, and claimed refuge there for  two
       days. She then made contact with Mr Banza, who took her to a medical
       facility where she remained for two weeks  receiving  treatment  for
       the beatings, rape and stitches to her face and foot, which she  had
       hurt getting over the wall. Mr Sabin Banza  has  provided  a  letter
       dated December 2006 regarding what happened to the  appellant  which
       is based on the account she gave to him and which he wrote  down  at
       this point. It is for  this  reason  his  account  is  so  precisely
       similar to her own, and contains things that only she observed first
       hand. The letter from Mr Banza was sent  to  the  appellant  by  the
       League of Voters when she was in Belfast. After her escape from camp
       Tshatshi her house was raided and one of her son's was  beaten.  The
       authorities left a "wanted notice", to say they were looking for the
       appellant. At this point the appellant's sister took the appellant's
       children,  and  also  the  appellant's  documents   (including   her
       passport) to her house.

   13. The appellant went to stay with a cousin in Kingasani to  await  the
       outcome of the elections. During this period the appellant was  very
       careful about  her  movements,  and  remained  in  hiding  from  the
       authorities. The appellant did not return to work. The appellant was
       called one day in January 2007 on her mobile phone whilst out of her
       cousin's home and told not to come  home  as  the  authorities  were
       looking for her.

   14. The appellant went to stay with a friend in Kingasani, and called Mr
       Banza for help leaving the DRC as she  was  unsafe  to  remain.   Mr
       Banza collected the appellant's passport from her sister  and  found
       an agent. The appellant provided Mr Banza  with  $5000  to  pay  the
       agent.

   15. On 4th January 2007 the appellant left the DRC on her  own  passport
       with a valid visa but with the assistance of an agent to go  through
       immigration controls. The agent used bribery and corruption to allow
       the appellant through immigration  control.  She  was  able  to  get
       straight on the plane without having her passport checked. She  flew
       to Ethiopia, spent the night there, and then boarded  another  plane
       and arrived in the UK on 5th January 2007.  A friend of  Mr  Banza's
       ([A]) met the appellant at Heathrow,  she  stayed  one  night  in  a
       hostel, then a week with a lady from  the  DRC  and  then  in  other
       places for a period of two months.

   16. In the UK she was advised by the friend of Mr Banza in  London  that
       she could not claim asylum as she  had  visa  for  the  UK.  So  the
       appellant paid him to provide her  with  a  false  Belgian  identity
       document and a ticket to the Republic of Ireland, and she  travelled
       intending to claim asylum there. She remained in touch with [A]  for
       a while, and he told her Mr Banza had died, but she has  since  lost
       his number.

   17. On 24th March 2007 the appellant arrived in Belfast airport and  was
       arrested for having a false instrument: she formally claimed  asylum
       on 25th March 2007. She was very distressed, and  attempted  suicide
       with a bed sheet in police custody. She was sentenced to a  term  of
       imprisonment for travelling on a false  document.  She  remained  in
       Belfast for two and a half years. She told her lawyer she  had  been
       raped, and he told the Home  Office.  She  had  therapy  with  Lorna
       Kavanagh at the Family Trauma  Centre.  The  appellant  returned  to
       London as she needed more help than was available  in  Belfast.  The
       appellant made contact with Daniel at the Notre Dame Refugee Centre.
       The Notre Dame Refugee Centre dealt with the appellant's case for  a
       while as her solicitor in Belfast left  the  country.  She  went  to
       Birmingham in 2009, and was sent to Scotland in 2010. She  told  her
       lawyer in Scotland she had been sexually abused in  custody  but  he
       said she had to speak to a specialist organisation about  this,  and
       she was referred by Daniel to the Medical Foundation.

   18. The appellant's asylum interview took place on 24th June  2010.  She
       found this very traumatic and there were issues with the interpreter
       who was Spanish although she spoke  in  French.  At  points  in  the
       interview record it says "silence" which was because  the  appellant
       was crying. The appellant found it difficult to explain her  history
       to the male interviewer.   She  obtained  some  of  her  documentary
       evidence after this interview as her lawyer explained to her at this
       stage it was important to do this, although the  letter  from  Sabin
       Banza had been sent to her in the UK in 2008. The letter from  Sabin
       Banza contained information from the appellant because she  reported
       to the organisation and to him after she was detained and  told  him
       what had happened to her.

   19. The appellant believes she will be  arrested  and  killed  by  those
       loyal to Joseph Kabila if she  is  returned  to  the  DRC.  She  has
       received, and provided to the Home Office, the wanted notice  served
       on her family. Francis Kalombo is still in power in the DRC. Further
       her leader, Mr Banza, has died in suspicious circumstances, and  the
       former leader [N] is a  refugee  in  Belgium.  Those  who  stand  up
       against government in the DRC are still killed, and women are  still
       abused. The appellant speaks to her sister in Kinshasa about once  a
       month, and has also spoken to her oldest  child  since  leaving  the
       DRC. She does not want to create problems  for  them  by  contacting
       them too often.

   20.  The appellant does not claim asylum on the  basis  of  her  medical
       problems,  but  submits  medical  evidence  from  her  GP,  from   a
       consultant psychiatrist (Dr Hajioff) and from Ms  Barbara  Gehrells,
       Notre Dame Refugee Centre counsellor, in support of her claim.  This
       evidence shows that she suffers from post traumatic stress disorder.
       The evidence also shows that the appellant  receives  medication  to
       treat diabetes, HIV and is on antidepressant  medication.   She  was
       very shocked by her HIV diagnosis. It came about  because  she  felt
       unwell, collapsed at her GP surgery  in  2010  after  receiving  her
       asylum refusal and was taken to hospital when she was diagnosed with
       TB and HIV. The appellant is an educated woman who knows  to  use  a
       condom if she has sex, and therefore  believes  she  contracted  HIV
       because of being raped. It will be an additional problem  to  return
       to Congo with HIV as she would not  be  able  to  live  secretly  in
       hiding trying  to  escape  her  political  persecutors  and  receive
       treatment for HIV.

   21. The appellant has also integrated herself into the community in  the
       UK. She has been a member of various churches in  the  UK,  she  has
       worked whilst she had work permission and studied. She has  provided
       evidence of this, along with letters from  friends  and  a  petition
       supporting her being able to remain in the UK.

   22. The appellant is also a member of two DRC political organisations in
       the UK, namely Apareco and Congo Support, which she joined  in  2010
       and 2009 respectively. She  joined  these  organisations  out  of  a
       genuine belief in changing DRC politics. She believes that  the  DRC
       authorities will be aware of these activities, particularly  as  her
       photo can be seen on the internet and as the DRC  is  known  to  use
       spies  to  watch  UK  political  meetings  and  demonstrations.  The
       appellant has supplied letters from these two organisations.

   23. In cross-examination the appellant added the following. She said she
       had originally planned to visit the UK to see a friend. She knew she
       needed to be a married woman to get a visa. She had got other  visas
       to travel whilst she had been living with her husband. Her  original
       plan was to return to the DRC to her home, good life and job  there.
       The wanted notice document had come to her in the UK via DHL. It had
       been sent by Mr Banza as proof for her case. She had shown it to her
       original solicitors - Hamilton - but they had not  sent  it  to  the
       Home Office, or put it in evidence to the Tribunal before the  first
       Immigration Judge.  The  document  was  then  shown  to  the  second
       solicitor - Fadiga & Co - who sent it to the Home  Office.  She  was
       unaware of any complaint about the first  solicitor.  The  appellant
       speaks occasionally to her sister who cares for  her  children.  She
       does not know much about how they survive, or whether  her  children
       are in school. She knows that her sister studied but is not able  to
       find a job. When she was in the DRC her children went to  school  as
       she paid for their tuition. They had a good life at that  time.  The
       appellant does not like to ask her sister about  their  difficulties
       as she cannot offer any support. The appellant  does  not  currently
       work as  she  has  no  work  permission,  and  because  she  is  too
       depressed. She is more stressed  now  than  in  the  past  when  she
       worked.

   24. Ms Barbara Gehrels attended the Tribunal and gave evidence  for  the
       appellant. She confirmed her name and her work address at the  Notre
       Dame Refugee Centre. She confirmed that she adopts her three letters
       submitted in support of the appellant  as  her  evidence.  In  these
       documents she sets out her full curriculum  vitae  which  shows  she
       holds an advanced diploma in therapeutic counselling. She has worked
       for the Notre Dame  Refugee  Centre  since  February  2007.  In  her
       letters she sets out also that she is fluent in French and  Swahili,
       and has lived and worked in Kenya. The appellant  has  presented  to
       her as an asylum seeker from the DRC who is deeply traumatised  with
       typical  symptoms  of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder   (numbness,
       paranoia, chronic headaches, lack of  concentration,  hyper-arousal,
       high anxiety, nightmares,  and  insomnia).  In  2009  the  appellant
       provided a history of  persecution  and  ill-treatment  in  the  DRC
       including imprisonment and rape.  She  was  initially  reluctant  to
       speak of her experiences  in  prison  because  she  felt  they  were
       shameful because of the enormous stigma attached to rape victims  in
       the DRC.  The appellant still finds it painful to  speak  about  the
       rapes. In Ms Gehrels' opinion the appellant is  extremely  depressed
       and vulnerable with frequent suicidal thoughts.  She  confirms  that
       after being homeless and sleeping  rough  she  was  hospitalised  in
       December 2010 and tested positive for TB  and  HIV.   The  prolonged
       uncertainty over her  legal  status  has  made  the  appellant  more
       insecure and vulnerable.  In September 2013 Ms  Gehrels  re-assessed
       the appellant and found her to be still  suffering  from  acute  and
       chronic PTSD. She still assesses the appellant as highly vulnerable.
       The counselling sessions she provides to the appellant are  to  help
       her cope with  the  symptoms  of  trauma,  and  her  depression  and
       anxiety. She cannot hope to recover from the trauma of her rape  and
       violence whilst her immigration status  is  insecure.  Being  street
       homeless in 2009, attending Tribunal hearings, and  the  appellant's
       physical ill-health have all had a large and negative impact on  the
       appellant's mental health.

   25. In cross-examination Ms Gehrels  explained  that  her  diagnosis  of
       PTSD for the appellant was formed on the basis of her own  work  but
       also on the basis of  other  medical  evidence,  for  instance  from
       Freedom from Torture (formerly the Medical Foundation).  Ms  Gehrels
       explained that she works in a drop-in environment  so  has  referred
       the appellant for in-depth counselling with other organisations such
       as Freedom from Torture and a rape  counselling  centre  in  Kentish
       town. She sees her role as containing the situation and helping  the
       appellant to cope. She explained that she does  make  a  credibility
       assessment of clients. She looked at how clients  presented  in  the
       sense of non-verbal signs of trauma such as  confusion,  discomfort,
       chronic aches and  pains.  She  believed  as  a  trained,  listening
       therapist that it would become apparent if a client was not genuine.
       If there was dissonance she would challenge the client  and  explore
       the issue. It was her job  to  question  any  gaps  in  the  history
       provided to see  if  the  client  was  credible,  and  to  challenge
       anything inconsistent and incongruent. She said  that  she  accepted
       that the appellant's separation from her home country and  children,
       her detention in the UK, her homelessness in the UK and diagnosis of
       TB and HIV had all made, and continue  to  make,  recover  extremely
       difficult for her, but she did not believe that  these  things  were
       the initial trigger for her PTSD. She felt there was strong  medical
       evidence supporting the appellant's rape and detention in the DRC.

   26. Ms Gehrels explained that she had not read  the  2010  determination
       but she had attended the hearing in 2012,  and  she  had  read  that
       determination which summarised the 2010 findings. She  had  attended
       all the appellant's hearings  since  2012.  She  had  also  attended
       hearings  with  other  clients.  She  said  there  was  a   lot   of
       psychological literature and studies, for instance one  produced  by
       Kings College, that showed that it was difficult for rape clients to
       be accurate in their evidence  after  trauma.  Giving  evidence  was
       difficult  because  people  shut  down  when   reminded   of   their
       experiences; were intimidated; and because of the stigma  and  shame
       attached to being a rape victim especially for those from Africa.

   27. In re-examination Ms Gehrels said that  changing  country  could  be
       traumatic but being in prison and experiencing  torture  produced  a
       different level of symptoms. In her opinion  there  was  significant
       medical evidence which showed this appellant had been raped. She had
       read the Women Against Rape report regarding the appellant, and seen
       that of Dr Hajioff at the 2012 hearing.

 Submissions

   28. Ms Everett submitted that she relied upon the refusal letter of 24th
       May 2012, and also on the asylum reasoning in  the  21st  July  2010
       letter and the 23rd August 2010 determination of Judge Wallace.

   29. The letter of 24th May 2012 sets out  that  Judge  Wallace  had  not
       believed the appellant was detained and tortured. She  had  rejected
       the letter from Mr Banza because it was an identical account to that
       given by the appellant, and was thus "hearsay" evidence which  could
       be given little evidential weight. Further the detention and  escape
       of the appellant were not plausible  because  she  had  referred  to
       financial constraints and information  on  the  internet  about  the
       state of prisons in the DRC when asked to explain why prisoners were
       not given food and water; and because she was not able  to  describe
       the size of her cell or the number of people  held  within  it;  and
       because despite her ill-health she was able to climb over a wall and
       escape to a Catholic  church.  There  was  an  inconsistency  as  to
       whether the women the appellant escaped with had been detained  with
       her (see her witness statement) or whether she  had  not  seen  them
       previously (her interview).  The fact that the appellant was able to
       go out to eat when she was living with her cousin indicated that she
       was  not  at  risk  whilst  in  the  DRC.  It  was  also  considered
       implausible that the appellant would be able to leave the  DRC  with
       her passport and would not claim asylum in the UK on arrival but use
       a false document to attempt to travel to the  Republic  of  Ireland.
       The new documents supplied with the fresh claim were viewed  in  the
       round in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439, and  must
       be seen in the context  of  the  credibility  findings  against  the
       appellant in the determination of Judge Wallace, in accordance  with
       Devaseelan  [2002] UKIAT 000702. As Judge Wallace had  rejected  the
       validity of the letter from Mr Banza then it was held that  the  new
       documents did not advance the appellant's claim.  The appellant  was
       not at risk as a result of her sur place activities because  it  was
       not accepted that she had any history of political engagement in the
       DRC.

   30. It was accepted that the appellant had private life in  the  UK  but
       found that her removal would be proportionate to the legitimate  aim
       particularly as she had established her private life  without  leave
       to remain whilst pursuing her  asylum  claim.  The  evidence  of  Ms
       Gehrels regarding the appellant's medical issues should not be given
       any weight as she had not followed the Istanbul protocol.

   31. The refusal letter of 21st July 2010 set out that  it  was  accepted
       that the appellant was a national of the DRC  as  claimed.   It  was
       also accepted that she had correctly  named  the  vice-president  Mr
       Sabin Banza and the president [N] of the League of  Voters.  It  was
       also correct that the League of Voters was involved with  monitoring
       elections in 2006 in the DRC. It was considered detrimental  to  the
       appellant's claim that she had only submitted  her  membership  card
       and a letter from Mr  Banza  after  her  asylum  interview  in  2010
       despite having claimed asylum in 2007, despite the appellant  having
       been represented in this time. The letter  from  Mr  Banza  was  not
       considered plausible because it was too similar to  the  appellant's
       account in her asylum interview, and contained information  that  he
       would not be privy to such as the make of car in which the appellant
       was abducted. Further there was no evidence that drinking water  was
       not given to prisoners in the DRC. The appellant had not  been  able
       to describe Camp Tshatshi, except for knowing the commune  in  which
       it was situated despite having escaped from it. It was  not  a  good
       enough reason for not being able to describe the cell simply to  say
       it was dark. It was also inconsistent that the  appellant  would  be
       offered medical care, but  starved  of  food  and  water  whilst  in
       detention.

   32. No medical evidence had been provided to corroborate mistreatment or
       explain  why  the  appellant  could  not  describe  her  torture  in
       detention. It was not plausible that the appellant  had  managed  to
       escape from detention in the way she  described  with  a  number  of
       women she had just met. It was not plausible that the appellant  was
       able to escape as she described after a five day period with no food
       or drink. Further the appellant stayed for two  months  in  Kinshasa
       after her escape before travelling to the UK, which  indicates  that
       she was not at risk  particularly  as  she  went  out.  Further  the
       appellant's account of the use of her agent was muddled and unclear.
       The appellant's claim was damaged in  accordance  with  s.8  of  the
       Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004 as  the
       appellant did not claim asylum on arrival, and did not  claim  until
       after she had been arrested suing a false  identity.  The  appellant
       had supplied no evidence that her NGO had given her the wrong advice
       about claiming asylum in the UK.  As the appellant's account was not
       considered credible or coherent  little  weight  was  given  to  the
       documents.

   33. It was not believed the appellant had been an election  monitor  for
       the League of Voters, but even if she had been this would  not  have
       put her at risk. If the appellant had been a monitor it is plausible
       that she would have witnessed fraud as there were  many  reports  of
       this taking place. Even if the appellant's history was  believed  it
       was not accepted that she would remain at risk after more than three
       years. The appellant could have got evidence of any current risk  to
       her through Mr Banza or her family as she was in contact with  them,
       and had failed to do so.

   34.  Ms  Everett  submitted  that  the  key  issue  in  this  case   was
       credibility. If the appellant was found  to  be  credible  then  she
       accepted that she  was  a  refugee.  She  argued  however  that  the
       appellant was not to be seen as credible. She relied  upon  the  OGN
       regarding risk, and said that the  appellant  was  not  at  risk  if
       returned simply as an asylum seeker. The fact that removals had been
       suspended until 2014 due to litigation  did  not  mean  that  asylum
       seekers were at risk simply as failed asylum seekers if removed.

   35. Ms Everett submitted that no weight should be given to Dr  Hajioff's
       report because he had failed to deal with the issues of  credibility
       raised in Judge Wallace's determination or to look for other  causes
       even though he had received the determination of Judge Wallace.  She
       accepted that the evidence of Ms Gehrels  should  be  given  greater
       weight as she had described her methods of assessing the credibility
       of what she was being told. Ms Everett said that the  wanted  notice
       should not be given weight as there was  no  evidence  it  had  been
       shown to the first solicitors. This should not been  seen  like  the
       issue of rape where there could be good  reasons  why  an  appellant
       might not tell her solicitors straight away. Further  the  appellant
       could have  mentioned  it  herself  at  the  interview.  Ms  Everett
       submitted that putting forward a wanted notice which is not  genuine
       seriously damages the appellant's credibility. Ms Everett  submitted
       that it should also be noted that the appellant had lied  to  get  a
       visit visa when she had no particular need to visit the UK.

   36. Regarding Article 8 ECHR Ms Everett submitted that the appellant had
       family in the DRC and so would be cared for if she went  back  there
       and had lived the majority of her life in that country.

   37. Ms Poynor relied upon the three skeleton arguments submitted to date
       in the case, and also on her own note on issues  and  evidence.  She
       accepted that in accordance with  Devaseelan  the  determination  of
       Judge Wallace remained of relevance. The appellant's claim was  that
       she was at real risk of persecution if returned to the DRC on  three
       grounds: as a failed  asylum  seeker;  because  of  her  actual  and
       imputed political opinions and because she is a victim of  rape.  To
       return her would thus be a breach  of  the  Refugee  Convention  and
       Article 3 of the ECHR. In addition it would be a breach of Article 8
       ECHR to return her due to her private life in  the  UK  and  on  the
       basis of her medical and psychiatric condition,  particularly  given
       the stigma and discrimination she would suffer as  an  HIV  positive
       victim of rape.

   38. The appellant had submitted evidence that she was politically active
       in the DRC and in DRC politics in the UK  as  follows:  letter  from
       League of Voters dated 19.12.2006,  membership  card  of  League  of
       Voters dated 2003, Congolese Support Group membership card,  letters
       from Congolese support group dated 1.12.10 & 29.5.13, photos of  the
       appellant campaigning in the UK, appellant's DRC  election  observer
       card, DRC wanted notice from the Ministry of  Defence,  letter  from
       the Committee Human Rights Now in DRC dated 15.11.2010, letter  from
       Apareco UK dated 25.2.2011 and ID card.

   39. The wanted notice shows she remains of interest to the  authorities.
       There is objective evidence of  the  risk  to  returned  DRC  asylum
       seekers,  see  report  of  Justice  First   (UK),   Unsafe   Return:
       Refoulement of Congolese Asylum Seekers 24.11.2011, which  looks  at
       risk to those involved with Apareco; and also in  the  current  High
       Court litigation that has led to there being a stop on all  removals
       to the DRC. Her fresh claim relies upon sur place  activities  which
       also indicate that the appellant would  be  likely  to  continue  to
       engage in such political activity in the DRC  and  so  would  be  at
       risk, in accordance with HJ (Iran)v SSHD [2010] UKSC  31.

   40. The appellant has submitted  substantial  evidence  of  her  medical
       condition from Women Against Rape  (4.7.12  &  3.6.13),  Notre  Dame
       Refugee Centre (6.8.09, 5.8.10, 9.2.11, 20.3.12, 13.6.12, 17.1.13  &
       9.13), Medical Foundation (4 letters), Dr Hajioff (4.7.12), Dr  Reid
       (8.6.12), Dr Cooke (3.7.12  &  31.1.13),  Wharfside  Clinic  (2012),
       Student counsellor (14.6.12) and other medical letters and records.

   41. The evidence of Dr Hajioff is that the appellant has scars which are
       consistent with her account of her ill-treatment in  detention.  His
       evidence  cannot  just  be  dismissed  for  taking  the  appellant's
       evidence at face value, see AM, R (on the  application  of)  v  SSHD
       [2012] EWCA Civ  521.  This  is  particularly  the  case  given  the
       evidence that many women do not admit to rape because of stigma  and
       shame. He was also supplied with a  copy  of  the  determination  of
       Judge Wallace. The evidence of Ms Gehrels was based on four years of
       contact with the appellant, and was clearly also from a witness  who
       took a critical approach.

   42. It is  submitted  that  the  appellant  would  not  have  access  to
       treatment to healthcare for her HIV and trauma if  returned  to  the
       DRC. This is consistent with the information in the  USAID  HIV/AIDS
       Country Profile for the DRC dated September 2010.

   43. In the light of the medical evidence the appellant should be treated
       as a vulnerable witness, in accordance with the  Joint  Presidential
       Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive
       appellant  guidance.  In  particular  paragraph  10.3  on  assessing
       evidence was of relevance and should be considered  in  relation  to
       late  disclosure,  inconsistency  and  discrepancies.  Someone  with
       mental  health  problems  is  defined  as  vulnerable,  and  it   is
       specifically noted that PTSD can make someone vulnerable.

   44. If it is accepted that the appellant was raped in the  DRC  then  it
       must be considered as to whether the are good reasons that  it  will
       not  be  repeated,  in  accordance  with  paragraph  339K   of   the
       Immigration Rules.

   45. It is submitted that if it accepted that the appellant was raped  in
       the DRC this forms a particular social group as in Re B; R v Special
       Adjudicator ex  p  Hoxha  [2005]  1  WLR  1063,  Baroness  Hale  had
       identified that women who had been subject to sexual  violence  used
       as a military strategy to humiliate their  community  and  who  were
       ostracised by that community could in  principle  be  recognised  as
       refugees.

   46. There is evidence of the appellant's private life  in  the  UK:  see
       letter of Jane  Gleaves,  letters  from  Rev  Leston  Blackburn  and
       letters from Sr. Oonah Harahan and Fr.  Stephen  McBrearty  and  the
       petition from the appellant's church with 226 signatures.

   47. In oral submissions Ms Poynor added that the appellant  had  claimed
       asylum on the day of her  arrest,  the  24th  March  2007.  At  this
       interview she had also said she  had  private  health  problems  and
       refused to say how they were caused,  and  clearly  had  medications
       with her.  Judge Wallace had seemingly not understood that there was
       an EB Kosovo [2008] UKHL 41 point because the respondent had delayed
       more  than   three   years   before   interviewing   the   appellant
       substantively (on 24th June 2010) and processing her claim.  At  the
       appellant's full asylum interview she had referred to being  torture
       in detention at questions 79, 94 and 95 but had simply  been  unable
       to answer when asked for details - hence the silence - see questions
       75 and 143.

   48. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions

   49. The parties both agree that if the appellant's history is true  then
       she qualifies for refugee status. The key matter to be determined is
       whether the appellant's history is credible.

   50.  My starting point in deciding the issue of credibility must be  the
       determination of Judge Wallace promulgated on 6th September 2010, in
       accordance with Devaseelan. Judge Wallace finds that  the  appellant
       could have worked for the League of Voters and also that  she  could
       have witnessed bribery in the elections, but finds the rest  of  her
       account not to be credible. She does not find the letter of Mr Banza
       as further evidence of the appellant's claim because it is  hearsay:
       he simply repeats what  the  appellant  told  him.  Her  account  of
       detention and escape is implausible. It was implausible to say  that
       food and water were denied in prisons in the DRC  due  to  financial
       constraints; the appellant managed to escape from prison despite her
       poor health and being under guard; she was  inconsistent  about  who
       the women were that she left the prison with; she was able to go out
       when leaving with her cousin whilst she was wanted in the  DRC;  she
       was inconsistent about the agent who  brought  her  to  the  UK  and
       whether they travelled together.

   51. In accordance with s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
       Claimants etc) Act 2004  I  must  also  find  that  the  appellant's
       credibility is damaged by the fact that she did not claim asylum  on
       arrival, and that she  did  not  claim  until  after  she  had  been
       arrested  for  using  a  false  identity.  Ultimately  whether   the
       appellant is found credible is a matter to be assessed in the  round
       however.  I also note that the appellant did say  that  her  husband
       was still  alive  when  making  a  visa  application  prior  to  her
       difficulties in the DRC, and thus has accepted  that  she  has  told
       untruthful facts to the immigration authorities.

   52. Since the determination of Judge Wallace  a  substantial  amount  of
       additional evidence has been presented in support of the appellant's
       asylum claim. The appellant has supplied medical evidence  regarding
       her rape and ill-treatment, and post-traumatic stress disorder.  She
       has supplied a wanted  notice  from  the  DRC,  a  letter  from  the
       Committee Human Rights Now  in  the  DRC  and  evidence  of  her  UK
       political activities with the Congolese Support  Group  and  Apareco
       UK. She has also provided a more extensive witness statement. I must
       consider all of this evidence in the  round  with  the  findings  of
       Judge Wallace and the negative s.8 finding.

   53. I will start with the medical evidence as if this is  accepted  then
       it follows that the appellant is a vulnerable witness on account  of
       being a rape victim with  mental  health  problems  including  post-
       traumatic stress disorder, and  that  I  must  assess  her  evidence
       generally in accordance with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note 2.

   54. I find that  the  appellant  has  produced  medical  evidence  which
       satisfies me that she is a victim of rape, and  suffers  from  post-
       traumatic stress disorder as  a  result.  I  come  to  this  finding
       primarily on the basis of  the  written  and  oral  evidence  of  Ms
       Barbara Gehrels. This evidence was not available to  Judge  Wallace.
       Ms Gehrels has seen the  appellant  regularly  over  the  past  four
       years. She has been  provided  with  a  consistent  account  by  the
       appellant which has stood up to her critical assessment,  and  which
       has been found over this period of time to have been  resonant  with
       non-verbal signs of trauma. Ms Gehrels has read and  considered  the
       opinion of Judge Wallace that the appellant  was  not  presenting  a
       truthful account (set out in the subsequent determination  of  Judge
       Balmain) but found that it did not accord with the  evidence  before
       her from her own work  with  the  appellant.  She  has  also  placed
       reliance upon the very detailed reports of Women Against  Rape  (who
       also diagnose the appellant as being a rape survivor, suffering from
       post-traumatic stress disorder and depression), and has referred the
       appellant to the Medical Foundation / Freedom from Torture  for  in-
       depth group therapy. Ms Gehrels  has  also  considered  whether  the
       appellant's condition could have been caused by the  other  stresses
       in her life: her exile from her home country,  her  separation  from
       her children, her homelessness in the UK, her  insecure  immigration
       status and her physical ill-health. She  concludes  that  these  are
       significant factors which inhibit the appellant's recovery but  that
       they could not  have  caused  the  depth  of  trauma  that  she  has
       identified in the appellant.

   55. The evidence of Ms Gehrels is  also  supported  by  other  evidence.
       Prior to her asylum interview, and soon after she arrived in the UK,
       the appellant disclosed she had been victim of rape and  torture  to
       her first solicitors in Belfast, P Drinan Solicitor and  they  wrote
       to the Asylum Support section of the Home Office about this  and  to
       the Legal Services Commission in 2007.  In  2008,  whilst  still  in
       Belfast awaiting interview and progressing of her asylum claim , the
       appellant approached Women Against Rape  for  assistance  after  she
       heard a talk they gave at refugee week, and she has  attended  their
       rape victims self help therapy group since February 2011.  She  also
       sought medical help from the Medical Foundation and the  Notre  Dame
       Refugee Centre for rape trauma in 2009 prior  to  being  interviewed
       substantively about her asylum claim.

   56. Further I find that the responses the appellant gave when the  issue
       of her torture was raised in her  interviews  to  be  typical  of  a
       person suffering from the shame of rape and sexual  abuse,  and  who
       therefore found it difficult to give a description either at  all  -
       hence the silent crying responses - or limited  "they  tortured  me"
       type responses when the issue was raised in the asylum interview.  I
       also note that the appellant is on anti-depressant  medication  from
       her  GP,  Dr  Philip  Reid.  In  addition  Dr  Hajioff  provides  an
       evaluation of three scars on the appellant's  body  which  he  finds
       consistent (in accordance  with  the  Istanbul  Protocol)  with  the
       appellant's history of beatings and injury whilst escaping over  the
       wall.

   57. The appellant's claim should be put into the context of the  country
       of origin materials which indicate that women  face  extremely  high
       levels of domestic violence including rape, and  that  reports  that
       the security forces continue to use torture,  see  for  instance  UK
       Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Human  Rights  and  Democracy:  The
       2012 FCO Report: Democratic Republic of Congo.  There  is  also  the
       fact of the appellant's HIV infection. This was not diagnosed at the
       time of hearing before Judge Wallace. The appellant was diagnosed in
       the UK in December 2010 (confirmed by medical letters and  notes  in
       the appellant's bundle), which the appellant  says  must  have  been
       caused by her rapes, and clearly would have been a  risk  of  forced
       unprotected sexual abuse in the DRC where there is a very high  rate
       of infection - the DRC being in the  20  nations  with  the  highest
       percentage of HIV/AIDS cases. (see Voice  of  America  News:  Flawed
       Distribution Impedes HIV/AIDS Treatment in DRC 10th July 2012).

   58. Considering all of the evidence, I find  that  the  appellant  is  a
       vulnerable witness as a  victim  of  rape  who  suffers  from  post-
       traumatic stress disorder. I am therefore  to  view  issues  in  the
       appellant's evidence with respect to late disclosure,  inconsistency
       and discrepancies with care as these may  be  a  reflection  of  her
       mental state, and not reflective  of  any  attempt  to  mislead  the
       Tribunal or a lack of credibility on  her  part.   I  find  this  of
       particular  relevance  to  the  appellant's  initial  reluctance  to
       remember and describe the dark cell where she was housed at the time
       of her rape, and to issues of how long  she  might  have  been  held
       there in this disorientating environment without food  and  water  -
       the fact that food and water were not supplied being something  that
       ultimately was found by Judge Wallace to be supported by the country
       of origin material.

   59. I also find that the appellant has coherently explained how she  was
       taken to the medical unit at the detention centre with the influence
       of her cousin who was working with the military. I note the case  of
       MM (plausibility) (DRC) [2005] UKIAT 00019 which, in a discussion of
       the use of the word, offers the following guidance: "A story may  be
       implausible and yet may properly be taken as  credible;  it  may  be
       plausible and yet properly not believed." Alone, the assessment that
       the appellant's account was implausible cannot suffice to  find  the
       appellant not to  be  credible.   I  find  that  it  is  in  no  way
       incredible or implausible that the appellant was able to escape  her
       guards mixing in with a  group  of  women  would  were  legitimately
       leaving the detention centre (who exactly they  were  and  why  they
       were leaving the appellant is quite naturally unclear about)  whilst
       her guards were smoking outside; nor that despite her  ill-treatment
       she summoned the strength to climb over a  wall  and  run  across  a
       piece of land used as a firing range. Prior to her  detention  of  a
       few days she had been a well nourished, healthy and  able  woman.  I
       also note that the appellant's claim that she used an agent to bribe
       officials so she did not pass through  immigration  control  at  the
       airport to escape from the DRC is consistent  with  the  country  of
       origin evidence  that  corruption  is  rife  in  that  country,  for
       instance at paragraph 2.3.2 of the  OGN  dated  10th  May  2012  the
       security forces are described as:  "undisciplined,  corrupt,  lacked
       training, were grossly underfunded and received little pay."

   60. The respondent has questioned the value of the  supporting  evidence
       the appellant has produced in respect of her political activities in
       the DRC on the basis of its late production and on  the  basis  that
       the letter from  Sabin  Banza  was  hearsay  evidence,  telling  the
       appellant's  account  and  not  being  a  first  hand  account.  The
       appellant says that she sent in her documentary evidence  after  her
       interview because she was not advised to do anything  prior  to  her
       interview, and that only certain pieces of evidence were selected by
       her representative at the time  of  her  interview,  Hamilton  Burns
       Solicitors,  and they did not select the wanted notice.

   61. I cannot understand the criticism of the Sabin  Banza  letter  dated
       19th December 2006 made by the  respondent,  which  is  repeated  by
       Judge Wallace. It was never  the  appellant's  case  that  Mr  Banza
       witnessed any of the abuse she suffered: his letter has to be  based
       on what the appellant told him.  Naturally his account would be  the
       same as the appellant's as this is his only source  of  information.
       Judge Wallace found that it was quite possible  that  the  appellant
       was a member of the League of Voters  and  had  been  involved  with
       election monitoring. She would seem therefore to have  accepted,  on
       the lower standard of proof applicable, that the membership card and
       observer cards were genuine documents reflecting  these  activities.
       No particular challenge  or  criticism  is  made  to  the  documents
       relating to the appellant's membership or activities with the League
       of Voters by either the respondent or Judge Wallace. It is agreed by
       the respondent that Mr Banza was the vice president of the League of
       Voters at that time; and none of the documents is said to  be  in  a
       wrong format or be otherwise doubtful in form.

   62. I do not accept the respondent's argument that the documents are  to
       be seen as doubtful for  not  having  been  produced  prior  to  the
       appellant's  asylum  interview.   They   had   not   requested   the
       documentation, and she had not  been  advised  to  send  it  by  any
       solicitor and no solicitor had made representations.  Documents  are
       routinely requested and  submitted  at  this  point  in  the  asylum
       process. The wanted notice was not submitted until the  fresh  claim
       was made. Ms Everett has said that I should view this document  with
       doubt because the  appellant  could  and  would  have  submitted  it
       earlier if it truly had existed. The appellant  says  this  document
       was not disclosed because her Scottish solicitors,  Hamilton  Burns,
       did not "choose" that document for translation  and  submission.  In
       support of this is the fact that these same solicitors  clearly  did
       not choose to disclose evidence of the appellant being a  victim  of
       rape, which there is clear evidence existed at that  time  and  when
       any reasonable representative would have known that it would support
       the appellant's asylum claim. I also note  that  the  wanted  notice
       does correspond to a visit to her home by  the  security  forces  at
       which such a piece of paper  was  served,  which  she  described  as
       having taken place in her asylum interview.   For these reasons I am
       satisfied that the appellant had produced this document to  Hamilton
       Burns in connection with her first asylum claim as she  claims,  but
       that they chose not to submit it to the respondent at that time.

   63. The DRC documentation must also  be  seen  in  the  context  of  the
       appellant having shown herself to be a committed political  activist
       in anti-Kabila politics in the UK. Prior to her asylum interview, in
       2009, she joined the Congo Support Group in London  and  started  to
       participate in demonstrations. On 10th June 2010 she joined Apareco-
       UK, and has  taken  part  in  their  activities.  She  has  provided
       letters,  membership   cards   and   photographs   of   herself   on
       demonstrations and at meetings in support of this. This material was
       not available to Judge Wallace.

    64. In the light of  the  medical  evidence;  the  consistency  of  the
        appellant's history with the country of  origin  material(including
        that set  out  below  in  my  analysis  of  risk  on  return);  the
        consistency of the core history she has  presented;  the  documents
        from the DRC which supports  her  claim  of  involvement  with  the
        League of Voters, election monitoring  and  her  history  of  being
        detained and abused, and being wanted, as well as  the  appellant's
        on-going political activities supported by documentation I come  to
        a different conclusion to that of Judge Wallace. I  find  that  the
        appellant is a credible witness, who has shown that  she  has  been
        persecuted in the DRC for her political opinions. In this respect I
        note what is said in paragraph 339K of the  Immigration  Rules,  HC
        395, as amended:

             "The  fact  that  a  person  has  already  been   subject   to
             persecution or serious harm, or  to  direct  threats  of  such
             persecution or such  harm,  will  be  regarded  as  a  serious
             indication of the person's well-founded fear of persecution or
             real risk of suffering harm, unless there are good reasons  to
             consider that such persecution or serious  harm  will  not  be
             repeated."

   65. I note that Ms Everett conceded  for  the  respondent  that  it  was
       accepted if the appellant was credible that she had a  well  founded
       fear of future persecution. The Operational Guidance Notes: DRC  May
       2012 and the DRC Country Policy Bulletin November 2012 accepts  that
       there  are  incidents  of  politically  motivated  detention,   ill-
       treatment and killings of opponents of the Kabila regime in the DRC.
        There are on-going complaints of severe election irregularities  by
       international organisations, and Congolese civil society  and  human
       rights organisations. It also records that members of NGOs may be at
       risk; and that the state  force  detain,  beat  and  intimidate  NGO
       workers, with cases of death threats and killings  of  activists.  I
       note that this appellant is a committed political  person,  and  has
       continued her political work in the UK and would, at least  but  for
       any fear of  persecution,  continue  it  if  returned  to  the  DRC,
       HJ(Iran).  In accordance with AB and DM (Risk  categories  reviewed,
       Tutsis added) DRC CG [2005] UKIAT 00118 being a  political  opponent
       to the government may found an asylum claim but it must be  assessed
       on the basis of the individual profile.  In the light of the  wanted
       notice, and the background country information I am  satisfied  that
       there is no good reason to believe that persecution or serious  harm
       will not be repeated with respect to this appellant. This is a  case
       of  state  persecution,  and  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is   no
       sufficiency of protection or actors of protection in the DRC for the
       appellant.

   66. The respondent has not suggested that the appellant  could  relocate
       safely internally, and I find that there is no evidence she could do
       so. I note that  the  Operational  Guidance  Note  finds  under  the
       internal relocation section at 2.4.6 that: "The significant risk  of
       rape by soldiers and non-governmental armed  entities,  couple  with
       government inability  to  secure  eastern  territories,  effectively
       restricted freedom  of  movement  by  women  in  many  rural  areas,
       particularly in the east of the country." In addition relocation  is
       made  difficult  and  unsafe  by  the  lack  of  a  reliable  public
       transportation system even in Kinshasa, and state  security  placing
       arbitrary checkpoints. Further I find such internal relocation would
       be unduly harsh, considering that all of the appellant's family live
       in Kinshasa and its environs where she would be  unsafe,  and  given
       her HIV diagnosis and her severe post-traumatic stress disorder  for
       which she would need their support and care.

   67. On consideration of all the evidence I find that the appellant has a
       well founded  fear  of  persecution  for  reason  of  her  political
       opinions if returned to the DRC and  is  thus  entitled  to  refugee
       status, and for the same reasons is also at real  risk  of  torture,
       inhuman and degrading treatment if returned there and thus that  her
       return would breach Article 3 ECHR.

   68. As I have found that the appellant  is  a  refugee,  and  cannot  be
       removed due to the protection of Article 3 ECHR  I  will  deal  with
       Article 8 ECHR very briefly.  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  an
       extensive private life in the UK (which includes  her  friends  from
       church,  politics  and  her  relationships  with  her   counsellors,
       particularly Ms Gehrels and Ms Sian Evans from Women Against  Rape),
       enhanced by the significant initial delays in processing her  asylum
       claim by the respondent, and that it  would  be  a  disproportionate
       breach of her right to respect for moral and physical  integrity  to
       remove her from the UK for the reasons set out above. Further in the
       light of the real risk of persecution which would  make  any  family
       and private life in the DRC impossible I  find  that  removal  would
       also amount to a disproportionate interference with her private life
       in the UK.

Decision

   69. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   70. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   71.  The decision re-made allowing  the  asylum  appeal  and  the  human
       rights appeal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.

Fee Award

There can be no fee award as no fee was paid or payable.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
25th September 2013

Annex A:
                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a national of the DRC.  Her original asylum claim  was
    refused and then dismissed on appeal  by  an  immigration  judge  on  6
    September  2010  who  made  adverse  credibility  findings.   Following
    further representations the respondent  eventually  decided  to  accept
    these as a fresh claim,  but  rejected  them  on  16  May  2012.    The
    appellant appealed raising asylum  and  human  rights  grounds.   In  a
    determination sent on  July  2012  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Balmain
    dismissed his appeal on Article 3 and 8 grounds.  The judge  considered
    further documentary and oral evidence but decided that  these  did  not
    cast any doubt on the adverse credibility findings of the first  judge.
    The new evidence before the second judge included the claim  that  when
    in the DRC the appellant had been detained and raped  twice  whilst  in
    detention.

2.   I am grateful to  both  representatives  for  their  careful  and  full
    submissions.

3.   Having heard these I have decided that the FtT judge  materially  erred
    in law.  The principal difficulty arises from what she said at para  56
    whose text I shall set out in full.

         "The appellant's evidence regarding her rape while in detention and
         the evidence of scars on her body was  not  before  the  judge  who
         heard her  asylum  claim,  nor  referred  to  in  her  Home  Office
         interviews. Whilst there is no specific evidence from her as to why
         she did not mention the rape or the scarring before, I accept  that
         many women do not admit to having been raped because of  the  shame
         and the associated stigma. Background country evidence contained in
         the reports before me confirm that rape is endemic in the  DRC.  It
         is therefore plausible that the appellant could have been subjected
         to rape prior to her departure but given her inconsistent  evidence
         in relation to other matters I have referred to  above,  I  am  not
         satisfied that even if she were raped it was while in detention  as
         she described, nor do I accept,  for  reasons  I  shall  deal  with
         later, that the recent diagnosis of Post Traumatic Stress  Disorder
         or indeed the existence of scars on her body would lead me to reach
         a decision with regard to the core of her claim which differs  from
         that of the judge who heard her first appeal."

4.   From this and subsequent paragraphs it is  clear  that  the  judge  was
    prepared to accept that the appellant had been a victim of rape in  the
    DRC.  That being the case, it was incumbent on the  judge  to  consider
    the potential impact of Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of  2012:
    Child, vulnerable adult  and  sensitive  appellant  guidance"  and  the
    section dealing with "Assessing evidence".  In  this  Note  judges  are
    enjoined when assessing evidence to be aware that "the order and manner
    in which evidence is given may be affected by mental, psychological  or
    emotional trauma or disability and "[c]omprehension of questioning  may
    have been impaired.  At para 14 it is stated:

         "Consider the evidence, allowing for possible different degrees  of
         understanding by witnesses and appellant compared to those who  are
         not vulnerable, in the context of evidence from  others  associated
         with the appellant and the background evidence before  you.   Where
         there are clear discrepancies in the oral  evidence,  consider  the
         extent to which  the  age,  vulnerability  or  sensitivity  or  the
         witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack of clarity.


         The decision should record whether the Tribunal has  concluded  the
         appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable, or sensitive,  the
         effect the Tribunal considered the identified vulnerability had  in
         assessing the evidence before it and thus whether the Tribunal  was
         satisfied whether the appellant   had  established  his  or   human
         rights case to the relevant standard of proof ..."

5.   There is nothing to indicate that  the  judge  bore  this  guidance  in
    mind. In particular there is nothing to indicate  that  when  reviewing
    the findings of fact made by the previous judge,  Judge  Balmain  asked
    herself  the  question  "Would  the  judge's   findings   of   material
    inconsistencies have been different if he had known  she  had  been   a
    rape victim?"

6.   There is a further reason which reinforces my view that  I  should  set
    this decision aside.  Unusually in my experience the respondent  sought
    when accepting the appellant's further representations as a fresh claim
    (and then issuing a fresh refusal) to restrict the grounds of appeal as
    being "limited though to Article 3 (Medical) and  Article  8  grounds".
    Absent any decision to certify the claim, that was not  something  that
    was within the power of the respondent  to  do.  Whilst  Judge  Balmain
    appears to a considerable  extent  to  have  properly  disregarded  the
    respondent's apparent attempt to restrict grounds to ill-health grounds
    arising under Articles 3 and 8 (clearly the  judge  considered  whether
    the decision would pose a real risk of ill-treatment to  the  appellant
    on the basis of her claimed past ill-treatment and also her  sur  place
    political profile), it remains that she  did  not  address  the  asylum
    grounds of appeal which were before her and which she was  required  by
    s.84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  to  consider.
    There is nothing therefore to refute  the  impression  that  the  judge
    (wrongly) saw herself as dealing with an appeal which  she  records  at
    para 2 as being one which the respondent had "rejected with  a  limited
    right of appeal".

7.   In light of the above I set aside the decision of the FtT.

8.   Whilst in view of the above it is unnecessary for me to deal  with  the
    further grounds relied on, I would comment that I do  not  consider  in
    isolation that the judge erred in  law  in  her  consideration  of  the
    medical evidence.  In line with the Court  of  Appeal  judgment  in  AM
    [2012] EWCA Civ 521, she plainly considered  that  the  medical  report
    constituted independent evidence. She did not consider,  however,  that
    it was evidence that withstood analysis and she  gave  several  reasons
    for this assessment, one of which related to the strong reliance placed
    by the doctor on the appellant's own account.   I  consider  they  were
    valid criticisms and indeed I would agree with Mr  Jarvis  that  it  is
    also doubtful whether the doctor engaged with the  adverse  credibility
    findings  of  the  first  judge,  despite  stating  she  had  read  the
    determination.

9.   Plainly at the next hearing the medical evidence will  continue  to  be
    relevant both as regards the asylum-related and Article 8 grounds.   In
    relation to the evidence about the appellant's claim to have been raped
    in detention, it may become important for her  representatives  (i)  to
    clarify when she first informed the respondent of this claim; (ii) why,
    if it was not until July 2012, she or those representing  her  had  not
    informed the respondent sooner given that it would appear she  had  had
    assistance from a number of medical professionals  from  2010  (if  not
    earlier) onwards.

10.  For the above reasons, the FtT judge materially  erred  in  law.    Her
    decision is set aside.  The appeal is adjourned to be heard at  a  date
    to be fixed.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Storey
