
AIT-AH-     -V1
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: aa/05294/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at STOKE ON TRENT              |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18th December 2014                |On 16th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               Mr Xiaowen Zhan
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tetty
For the Respondent:    Mr Mc Veety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a Chinese national born on 2nd May 1978.

 2. He claims to have entered the UK on 5th March 1999 and  claimed  asylum
    using false details having spent "about  six  months"  in  France.  His
    claim was rejected on 6th March 2001. Later submissions on  his  behalf
    in 2011 were also rejected by the respondent.  On  4th  July  2014  the
    respondent  considered   those   representations   but   rejected   the
    appellant's application for leave to remain on human rights' and  other
    grounds. She also  refused  to  give  discretionary  leave  to  remain,
    explaining that the delay in considering the appellant's status was due
    his failure to make an application to regularise his long stay  in  the
    UK. On 7th July 2014 the respondent served the  appellant  with  notice
    that he would be removed from the UK as an illegal entrant.

 3. On 29th July 2014 the appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FTT) against the respondent's decision  to  remove  him,  claiming  it
    would breach the UK's obligations under the UN Convention  relating  to
    the Status of Refugees  (Refugee  Convention)  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights  (ECHR).  The  appellant  also  claimed  the  respondent's
    decision was  not  in  accordance  with  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC
    (Humanitarian Protection) and the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules.

 4. The immigration judge who considered his appeal, Judge Brookfield  (the
    Immigration Judge) decided that the appellant did not qualify under any
    of those international instruments, dismissed the appeal on all grounds
    that  had been argued before him and made no anonymity direction or fee
    award.

 5. Judge of FTT Reid decided that there may have been material  errors  of
    law in that decision in that there was a lack of reasons  for  material
    findings which, in any event, appear to have been by the evidence.  The
    Immigration Judge had not fully reconciled conflicts in  the  evidence.
    There were also some potential factual errors.

The hearing

 6. At the hearing I heard submissions by both representatives.  Mr  Tettey
    for the appellant pointed out that was a minor error in  the  date  the
    Immigration Judge had given for the appellant's admission into the  UK.
    It seems that the Appellant first made his claim in  1999.   Mr  Tettey
    was unable to explain where the reference to 1998 had come  from.  More
    important errors appeared in the determination, he said. In  particular
    several of the Judge's findings in relation to the appellant's  support
    for Falun Gong needed to be reconsidered.  The  Immigration  Judge  had
    summarised evidence  at  paragraph  9  (iv)  of  his  determination  in
    relation to "people  from  the  Central  Military  Commission  (having)
    called looking for him" which  should  have  been  properly  considered
    against the background  material.  In  the  light  of  that  background
    evidence the conclusion at  paragraph  10(iii),  where  the  judge  had
    indicated  that  the  delay  in  the  authorities  contacting  him  was
    incredible, was unsustainable. The Immigration Judge  had  referred  to
    the issue of a summons  against  him  in  paragraph  10  (iv)  but  not
    examined the evidence in relation to that adequately  before  rejecting
    it. It was also pointed out that the Immigration Judge made a bad point
    at paragraph 10 (vi) when he suggested that the appellant had been able
    to leave China to travel to Japan without incident. The point that  the
    judge had missed was that at that stage the appellant was not a  wanted
    man. His departure had been dependent on "snakeheads" who would  remove
    him when it suited them in any event. Mr Tettey also pointed  out  that
    the appellant had not been properly represented before the FTT in  that
    Titus Miranda, the  firm  which  had  represented  him,  had  run  into
    regulatory difficulties and they may not have put all relevant  matters
    forward.

 7. Mr Tettey then  referred  to  the  report  from  Dr  Sheehan  who  drew
    attention to many of the features of the Chinese  state's  relationship
    with Falun Gong. There is a long history of confrontation  between  the
    Chinese state and that organisation. Again the  Immigration  Judge  had
    demonstrated that he was aware  of  this  evidence  but  then,  it  was
    argued, failed to give adequate weight to it. There was clear  evidence
    in the expert's report that Falun Gong demonstrators  were  subject  to
    harsh treatment by the authorities.

 8. Mr Tettey concluded by  saying  that  the  adverse  findings  were  not
    sustainable and the Tribunal ought to set them aside  and  re-make  the
    decision or remit the appeal to the FTT for it to make fresh findings.

 9. Mr Mc Veety for the respondent submitted that  the  criticisms  of  the
    Immigration Judge were not justified.  The immigration Judge  had  made
    detailed findings which were sustainable. Those  findings  incorporated
    proper consideration  of  the  expert  evidence  and  included  drawing
    adverse inferences where justified. The expert's report  was  based  on
    the appellant's case that he had attended a demonstration at  which  he
    had been fired on but there was in fact no evidence that he  had  taken
    part in that demonstration. The  expert  had  not  looked  sufficiently
    critically  at  the  appellant's  account  and  had  therefore  reached
    incorrect conclusions. The Immigration Judge had found, contrary to the
    appellant's case that he would not have become involved with Falun Gong
    and this was a finding the expert should have taken on board. If  there
    were a serious incident involving 300 police officers opening  fire  on
    demonstrators why, the judge had been entitled to ask, had  there  been
    no adequate record of this? It was open to the judge to  conclude  that
    it would have come to light, and the  appellant  would  have  become  a
    wanted man, in less than eight months.  The appellant would  have  been
    expected to produce some documents to  support  his  claim.   The  poor
    representation at the hearing  had  not  prevented  the  case  for  the
    appellant being forcefully presented before the Immigration Judge.  The
    judge had regard to the wider picture and reached conclusions that were
    entirely open to him.

10. Mr Tettey replied to the respondent's submissions. He said round ups of
    Falun Gong supporters were a regular occurrence and the Appellant would
    be in serious trouble if he breached  the  cordon  put  around  by  the
    police. The extent of unrest and consequences for demonstrators were to
    some extent hidden from the outside world.  It  was  unsurprising  that
    there were few documents to support  the  appellant's  case  therefore.
    Further, in addition to the appellant's asylum claim  and  humanitarian
    protection claim the appellant wished to claim for an  infringement  of
    his human rights. Amongst the articles he relied on was article  8  but
    it was accepted on his behalf that he would  only be entitled to  claim
    that he had established a  private  life  in  the  UK  as  he  had  not
    established any family life.

Conclusions

11. The appellant is a Chinese national who first came to the UK  in  1999.
    He admired Falun Gong and claims that as  a  member  of  special  armed
    forces in Xin Xiang he decided to disobey  commands  when  forces  were
    unleashed on demonstrators. After he arrived in the UK he  advanced  an
    asylum claim which was rejected in March  2001.  This  claim  was  made
    after he had spent six months in France, a country where he could  have
    safely claimed asylum if he wished. His explanation for  this  was  the
    control over him of "snakeheads"  but  this  account  was  clearly  not
    accepted by the Immigration Judge. He waited until 2011  before  making
    further submissions and forwarding evidence to  support  his  claim  to
    being a refugee here. The  respondent  did  not  regard  his  claim  as
    credible and the Immigration Judge agreed with her.   Nevertheless  the
    appellant maintains he would be arrested and "sentenced to death" if he
    returned to China.  Judge Reid thought his grounds, which seem to be of
    inordinate length, were at least arguable.

12. The respondent did not accept the appellant's account and nor  did  the
    Immigration Judge. The Immigration Judge had to consider the appeal  to
    the lower standard which applied to asylum and human rights' claims  of
    this type-the claim had to be no more than  "reasonably  likely  to  be
    true" or there had to be substantial grounds for believing his claim to
    Humanitarian Protection. There was an additional claim based on Article
    8 of the ECHR which relied on the private life he  had  established  in
    the UK.

13. The Immigration Judge made comprehensive findings and  gave  more  than
    adequate reasons for upholding the respondent's  decision.  I  note  in
    particular the following points:

        1) He comprehensively rejected the credibility of  the  appellant's
           account (see for  example  paragraph  10  (ii)).  Part  of  this
           finding was based on the inherent improbability of the appellant
           remaining in Xin Xiang  after he allegedly disobeyed orders  and
           the fact that it did not appear reasonably likely to  the  judge
           that the authorities would have taken eight months  to  discover
           the appellant's disobedience (see paragraph 10 (iii));

        2) The respondent was not bound to accept documents submitted  late
           and the appellant's account  of  having  been  informed  by  his
           mother of the summons did not appear likely to the judge without
           any detail being supplied. In any event such documents  were  to
           be judged by the same standard as the oral evidence;

        3) The appellant claims that the reasoning was inadequate but  when
           read as a whole the Immigration Judge's  findings  amount  to  a
           comprehensive rejection of the appellant's case;

        4) The conclusions were not speculative as has been  suggested  and
           the Immigration Judge had sufficient  regard  to  the  objective
           evidence placed before him;

        5) The expert evidence by Dr Sheehan, although helpful in providing
           background material, assumed the truthfulness of the appellant's
           account which was found wanting by the  Immigration  Judge.  The
           role of the expert is not to displace the role of the judge  who
           has to decide issues of fact but this expert's report, arguably,
           went further than  that  in  venturing  an  opinion  as  to  the
           credibility of the appellant's account (see paragraph 4);

14. The rejection of the appellant's case lead the Immigration Judge to the
    justified conclusion that  the  appellant  had  not  given  a  truthful
    account that could be relied on and he would not be at risk on  return.
    There were in truth no substantial grounds for believing the  appellant
    would suffer serious harm.

15. The appellant's claim was also considered under Articles 8 of the  ECHR
    but the interference with the appellant's  private  life  (he  did  not
    claim to have established any family life in the UK) was  justified  by
    the legitimate aim of enforcing  proper  suitability  requirements  for
    immigrants which are now reinforced by the changes  introduced  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014. It was not accepted by the  respondent  that  the
    appellant had no family ties in China and his claim  raised  no  issues
    which were not adequately covered by the Immigration Rules.  No  reason
    was placed before the Immigration Judge  for  exempting  the  appellant
    from the requirements in the Immigration Rules  that  other  immigrants
    must fulfil.  Although the appellant had been in the UK  for  about  15
    years at the date of the hearing before the FTT he had  not  been  here
    for the period specified in those rules (20 years).

Decision

16. The decision of the FTT does not contain a material error  of  law  and
    the decision of the respondent to refuse asylum and  the  other  claims
    was lawful.

17. No anonymity direction or fee award was made by the FTT.



Signed W.E.Hanbury

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


Date 13th March 2015

