
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05479/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Sent         |
|On 29th July 2014                               |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                                     b k
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Nwaiwu of Jamek Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be a citizen of Syria, on the basis of which he
    sought asylum in this country.  His appeal was dismissed  by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Ford in a determination promulgated on 2nd  May
    2014, on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  (Articles  3
    and 8) grounds.  The judge did not accept that  the  Appellant  was  in
    fact from Syria.

 2. The grounds of application are quite lengthy and allege that the  judge
    had misdirected herself in various ways, had been procedurally  unfair,
    had failed to give weight to relevant evidence as  to  the  Appellant's
    nationality, had erred by giving  weight  to  irrelevant  matters,  had
    speculated as to  matters  and  erred  in  her  approach  to  the  best
    interests of the child who now formed part of a household of which  the
    Appellant was part.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge R  C  Campbell  on
    27th May 2014.  He detected little merit in the  grounds  save  in  one
    respect, namely the judge's self-direction  (at  paragraph  14  of  her
    determination) that "In relation to nationality it is the Appellant who
    bears the burden of proving on the balance of probabilities that he  is
    a national of Syria".  He commented that although the burden rested  on
    the Appellant to prove his nationality the standard of  proof  was  the
    same  as  applied  in  relation  to  other  aspects  of  a   claim   to
    international protection on the basis of risk on return, i.e. the lower
    standard: MA [2009] EWCA Civ 289; Lucas  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1809.   The
    Respondent served a response under Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rule  24
    contending that the judge had directed herself appropriately.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Mills accepted that the  response  document
    was itself wrong in respect of the standard of proof upon an  Appellant
    in an asylum appeal seeking to establish nationality.  He accepted that
    the lower standard was that applicable but  submitted  that  any  error
    made by the judge in that respect would not have been  material  as  it
    was very hard to believe that Judge Ford would have come to a different
    conclusion given her findings that a forged identity card and  passport
    had been submitted.  Mr Nwaiwu for the Appellant relied on the grounds,
    noting that the judge had not accepted that a Sprakab report indicating
    that the Appellant was Egyptian could be relied  upon.   He  questioned
    the expertise of the Home Office employee who had  found  the  identity
    card and passport not to  be  genuine  documents.   He  contended  that
    Article 8 issues had not been properly considered and  that  the  judge
    should have gone on to  consider  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  His main point was however the  standard  of  proof  which  the
    judge had employed.  He contended that the error made was material  and
    if the judge had thought that the lower  standard  was  applicable  she
    would have treated the evidence differently.  The Appellant  had  given
    many accurate replies concerning his home town in  Syria  and  had  she
    applied the correct standard the judge would, he said, have given those
    replies greater weight.

 5. Finally in response Mr Mills submitted that the  complaints  about  the
    forgery reports were in error.  The Appellant  initially  submitted  an
    identity card which had not been accepted as genuine  and  subsequently
    submitted a passport which was not genuine.   He  accepted  that  if  I
    found it arguable that the error made infected the core  findings  then
    the appeal would need to be reheard.

 6. I have given careful consideration to the determination in the light of
    the submissions made.  It is a careful and detailed document.   However
    at several points the  judge  refers  to  the  burden  of  proving  his
    nationality being upon the Appellant and the standard being the balance
    of  probabilities.   That  is  set  out  at   paragraph   14   of   the
    determination.  At paragraph 35 the judge stated that  much  turned  on
    the Appellant being able to establish that he was a national  of  Syria
    and at paragraph 40 that she could not be satisfied on the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant was a Syrian national.   At  paragraph
    43 she stated

         "I am not satisfied that  this  Appellant  faces  a  real  risk  of
         persecution for a  Refugee  Convention  reason  because  I  am  not
         satisfied that he is a Syrian national and I am not satisfied  that
         he will be removed to Syria or that he will face  a  real  risk  of
         persecution for a Refugee Convention reason in Syria."

 7. The question of the Appellant's nationality was crucial to the  outcome
    of this appeal.  The Respondent had accepted in the refusal letter  (at
    paragraph 40) that if it was accepted that the Appellant was a national
    of  Syria  as  claimed  he  would  have  established  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or a breach of the ECHR there.  That the  correct  standard
    of proof in asylum matters when the burden is  upon  the  Appellant  in
    respect of nationality remains the lower standard was  accepted  by  Mr
    Mills at the hearing before me and that view is supported by  the  case
    law referred to in the grant of permission.

 8. The Respondent's case was that the error, which  it  was  accepted  had
    been made by the judge in misdirecting herself as to  the  standard  of
    proof, was not material.  I have of course considered  this  point.   I
    note that the judge found  against  the  Respondent  in  respect  of  a
    Sprakab report, presciently anticipating the views  expressed  by  Lord
    Carnwath in the Supreme Court in SSHD v MN and KY [2014]  UKSC  30  and
    had found in the Appellant's favour with regard to  that  report.   She
    found against him, with reasons, in respect of the authenticity of  the
    identity card  and  the  passport.   However  the  production  of  some
    documents which may be false potentially to bolster a claim does not in
    itself render an asylum claim without merit.

 9. In MA Lord Justice Elias commented (at paragraph 48)  "I  would  accept
    that normally if a  Tribunal  adopts  the  wrong  legal  approach  with
    respect to parts of its decision that error  will  infect  all  related
    aspects of the decision".  The question of the Appellant's  nationality
    appears to have been the issue upon which the asylum claim turned.   As
    the judge misdirected herself as to the standard of proof I find that I
    cannot be satisfied that had she applied the correct standard of  proof
    she would not have come to a different conclusion.  With  some  regret,
    bearing in mind the history of this appeal, I am therefore of the  view
    that the appeal must be reheard.  I have  considered  whether  some  of
    Judge Ford's conclusions should be preserved, in particular  that  with
    regard to Article 8.  However her conclusion in that  regard  was  that
    the Appellant could return to his home country to seek entry clearance;
    if his home country was in fact  Syria  that  would  not  have  been  a
    practical proposition.  I therefore conclude that the fairer course  is
    for all issues to be reconsidered at a fresh hearing.  In the light  of
    potential onward Grounds of Appeal  and  in  accordance  with  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    accordance with the directions which follow.  There is  no  reason  why
    the appeal should  not  come  before  me,  sitting  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. An anonymity direction was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   With
    regard to this determination I have decided to make an anonymity  order
    as set out below.

Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing in  accordance
with the following directions.

Under Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
order that disclosure or publication of any matter likely  to  lead  members
of the public to  identify  the  Appellant  is  prohibited  because  of  the
potential risk to the Appellant that might arise  from  such  disclosure  of
publication.




Signed                              Date 31 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

