

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05376/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 13th February 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    E C E
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Ms Rutherford instructed by TRP Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Rose who, in a determination dated 16th October 2013, allowed
        the appeal on human rights grounds.


     2. The Secretary of State seeks to  challenge  the  findings  but  the
        grounds on which permission is sought read more like a challenge to
        a decision in a deportation appeal rather than a case  involving  a
        challenge to a refusal of leave  to  remain.   I  accept  there  is
        reference to some criminality in the  papers  but  this  is  not  a
        deportation case.


     3. The Judge found the  appeal  should  be  allowed  by  reference  to
        Article 8  after  having  conducted  a  detailed  analysis  of  the
        evidence. It was noted, for example, that ECE had  been  granted  a
        period of leave to pursue a case for contact that such contact  was
        found to have been re-established since the decision letter. Whilst
        the author of the refusal letter cannot be criticised  for  finding
        no evidence of ongoing contact at the time the letter  was  written
        the author of the grounds should have realised it is an  irrational
        challenge to suggest that having  granted  a  period  of  leave  to
        secure contact and for it to have been found that such contact  has
        been re-instated and that family life exists as a result, a finding
        in  ECE's  favour  on  the  family  life  issue  leading   to   the
        proportionality conclusion is somehow legally wrong.


     4. The claim in the grounds on which permission to  appeal  is  sought
        that the Judge misdirected himself in relation to the new rules has
        no merit. As stated this is not a deportation appeal to  which  the
        rules which came into force on  9th  July  2012  would  apply.  The
        application was made on 16th December  2011  and  returned  to  the
        Secretary of State for a lawful decision to be made which  resulted
        in the further refusal letter of the 30th May 2013.  There  was  no
        provision in the Rules for considering Article 8 claims  when  this
        application was made and so the transitional provisions  purporting
        to apply the provisions of the Rules in force at the 9th July  have
        no relevance.  I accept that the Secretary of State was entitled to
        consider the new rules as  being  representative  of  her  view  in
        relation to the application of Article 8, but this does  not  prove
        any legal misdirection by the Judge in this case. It was  for  this
        reason the Judge was entitled to rely upon the case law which  pre-
        dated the new rules.


     5. The claim in  the  grounds  asserting  inadequate  findings  as  no
        arguable merit. A reading of  the  determination  shows  the  Judge
        considered all the competing  elements  with  the  degree  of  care
        required, that of anxious scrutiny, and gave adequate  reasons  for
        the findings made. There is no obligation  on  the  Judge  to  make
        findings on each and every element of the case provided a reader of
        the determination is able to understand why  the  conclusions  have
        been reached. In this case that test has been satisfied.


     6. In any event the Judge appears  to  have  considered  the  case  in
        accordance with the framework set out by the Court of Appeal in  MF
        (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 at paragraph 35.


     7. The conclusions in relation to the proportionality of the  decision
        were open to the Judge on the evidence  and  within  the  range  of
        decisions  properly  open  to  him  on  the  facts.   No   arguable
        irrationality, legal misdirection, or perversity has been proved.


Decision

     8. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     9. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.  I
        continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16th February 2014












