
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05617/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th November 2015                |On 10th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     amy
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan of Counsel instructed by Bankfield Heath
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Kempton
    made following a hearing at North Shields on 28th April 2015.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  He entered the UK  via  Belfast
    on 27th May 2013 and claimed asylum a month later.  He was  refused  by
    letter on 17th March 2015.  The respondent accepted that the  appellant
    was a citizen of Somalia, and that he was from the Ashraf clan and  had
    experienced conflict with other clans, but not that he had  experienced
    problems with Al Shabab as claimed.

 3. The Judge similarly rejected the  appellant's  account  of  the  events
    which led him to leave Somalia on the grounds that there were a  number
    of inconsistencies in his story  and  there  is  no  challenge  to  her
    credibility findings in the grounds.

 4. The Judge considered  the  risk  on  return.   She  recorded  that  the
    appellant said that he and nine others left Somalia  for  abroad.   The
    appellant had some money saved and others in the  group  who  were  all
    also Ashraf, similarly had funds.  The  appellant  gave  evidence  that
    when they arrived in Addis Ababa they received money  from  abroad  and
    his expenses were paid.

 5. The Judge wrote as follows:
         "In his oral evidence there is the same pattern of other members of
         the Ashraf clan looking out for each other when he was in Italy and
         Norway.  It was through other members of the  Ashraf  that  he  was
         able to afford to travel to Belfast and subsequently  claim  asylum
         in the UK."

 6. The Judge considered the country guidance of MOJ and Others (return  to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 442.

 7. She concluded:
         "According  to  (xii)  return  to  Mogadishu  as  proposed  by  the
         respondent in this case may not be a real possibility for a  person
         such as him who  is  from  a  minority  clan  as  accepted  by  the
         respondent with no former links to the city, no access to funds and
         no other clan or family or social support and an absence  of  means
         to establish a home and ongoing support.  Such a  person  would  be
         likely to have to live in a makeshift camp where there  is  a  real
         possibility of having  to  live  in  conditions  which  fall  below
         acceptable humanitarian standards.
         Accordingly on looking at this appellant's  circumstances,  he  was
         only in Mogadishu when he was born, as his mother  went  there,  he
         said, when he was due to be born and then he returned home.   I  am
         not sure why she did this or if there was some family in  Mogadishu
         at that time.  He says he has  no  family  contact  and  no  family
         support there now.  However his evidence is that even if he is from
         the Ashraf clan, he has in fact had funds to leave the country  and
         he has received financial help over the years from other members of
         the Ashraf clan.  His evidence is that they help each other.
         I note that there is an expert's report from Dr Bekalo which states
         at paragraph 2.1 that  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  if  not
         impossible for the  appellant  to  access  meaningful  support  and
         protection either in the  IDPs  in  Mogadishu  or  outside.   Hence
         destitution is more likely.  Aid agencies struggle  to  meet  basic
         human requirements as it is  a  war  torn  and  resource  stretched
         country (2.2).  Paragraph 3.4 of Dr Bekalo's report concludes  that
         there is a lack of a  strong  central  law  enforcement  force  and
         credible judicial system coupled with the centuries old Somali clan
         discriminatory system and this put people with no  clan  or  family
         support network at greater risk of  persecution.   Dr  Bekalo  also
         expresses concern at the extremism  of  Al  Shabab  which  has  now
         spread to Kenya and so the inference is clear that it is not yet  a
         spent force in the whole area.
         I take into account the decision of MOJ and Dr Bekalo's report.   I
         also consider that the appellant has not  given  at  all  times  an
         entirely consistent account.  However  given  that  the  respondent
         accepts that he is from the Ashraf minority clan and that he  would
         be returned to Mogadishu, I consider that in  the  absence  of  any
         evidence of family support in Mogadishu, that the appellant, on the
         face of it, would struggle financially in Somalia.  However he  has
         received help all these years from other members of the Ashraf clan
         who are abroad.  There is no reason why this would not continue  if
         he were to be returned to Somalia."

 8. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge
    had erred in her assessment of  the  evidence.   Whilst  the  appellant
    received assistance from members of  the  Ashraf  clan,  the  financial
    support was limited.  She had taken an act of kindness and  treated  it
    as meaningful support since there was no evidence  that  the  appellant
    was still in contact with the nine members of the Ashraf clan  or  that
    they will be able to continue to provide support or  whether  it  would
    stretch to allowing the appellant to live safely in Mogadishu. Moreover
    she had failed to assess the evidence in the light of the expert report
    from Dr Bekalo.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Levin on 8th  June  2015  for
    the reasons stated in the grounds.

11. On 23rd June 2015 the respondent served a reply  opposing  the  appeal.
    The Judge had found that the appellant received funds  from  others  in
    his clan which ameliorates the suggestion in  MOJ  that  minority  clan
    members would have no access to funds and the conclusion of the  expert
    that it would be extremely difficult  if  not  impossible  for  him  to
    access meaningful support.

Submissions

12. Mr O'Ryan relied on his grounds.  Essentially, he argued that the Judge
    had drawn conclusions which were not properly founded on the  evidence.



13. He submitted that the appellant had given  examples  in  his  screening
    interview and  in  his  oral  evidence  of  how  difficult  his  living
    circumstances were in Italy.  In his SEF  interview  he  had  described
    nine people who had pooled their resources  for  the  sole  purpose  of
    escape. Even if he had had assistance to come to Belfast,  that  was  a
    single  occasion  and  insufficient  to  base  a  conclusion  that  the
    appellant would be able to access help from the  Ashraf  on  return  to
    Somalia. The Judge  had  simply  exaggerated  the  level  of  financial
    support to which the appellant had had access.

14. Second, the claim that there  were  significant  remittances  from  the
    Ashraf into Mogadishu was contrary to the known evidence as analysed in
    MOJ.  The Judge should have given detailed  reasons  for  reaching  the
    unusual conclusion that minority clan members would offer assistance to
    the appellant on return, and he asked me to reverse the decision.

15. Mr McVeety defended the determination, and relied heavily upon the fact
    that there was evidence before the Judge that the  appellant  had  been
    able to pay for an agent to bring him to the UK, which must  have  been
    expensive.  The Immigration Judge was correct  to  question  where  the
    money had come from.  There was clear evidence that the  appellant  was
    being helped not only on departure from Somalia in  2007  but  also  in
    2013 when he entered the UK.  He accepted that she had not undertaken a
    forensic examination  of  the  evidence  but  submitted  that  she  was
    entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had  been  in  receipt  of
    financial support for some time and there was no reason why this should
    not continue.

16. If the decision were to be remade, he submitted that it was clear  that
    the Ashraf clans in the diaspora had been  able  to  provide  funds  to
    support the appellant's illegal entry  in  the  past  and  it  was  not
    implausible that they should do so in the future.

Consideration of whether the Judge erred in law.

17. In MOJ the Tribunal concluded that an ordinary civilian would  face  no
    real risk of persecution on return and that  any  ordinary  citizen  of
    Mogadishu would be able to reduce personal exposure to risk.

18. At (vii) the Tribunal said:
         "A person returning to Mogadishu after a  period  of  absence  will
         look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the  city,  for
         assistance in re-establishing himself and  securing  a  livelihood.
         Although a returnee may also seek assistance from his clan  members
         who are not close  relatives,  such  help  is  only  likely  to  be
         forthcoming for majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have
         little to offer."

19. At (ix) the Tribunal said:
         "If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all  the  circumstances.   These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to:
           . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
           . length of absence from Mogadishu;
           . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           . access to financial resources;
           . prospects of securing a livelihood, whether that be employment
             or self-employment;
           . availability of remittances from abroad;
           . means of support during the time spent in the UK;
           . why his ability to fund the journey  to  the  west  no  longer
             enables an appellant to secure financial support on return."

20. It was therefore incumbent upon the Judge to conduct a careful analysis
    of the appellant's  circumstances.   She  was  assessing  the  risk  to
    someone whom was accepted to be a minority clan member  without  family
    support in Mogadishu.

21. There is no such analysis in this determination.  Most of  the  matters
    referred to in (ix) were not addressed by the Judge.   She  focused  on
    his ability to fund the journey to the west but did  not  consider  the
    other factors referred to in that sub-paragraph.

22. Moreover I accept the submission that the Judge's conclusion  that  the
    appellant had received help "all these years from other members of  the
    Ashraf clan who are abroad" is not founded firmly in the evidence.

23. In his SEF interview the appellant was asked how he was able to pay for
    his exit from Somalia.  The reply was
         "In the first place we were nine in number and I saved  some  money
         but the people I had been with had money and we are the  same  clan
         so we owe each other.  When we got to Addis Ababa we received money
         from overseas and they paid my expenses."

24. Whilst there was evidence of a pooling of resources when  he  and  nine
    others left in 2007, the appellant's evidence was that he actually  had
    funds of his own which he had saved (question 122).  In any  event  his
    reply is not a basis for a proper finding that that  support  would  be
    available to the appellant on return.  He left Somalia some nine  years
    ago.

25. The appellant gave  details  of  his  travels  through  Europe  at  his
    screening interview. At 2.1 the appellant said:
         "I came through other country.  I left Somalia 6/2007.  I  left  by
         motor vehicle in Hamar in Mogadishu into Djibouti.  I left Djibouti
         and went to Eritrea and then to Sudan and then to  Libya.   Then  I
         caught a boat from Libya.  Then I came to Italy on 27/3/09.  I  was
         in a refugee camp.  I was there for a long  time  then  I  went  to
         Norway not sure of date possibly May.  I was there for a  year  and
         nine months.  Then they returned me back to Italy (February  2012).
         Stayed Italy for two years two months ... I  fled  from  Italy  and
         came here to Belfast.  Came Belfast on 27/5/13 I travelled by air."

26. During cross-examination the appellant was asked  who  had  helped  him
    when he was in Norway, and whether the people who had helped were  from
    the Somali community. He agreed that he had been supported by  Somalis.
    The appellant also accepted that members of the  Somali  community  had
    financed his journey from Italy to Belfast.

27. So far as Italy was concerned he told the Judge that  he  had  been  in
    need of help in Italy because he was unwell and beaten  by  alcoholics.
    A young man had helped him and he was from the Ashraf clan, also living
    on the streets. According to the Judge's note of the oral evidence,  he
    was helped by a fellow member of the clan after he had been  beaten  up
    but that clan member was also living rough on the streets.

28. The above evidence is not an adequate  foundation  for  the  conclusion
    that he would be able to access support on return.

29. Furthermore whilst the Judge refers to Dr Bekalo's report it is not  at
    all clear that she engages with his conclusions that the appellant  was
    not likely to get any meaningful  support  in  terms  of  security  and
    building livelihood from clan members and even if he had maintained  or
    re-established fresh contacts with his clan the Ashrafs are simply  too
    poor and powerless to provide the necessary support.

30. Accordingly the Judge erred in law in failing to give adequate  reasons
    for her conclusions that members of the diaspora would  be  willing  to
    support the appellant on return to Somalia.  The determination  is  set
    aside.

Findings and conclusions

31. Applying the Judge's findings to the criteria set out by  the  Tribunal
    in MOJ, the appellant had been found to be untruthful in his claims  to
    have been sought by Al Shabab but, at paragraph 31,  she  accepts  that
    the appellant has no former links to Mogadishu.   He  has  been  absent
    from there for nine years.  He does not have family there and his  clan
    associations are the Ashraf whom the Tribunal found may have little  to
    offer.  That is a finding confirmed by the  report  of  Dr  Bekalo  who
    concluded that the Ashraf would not be in a position to assist  him  to
    build a livelihood in Mogadishu.

32. In MOJ at (xi) the Tribunal said:
    "(i) It will therefore only be those with no clan or family support who
         will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who  have  no
         real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on return who will
         face the prospect of living in  circumstances  falling  below  that
         which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms."

33. I do not accept that the fact that the  appellant  received  assistance
    from a fellow street sleeper after an assault suggests in any way  that
    financial  support  would  be  available  in  Mogadishu.   Whilst   the
    appellant had the ability to pay an agent to come to the UK was  helped
    to do so, the assistance was limited and from people whom  he  had  met
    and in response to  a  particular  situation.  It  cannot  properly  be
    characterised as continuous or reliable.  In fact there is no  evidence
    that the appellant is even in contact with anyone who might have helped
    him in the past.

34. Accordingly I conclude that the appeal should therefore be  allowed  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the Judge is set aside.   It  is  remade  as  follows.   The
appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds  but  allowed   on   humanitarian
protection grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
