
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05575/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UTIAC Stoke                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2016                             |On 27 May 2016                    |
|Prepared 9 May 2016                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    Y K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Mensa, Counsel, instructed by AJO Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.
2.   The Claimant a  national,  which  was  disputed,  of  Eritrea  appealed
    against the Secretary of State's decision dated 12 March 2015  to  make
    removal directions following the  refusal  of  an  asylum/human  rights
    based claim and a form IS151A having been served on 29 July 2014.

3.   The appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  Davies  whose
    decision [D] allowed the appeal on Refugee  Convention  grounds  on  26
    June 2015.

4.   The Secretary of State in grounds, dated 1 July 2015,  challenged  that
    decision.  Permission to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Kelly on 13 July 2015.

5.   The reasons given by Judge Kelly for granting permission are  really  a
    bare recitation of the Secretary of State's claim  and  perhaps  should
    have addressed the broader picture, in the light of the  many  positive
    findings  of  fact  and  there  being  no  adverse  criticisms  of  the
    Claimant's  credibility on the many material issues, of whether or not,
    even  if  there  was  some  substance  in  the  Secretary  of   State's
    criticisms, ultimately no real purpose would be  served.   One  way  or
    another the fact was that since that decision many months have  passed:
    Nearly a year in effect in the life of the Claimant.  I  consider  this
    matter entirely on the basis advanced by Mr McVeety.  I am satisfied on
    a fair reading of the  judge's  decision  that  he  was  taken  to  the
    relevant issues as viewed by the parties in terms of the  evidence  and
    submissions made.  What was clear was that the judge realised that  the
    Secretary of State took the point that  the  Claimant  had  not  sought
    permission to travel from  the  Ethiopian  authorities  in  London,  as
    contemplated by the cases of MA [2009] EWCA Civ 289 and ST Ethiopia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 52. If a positive case was being advanced that he could not
    obtain  travel  approval  to  make  attempts  to   obtain   appropriate
    documentation an application should have been made.

6.   The  Claimant's  representatives  and  the  Claimant,  as  set  out  in
    paragraphs 68 to 84 of his evidence, explained why the view  was  taken
    that there was no point in  actually  making  any  application  to  the
    Ethiopian  Embassy  because  there  was,  as  understood  by  them,  no
    documentation available as required for such, bearing in mind when  the
    Claimant left Ethiopia and came to the United Kingdom.

7.   In reply Mr McVeety submitted it was clear from the  case  of  MA  that
    there is not just an expectation but in effect an imperative to make an
    application to the Ethiopian  authorities  to  allow  the  Claimant  to
    return to Ethiopia and absent of doing all those steps including making
    a formal application with or without necessary documentation meant that
    the guidance in MA and ST simply was not being properly  addressed  and
    any appeal should be refused.

8.   From that position Mr McVeety argued that according  to  a  significant
    amount of case law which re-stated the  self-evident  point  that  each
    party to an appeal is entitled to reasons which  disclose  why  on  key
    relevant issues a Claimant has failed or succeeded or indeed  similarly
    for the Secretary of State's.

9.   There is much force in Mr McVeety's point as a general point.   Looking
    at the decision as a whole it is clear from the findings of  fact  made
    bearing in mind  the  judge  was  aware  and  found,  [D  46]  on  that
    particular issue, that the Claimant was a credible witness in terms of:-



10.  First, fluency as a Tigrinyan speaker.

11.  Secondly, the Claimant's  claim  to  be  a  Pentecostal  Christian  was
    genuine.

12.  Thirdly, the judge decided having heard the evidence  of  the  Claimant
    that the  significance  of  points  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    concerning the interview were not in the judge's view  of  the  adverse
    kind that the Secretary of State wished to argue.

13.  Fourthly, the Claimant had given a truthful  and  accurate  account  of
    where he lived in Eritrea  which  had  been  confirmed  by  documentary
    evidence presented.

14.  Fifth, the Claimant was found to be a credible witness of fact.

15.  Sixth, the Claimant had, as claimed, been  the  subject  of  past  ill-
    treatment.

16.  Seventh, the Claimant's faith had continued  to  be  practised  in  the
    United Kingdom and importantly that the Claimant was a truthful witness
    of fact.

17.  Eight, the Claimant had left Eritrea illegally and  would  be  regarded
    as a deserter from military service if returned to Eritrea.   In  those
    circumstances he would be liable to be picked up  and  materially  ill-
    treated so as to engage the Refugee Convention.

18.   Ms  Mensa  therefore  argued,  in  the  light  of  those  findings  so
    positively made and acceptance of the Claimant's evidence, even  though
    the entirety was evidently not recited in the decision the  judge  need
    do no more. The judge had tackled the material issue of the origins  of
    the Claimant and where he could be returned to.  The  judge  must  have
    accepted that the Claimant had been forcefully evicted along with  many
    thousands of other Eritreans on  account  of  their  ethnicity  in  the
    circumstances that arose in the conflict between those two countries.

19.  I agree that the Claimant had  failed  to  undertake  the  exercise  as
    expected in MA and ST.  It seemed to me, on the findings of  fact  that
    were made, the fact that the application was not made and undertaken in
    the circumstances, indicated  that  the  failure  would  not  make  any
    material difference were the matter re-made:  Particularly  when  there
    are no substantive challenges in the grounds of appeal by the Secretary
    of State to the judge's findings.  I think it was correct to  say  that
    the findings of fact, other than the judge's decision on the country of
    origin, should stand.  Therefore to re-make this matter, absent of  any
    other evidence other than that issue, suggests no different outcome was
    likely to arise.  It is unfortunate the judge's failure to address that
    matter with reasons has unsurprisingly prompted a legitimate  challenge
    to that aspect of the decision.
20.   The second aspect of the decision that was challenged was whether  the
    judge had properly dealt with issues raised in paragraphs 23 to  27  of
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter. In this respect Mr McVeety rightly  and
    with some insight accepts the difficulty of that as an  issue  for  two
    reasons.  First, if you look at  those  issues  in  the  light  of  the
    positive findings of fact made they are not  of  particular  substance.
    Secondly, the Claimant had set out his substantive responses  to  those
    issues in his long statement of evidence, although again the judge  did
    not, as might be expected, address it. It seemed to me  therefore  that
    if those matters were looked at again they are unlikely  to  have  made
    any material difference to the outcome of the Claimant's appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION
         The Original Tribunal's decision stands.
     The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

21.     The    anonymity    order    that    was    made    is    continued.




DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 24 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
