
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05653/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th September 2015                   |On 6th October 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                              aniqa adnan khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan borne on  2nd  May  1985.
    She first came to the UK with her husband Adnan Aziz Khan on 24th March
    2012 when she was given leave to enter as his dependant until  November
    2013.   The  Appellant  applied  for  asylum  in  October  2013.   That
    application was refused for  the  reasons  given  in  the  Respondent's
    Decision dated 6th March 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and her  appeal
    was ultimately heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 20th June 2017.  The Judge  decided  to  allow
    the appeal on asylum and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR grounds for the  reasons
    given in her Decision dated 4th July 2017.  The Respondent sought leave
    to appeal that decision, and on 28th  July  2017  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant's case was that she was at risk  on  return  to  Pakistan
    because she was an ethnic  Punjabi  who  had  married  a  Pathan.   The
    Appellant was an intelligent, highly educated woman  and  as  such  her
    marriage would not be accepted by  the  very  conservative  traditional
    Pathan community.  Whilst the Appellant and her husband were in the UK,
    a Jirga meeting had taken place in September 2013 attended  by  members
    of the Appellant's husband's family and also members  of  the  Taliban.
    At the Jirga, a fine was  imposed  and  it  was  decided  that  if  the
    Appellant continued her relationship with her husband, she would be the
    victim of an honour killing.

 4. The Judge allowed the appeal because she  found  the  Appellant  to  be
    credible.  Having considered an expert report from Dr Holden, the Judge
    found the Appellant to be at risk on return on account of the  decision
    by the Jirga.  The Judge further found that internal relocation was not
    a possibility as the extended family of  the  Appellant's  husband  was
    spread throughout Pakistan and would know of the Appellant's return  as
    she and her husband would  have  to  apply  for  CNICs.   It  would  be
    unreasonable by way of unduly harsh for the Appellant and  her  husband
    to live in hiding in Pakistan.   Further, the Judge  found  that  there
    was not an adequacy of State protection for women  in  the  Appellant's
    predicament in Pakistan.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills argued that the Judge had  erred  in
    law in coming to  this  conclusion  because  she  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for her decision in respect  of  internal  relocation.
    In particular, the Judge had failed to deal with  the  decision  in  AW
    (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC).  AW was  not
    a Country Guidance case but gave  valuable  guidance.   The  Judge  had
    placed too much weight on the evidence of the expert, and  should  have
    relied more upon the background information.  The Judge had  failed  to
    take into account the fact that the  Appellant  came  from  a  wealthy,
    educated and influential family who  would  be  able  to  secure  State
    protection for the Appellant.  The involvement  of  the  Taliban  would
    activate State interest.

 6. In response, Mr Pipe referred to the Rule 24 response and  argued  that
    there was no such  error  of  law.   The  Judge  had  made  sustainable
    findings and had given sufficient reasons  for  them.   AW  was  not  a
    Country Guidance case and therefore it was not an error of law  not  to
    rely upon it.  AW was merely an explanation of the decision in  Horvath
    [2001] 1 AC 489 using a  Pakistani  case.   The  Judge  had  adopted  a
    cautious approach to the expert report and had analysed  it  carefully.
    She  had  not  blindly  followed  the  opinion  given   therein.    The
    Respondent's own policy known as "Pakistan: Women fearing  gender-based
    harm/violence Version  3.0  February  2016"  recognised  the  dangerous
    situation of women in the Appellant's position  and  thereby  confirmed
    the opinion contained in the expert report.  The Judge had  dealt  with
    the issue of internal relocation and  explained  sufficiently  why  the
    Appellant's return to Pakistan would be noticed thereby placing her  at
    risk.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do not set aside.  The challenge to the Judge's decision  relates  only
    to her finding as regards internal relocation.  The  Judge  dealt  with
    this issue at paragraphs 35 to  38  inclusive  of  the  Decision.   She
    explained her finding that the Appellant would not be able to return to
    any part of Pakistan without the knowledge of her husband's  family  or
    the Taliban.  She also explained her finding that it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the Appellant and her husband to relocate.  In reaching
    that conclusion, the Judge accepted the opinion of Dr Holden  given  in
    the expert report, and there  was  no  evidence  before  the  Judge  to
    suggest that that report should not be  given  weight.   As  the  Judge
    recorded at paragraph 19 of the Decision the Judge  took  into  account
    the background information before her.  It is true that the  Judge  did
    not consider the decision in AW, and made no reference to that case  in
    her Decision.  However, in my view that does not amount to an error  of
    law.  AW is not a Country Guidance case and  is  not  authoritative  on
    circumstances in Pakistan.  In any event, at paragraphs 2 and 3 of  the
    heading to that case, it is said that the particular  circumstances  of
    any Appellant must be taken into account  including  past  persecution.
    This is exactly what the Judge did.

 8. For these reasons I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so, and indeed find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date   6th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

