

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05908/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 31 March 2015                     |On 21 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          SAID IBRAHIM ABDI RAHMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T. Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. A. Rana, counsel instructed by Aden & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Secretary of State has been granted permission to appeal  against
       the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  O'Flynn  who,  by   a
       determination promulgated on 15 January 2015, allowed the appellant's
       appeal. Therefore, the appellant is the respondent before  the  Upper
       Tribunal but, because it will be necessary to reproduce extracts from
       the determination of the First-tier Tribunal, for convenience and  in
       the interests of consistency,  I  shall  continue  to  refer  to  the
       Secretary of State  as  the  respondent  and  to  Mr  Rahman  as  the
       appellant.

    2. The appellant, who was born on  16  August  1990,  is  a  citizen  of
       Somalia. He claimed asylum on arrival in the  United  Kingdom  on  11
       November 2013. He appealed against refusal of that claim, and against
       the decision that he be removed from the United Kingdom. His  grounds
       for appealing were first that, on the basis of being a  member  of  a
       minority  clan  who  had  experienced  clan  based  persecutory  ill-
       treatment in the past, he should  be  recognised  to  be  a  refugee.
       Secondly, he was now reunited in the United Kingdom with  his  mother
       and siblings, who had travelled here some 15 years ago  and  who  are
       now all settled here. Therefore,  there  would  be  an  impermissible
       infringement of rights protected by article 8 of the ECHR if he  were
       not allowed to stay to re-establish the family  life  that  had  been
       shattered when the family were separated by  violence  in  Mogadishu,
       causing his mother to flee to seek asylum.

    3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Flynn  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
       appellant and from his mother and sister and found  them  all  to  be
       credible  witnesses  who  had  given  a  truthful  account   of   the
       difficulties they had experienced in the past in Somalia  on  account
       of being members of a persecuted minority clan.  The  judge  rejected
       the protection claim because, in the light  of  the  current  country
       guidance in MOJ and Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT
       00442, it was plain that the appellant no longer faced a real risk of
       persecution or other ill-treatment on return to Mogadishu,  where  he
       had been working as a labourer before his departure.

    4. The judge was plainly correct in that regard, as is reflected by  the
       absence of any challenge to his decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on
       asylum grounds.

    5. However, the judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,
       founded upon the article 8 claim. In granting  permission  to  appeal
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes said:

           "The grounds of appeal complain that  the  judge  erred  in  the
           consideration of section 117 of the 2002 Act.

           There are arguable errors of law."

    6. The judge commenced his consideration  of  the  article  8  claim  at
       paragraph 19 of the determination.  His  approach  to  that  exercise
       cannot be faulted. He recognised that the appellant's article 8 claim
       could not  succeed  under  the  immigration  rules  and  although  he
       recognised also that the immigration rules now sought to  incorporate
       the principles enshrined in article 8, as he put it, he said that  it
       was clear from the emerging jurisprudence that there remained a  need
       to see, where there was arguably good grounds for doing so, if  there
       were an arguable case outside the rules. He then said,  at  paragraph
       22 of the determination:

           "Bearing  those  cases  in  mind,  I  am  satisfied   that   the
           appellant's circumstances in this appeal  warrant  and  analysis
           under Article 8, not restricted by the Rules, for these reasons.
           The appellant got separated from his mother and family when they
           were attacked in 1998. This was, sadly, a common  occurrence  in
           Somalia in those days. Since then, his mother  and  sister  have
           been granted  refugee  status  and  one  brother  is  a  British
           citizen. The status of the second brother was unknown but he  is
           in the UK. It is not beyond the bounds of possibility  to  think
           that, had the family not been separated,  this  appellant  would
           also be in  the  UK  with  his  family.  Instead,  he  has  been
           separated from them for some 15 years.  His  mother  said  that,
           after they were reunited, "I thought all the feelings  a  mother
           feels. You can't imagine it  -  he  does  everything  a  son  is
           expected to do." This case cannot rest simply on the  Rules.  Mr
           Rahman, as a result of  war  and  internal  conflict,  has  been
           separated from them for a very long time. It was suggested  that
           he could apply for a visit fees from time to  time  but  I  find
           this totally unrealistic given that he was a labourer in Somalia
           and the family is hard pressed financially in the  UK.  Plainly,
           his mother will not return to Somalia: she is  now  71  and  has
           refugee status in the UK. Put starkly, the reality is that it is
           unlikely that the appellant will ever see his mother again if he
           were to return to Somalia."

    7. Having set out the provisions of articles 8(1) and 8(2) of the  ECHR,
       the judge reminded himself that it was for the appellant to establish
       that the article was engaged after which it was for the respondent to
       show  that  the  interference  that  would  arise  was   lawful   and
       proportionate. He then said this:

           "In order to properly consider Article  8  I  use  the  case  of
           Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  the   five   step   approach   to
           proportionality. Before I come to that, however,  importantly  I
           must take into account that, from 28 July 2014,  section  19  of
           the Immigration Act 2014 was brought into force:  Article  3  of
           the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  No.  1,  Transitory  and
           Saving Provisions) Order 2014 SI 2014/1820).   This  amends  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  by  introducing  a
           new Part 5A which contains sections 117A, 117B, 117C  and  117D.
           These statutory provisions apply to  all  appeals  heard  on  or
           after 28 July 2014  irrespective  of  when  the  application  or
           immigration  decision  was  made....   In   short,   where   the
           Immigration Rules, found at Appendix  FM,  paragraph  276ADE  or
           paragraphs 398 and 399, reflecting the  respondent's  Article  8
           obligation  do  not  apply,  Section  117  of  the  Nationality,
           Immigration and  asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended)  provides  the
           factors to which the Tribunal must have regard"

    8. The judge then set out those provisions, so far as they were relevant
       to this  appellant.  It  is  not  necessary,  therefore,  for  me  to
       reproduce them once again. This establishes, unambiguously, that  the
       judge had the provisions of s117 at the forefront of his mind  as  he
       embarked upon  his  assessment  of  the  article  8  claim.  He  then
       proceeded to consider each of the five Razgar steps.

    9. First, the judge found that, although now an adult, the appellant did
       enjoy family life with his mother and sister  and  that  his  removal
       would constitute an interference with their enjoyment of it. That was
       because, having directed himself in terms of Kugathas v  SSHD  [2003]
       EWCA Civ 31, he found that:

           "... the bond between Mr Rahman and his mother in this case  is,
           I am satisfied, far stronger than "normal emotional ties".  They
           were separated for 15 years. He was only  8  when  the  conflict
           wrenched apart this family. Far from being less because  of  the
           absence, the relationship now is cemented by those very years of
           absence; absence which clearly laid heavily on  his  mother.  To
           separate  them  now  would  be  far  more  devastating  for  the
           appellant's mother than if they  had  been  together  all  these
           years..."

   10. Reminding himself that  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  observed  in  AG
       (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 407 that the threshold of engagement
       with Article 8 was not an especially high one, he found that  it  was
       engaged in this case because:

           "The appellant would be leaving a life with the family  that  he
           has just re-discovered. It is clear from the  evidence  that  he
           and his mother and sister (with whom he lives) are  very  close.
           In the circumstances, I have no doubt  that  removal  will  have
           consequences of such gravity so as  to  potentially  engage  the
           Article."

   11. The judge recognised that the proposed interference was in accordance
       with the law.

   12. Finally,  the  judge  took  together  the  fourth  and  fifth  steps,
       considering whether the proposed interference with the family life he
       found to exist was  necessary  and  proportionate,  arriving  at  the
       conclusion that it was not. This was for the reasons already given in
       his determination and because:

           "Mr Rahman has been separated from his family far too long.  Had
           he not, as an 8 year old child, been lost when  the  family  was
           attacked, there is every possibility he  would  have  been  here
           with leave for years as his sister and brother have.  He  should
           not be penalised for being torn away from his family as a  young
           child. He has not been able to grow up in his close  family  (he
           was brought up by a cousin of his  father).  He  should  now  be
           given that opportunity. The effect of losing his family  at  the
           age of 8 can barely be imagined. I have fully taken into account
           that he does not, at this stage, speak English or have financial
           independence; however, I am satisfied that it would be  entirely
           disproportionate to the necessity for an  effective  immigration
           policy for him to have to go  through  the  break  up  with  his
           family again when he has just re-discovered his mother  and  his
           mother has re-discovered him."

   13. The grounds for seeking  permission  to  appeal,  all  of  which  are
       pursued  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  Mr  Wilding,  set  out   a
       comprehensive challenge to  the  determination.  It  is  possible  to
       identify that 8 separate complaints are being made. It  is  submitted
       that the judge erred in law in that:

             i. He incorrectly interpreted the requirements of s117B(2)  and
                (3) as being something that the appellant can attain at some
                point in the future instead of assessing the position at the
                date of the hearing;

            ii. He incorrectly looked at  the  ability  of  the  appellant's
                siblings  to  satisfy  those   criteria   instead   of   the
                appellant's ability to satisfy them;

           iii. He failed to weight the appellant's inability to satisfy the
                requirements of  s117B  (2)  and  (3)  against  him  in  the
                balancing exercise;

            iv.  He  failed  to  attach  little  weight  to   private   life
                established when immigration status precarious;

             v. He misdirected himself when  determining  that  family  life
                with adult  siblings  go  beyond  normal  emotional  ties  -
                Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31;

            vi. He failed to identify any element of dependency going beyond
                normal emotional ties between parents and adult children;

           vii. He failed to factor in the non attendance of 2  siblings  at
                hearing;

          viii. He failed to recognise that S117A-D does not envisage family
                life being outside of a  qualifying  partner  or  qualifying
                child.

   14. In determining the appeal to the Upper Tribunal  it  is,  of  course,
       important to remember that I am concerned with the  grounds  advanced
       and not with any other point or issue  that  the  judge,  or  another
       judge, might have taken against the appellant. Mr  Wilding  confirmed
       in advancing his oral submissions in  support  of  the  grounds  that
       there was no perversity challenge pursued. The real complaint is that
       the assessment of the judge was not properly informed by the  matters
       he was required to have regard to by the provision of s117. Also,  Mr
       Wilding submitted that the judge erred in finding that there  existed
       family life because there was no evidence of dependency or  that  the
       ties went beyond what would be expected in any  relationship  between
       adult relatives and that the judge fell  into  error  in  considering
       that the appellant might expect to achieve financial independence and
       fluency in the English language  at  some  future  time,  when  those
       features were not established at the date of the hearing.  The  judge
       was required to weigh those matters  against  the  appellant  and  he
       failed to do so.

   15. I will address in turn each of the challenges raised in the  grounds,
       as  I  have  listed  above,  in  the  light  of  Mr  Wilding's   oral
       submissions.

   16. I do not  accept  that  the  judge  erred  in  considering  that  the
       appellant met the requirements of s117(B)(2) and (3) because he would
       become financially independent and fluent in the English language  in
       the future. The judge was simply recording the fact that, as required
       by those provisions, he was  having  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
       appellant did not have language fluency or financial independence but
       was explaining why, despite that counting against the  appellant,  he
       still  concluded  that  his  article  8  claim  should  succeed.   In
       recognising that these were factors to which he was required to  have
       regard, the judge was doing precise what s117 demanded of him.

   17. For the same reason, nor can it be said that the  judge  was  somehow
       finding that, at the date of the hearing, somehow the requirements of
       s117B were met vicariously by the appellant's siblings.

   18. Therefore, the judge did not fail to weigh these matters against  the
       appellant. He has given legally  sufficient  reasons  for  explaining
       why, in his judgement, in this particular case,  the  fact  that  the
       appellant did not meet  these  requirements  did  not  weigh  heavily
       against him.

   19. There is no merit in the ground complaining that the judge failed  to
       attach  little  weight  to  private  life   established   while   the
       appellant's immigration status was precarious because the appeal  was
       not allowed on the basis of the appellant's right to respect for  any
       private life.

   20. The grounds complain next that the  judge  was  wrong  to  find  that
       family life existed because the evidence did  not  disclose  anything
       that went beyond the normal ties or bonds one  would  expect  between
       adult relatives. But it is plain from a reading of the  determination
       why the judge arrived at that conclusion. He heard oral evidence from
       the appellant, his mother and his sister and so the  judge  was  best
       placed to make that judgement. That may not have been the  only  view
       possible of the evidence but I am unable to say that it was  one  not
       open to the judge on the evidence before him.

   21. Similarly, the absence of specific evidence  of  dependency  did  not
       disqualify the judge from being entitled to arrive at the  conclusion
       he did. The judge looked at the evidence as a whole and was  entitled
       to conclude that  the  circumstances  in  which  this  family  became
       separated and then reunited, taken together with the circumstances in
       which the appellant's mother, now aged 71 and, in his view,  unlikely
       to be able to visit the appellant in Somalia or anywhere else, had to
       flee from Somalia to seek asylum, were sufficient to demonstrate  the
       existence of family life  where,  absent  those  characteristics,  it
       might not exist. In his submissions, Mr Wilding suggested  that  this
       reasoning  may  be  thought  to  illustrate  that   the   judge   was
       impermissibly using article 8 of the ECHR as  a  "general  dispensing
       power". However, it seems to me that the judge was focussing upon the
       relationships as they were and the impact  upon  those  concerned  of
       bringing  about  a  separation,  that  being  a  legitimate  area  of
       application of rights protected by article 8.

   22. Next, the grounds point out that the judge did not address  the  fact
       that there were 2 siblings of the appellant in the United Kingdom who
       did not attend the  hearing  to  give  evidence  in  support  of  the
       appellant's claim. However,  the  family  life  found  to  exist  was
       between the appellant, his mother and sister, those three individuals
       living together in the same household. The fact  that  the  appellant
       may have other relatives in the United Kingdom with whom he  did  not
       enjoy family life was not something  that  in  any  way  diluted  the
       strength of the relationships that were found by the judge to be more
       significant in terms of the claim under article 8.

   23. The final complaint that can be distilled from the  grounds  is  that
       the judge erred in failing to recognise that s.117 does not  envisage
       family life existing  outside  a  qualifying  partner  or  qualifying
       child.  Mr  Wilding  did  not  seek  to  enlarge  upon  that  in  his
       submissions and was plainly correct not to do so. It cannot  sensibly
       be argued that the effect of s117 is that family  life  cannot  exist
       except between qualifying  partners  or  between  parents  and  minor
       children.

   24. Drawing all of this together I reach the following conclusions.  This
       was a fact based assessment for the judge to carry out and, as he had
       the benefit of hearing oral evidence, he was best placed to do so. As
       was observed by Carnwath LJ (as he  then  was)  in  Mukarkar  v  SSHD
       [2006] EWCA Civ 1045:

           "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy, but they are
           not made easier or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
           analysis. It is of the nature of such judgments  that  different
           tribunals,  without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may   reach
           different conclusions on the same case (as is indeed illustrated
           by Mr Fountain's decision after the second  hearing).  The  mere
           fact that one tribunal has reached what may  seem  an  unusually
           generous view of the facts of a particular case  does  not  mean
           that it has made an error of law, so as  to  justify  an  appeal
           under the old system, or an order for reconsideration under  the
           new. Nor does it create  any  precedent,  so  as  to  limit  the
           Secretary of State's right  to  argue  for  a  more  restrictive
           approach on a similar case in the future. However, on the  facts
           of the particular case, the decision of the specialist  tribunal
           should be respected."

   25. It may well be that this appellant is the beneficiary of  a  generous
       decision and that the outcome of his appeal may have  been  different
       had it been determined by another judge. It may well be  that  it  is
       possible to construct lines of reasoning that sit uncomfortably  with
       those set out in this determination, for example the fact  that  this
       appellant had been able to buy himself a ticket for his flight to the
       United Kingdom is not altogether easy to  reconcile  with  a  finding
       that there would be no scope for future face to face  contact  if  he
       were not granted leave to remain. But the question to be addressed by
       the Upper Tribunal is whether the grounds that have been advanced  in
       challenge to the decision of the judge have identified  an  error  of
       law such as  to  require  that  it  be  set  aside.  Having  examined
       carefully each of those grounds of challenge I am satisfied, for  the
       reasons  I  have  given,  that  whether  considered  individually  or
       cumulatively, those grounds have not established that the judge  made
       any error of law.

  Summary of decision

   26. The First-tier Tribunal made no error of  law  and  the  decision  of
       Judge O'Flynn to dismiss the appeal,  contained  in  a  determination
       promulgated on 15 January 2015, is to stand.

   27. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.






                               Signed   [pic]


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:    1 April 2015


