
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05682/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 September 2014                            |On 6th Nov 2014               |
|                                                |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STAE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               TABATH MUTANGA


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Dr M Mavaza, Walters, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Tabath Mutanga, was born on 1 May 1970 and is a  female
    citizen of Zimbabwe.  I shall hereafter refer to the appellant  as  the
    respondent and to the respondent as the  appellant  (as  they  appeared
    respectively  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The  appellant  has
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State  dated  27  May
    2013 to refuse to grant her asylum and to make directions to remove her
    from the United Kingdom.  Her appeal  was  allowed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cohen) in a determination  promulgated  9  April  2014.
    The Secretary of State now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There is effectively one ground of  appeal.   Although  the  judge,  in
    assessing risk on return, made reference to CM  (EM  Country  Guidance;
    Disclosure) Zimbabwe  [2013]  UKUT  00059  (IAC)   and  EM  and  Others
    (Returnees) Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 98 (IAC)  at [7] it appears that at
    [22] he applied the out of date  country  guidance  of  RN  (Returnees)
    Zimbabwe CG 2008 UKIAT 00083..  At [22], the judge wrote:

         "The appellant has undertaken numerous political activities  whilst
         in the UK.  I accept that the appellant  has  attended  a  Zimbabwe
         Vigil on a regular basis from the photographs provided  to  me  and
         letter from  the  organisation.   I  accept  the  evidence  of  the
         appellant having published a website  against  the  regime.   I  am
         compelled from the weight and quality of the evidence  provided  to
         me to accept that the appellant has been a  political  activist  on
         behalf of the opposition including the MDC in the UK.  I find  that
         this would become known to the authorities in  Zimbabwe  and  place
         the appellant at great risk upon return.  I find having  regard  to
         the risk factors of EM and RN Zimbabwe that  the  appellant  has  a
         number of identifying factors that would place at risk upon  return
         (sic) as well as her sur place political activities  she  has  been
         out of Zimbabwe for a number of years, has been present in  the  UK
         and will be returned as a failed asylum seeker.  I  find  that  she
         would not be able to demonstrate support for the  ZANU-PF  on  upon
         return.  I conclude that the appellant would be at risk based  upon
         her UK political  activities  based  upon  the  current  prevailing
         political situation in Zimbabwe upon return.  In the light of these
         factors I am satisfied the appellant has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution [upon] return to Zimbabwe.   I  find  that  her  asylum
         claim falls to be allowed."

 3. Later, at [24] the judge observed:

         "I note that having regard to the  present  case  law  that  whilst
         returnees are returned with contempt and suspicion  on  return  and
         face a hostile atmosphere that does not in itself indicate  a  real
         risk of persecution.  Based on my findings above the  appellant  is
         of adverse interest to the authorities I find that she comes within
         the risk categories identified within the case.  The appellant  has
         attended the Zimbabwe Vigil and has spoken out against  the  regime
         in a TV broadcast.  I find the appellant would be  of  interest  to
         the authorities based upon political opinion.  I find the appellant
         comes into the risk categories identified in the case law.  I  find
         the appellant cannot demonstrate loyalty to the regime.   Based  on
         my findings, I find that the appellant would be of interest to  the
         authorities on return.

    Leaving aside the somewhat circular argument that is  set  out  in  the
    latter paragraph, it is unclear to which "case" the judge is  referring
    at [24].  The respondent is right to point out that the guidance of  EM
    (reaffirmed by CM) differs from that in  RN.   Having  said  that,  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal do not  seek  to  challenge  the
    findings  of  Judge  Cohen.   That  aspect  of  the  case  is   further
    complicated by the outcome of a hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Freeman in this appeal on 9 June 2014.  Judge Freeman did not  actually
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal determination on the  basis  that  it
    contained an error of law although  he  indicated  in  his  ruling  and
    directions that the judge's failure to apply  the  appropriate  country
    guidance was "was material enough in  this  case  to  require  a  fresh
    hearing."  The remainder of the ruling and  directions  concerns  Judge
    Freeman's  attempt  to  link  the  instant  appeal  with  that  of  the
    appellant's daughter  (AA/00490/2014)  which  I  happened  to  hear  at
    Bradford on 1 July 2014.  At that time, I was not aware of  the  appeal
    proceedings  concerning  Tabath  Mutanga  the  current  appellant.    I
    dismissed the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the daughter's appeal on asylum and  human
    rights grounds.

 4. Having considered  Judge  Cohen's  determination  carefully,  I  remain
    concerned that it remains  unclear  exactly  upon  what  basis  he  has
    allowed the appeal.  His reference to "the case"  at  [24]  appears  to
    invoke one of the items of country guidance jurisprudence  to  which  I
    have referred above but it is not clear which one.   This  may  perhaps
    have not been a significant problem if the risk factors  to  which  the
    judge referred were those detailed in EM and CM.   However,  the  judge
    appears to go beyond the guidance of those cases by placing  weight  on
    the fact that the appellant would not be able  to  demonstrate  support
    for ZANU-PF (a feature of the country guidance in RN but of  much  less
    significance in EM and CM).  It was also  not  clear  how  the  judge's
    findings that the appellant's sur place activities would  be  known  to
    the Zimbabwean authorities (therefore exposing her  to  possible  risk)
    may be reconciled with the existing country guidance.  In the light  of
    these observations, I have decided  to  set  aside  the  determination.
    However, I preserve the following facts which are not  tainted  by  the
    error of law which I have identified: (i) the appellant published a web
    page in the United Kingdom concerning politics  in  Zimbabwe  (ii)  the
    appellant's daughter was targeted and sexually abused by  a  member  of
    ZANU-PF and has undertaken MDC activities in Zimbabwe  and  the  United
    Kingdom (iii) the appellant has attended  the  Zimbabwe  Vigil  in  the
    United Kingdom (iv) the appellant's house was raided in Zimbabwe and at
    that time she came to the attention of the Zimbabwean  authorities  (v)
    the appellant's claim that her husband worked  for  the  government  in
    Zimbabwe investigating claims of ZANU-PF corruption and that her father
    was allegedly killed by the authorities are matters of  little  weight.
    The First-tier Tribunal to which this case is now remitted will need to
    have regard to those findings considering risk on return in  the  light
    of the current country guidance.  The analysis will need  to  focus  on
    the nature of the appellant's political profile in  Zimbabwe  (if  any)
    and I accept that this may require further evidence in order to provide
    the Tribunal with an adequate matrix of facts upon which  to  make  its
    risk assessment.

DECISION

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 9
    April 2014 is set aside.  The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal (not Judge Cohen) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Signed                              Date 10 October 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
