
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05027/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 July 2013                               |On 1 August 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                              ABDUL HAMEED SYED

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Whitehouse, Counsel, instructed by Longfellow
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  8  February  1968.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 4 May 2013 and claimed asylum.

2.   Asylum was refused by the respondent on 20 May 2013.

3.   Although it was accepted that the appellant was  a  police  officer  it
    was not accepted that he was an Ahmadi as claimed.

4.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolley on 21 June 2013.

5.   Although she found the appellant to be an Ahmadi she did not find  that
    he would be at risk upon return and therefore dismissed the  appeal  on
    asylum and on human rights grounds.

6.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that decision  and  permission
    to appeal was granted on 27 June 2013.

7.   Initially the hearing was conducted under  the  fast  track  provisions
    but following the grant of bail the matter was listed at Field House in
    the usual way.  The matter came before me in pursuance of the grant  of
    leave.

8.   In summary the appellant was a police officer.

9.   The appellant was careful to whom and with whom he discussed his  faith
    as an Ahmadi.

10.  In September 2008 a leader of the Ahmadi community was shot and  killed
    by one Imran.  The appellant through his contacts obtained the name  of
    that individual who was arrested but subsequently was released  through
    lack of evidence.

11.  That person began to cause  trouble  for  the  appellant  and  for  his
    family.  An FIR was lodged against his uncle and his uncle's son and an
    FIR was lodged against the appellant himself on 12  April  2013  and  a
    warrant issued on 13 April  2013.   Thus  it  was  that  the  appellant
    removed himself from the jurisdiction and came to the United Kingdom.

12.  The Judge did not accept that the appellant was wanted  by  members  of
    the KN or that he had received threats.

13.  A matter of some  concern,  however,  is  the  approach  taken  to  the
    potentially important documents of  the  FIR  and  arrest  warrant.  At
    paragraph 46 of the determination the  Judge  expresses  some  surprise
    that the appellant had made no mention previously of the fact that  the
    documents had been issued against  him.  It is not clear  from  such  a
    comment whether or not  the  Judge  accepts  that  the  documents  were
    genuine or finds that they were not. Given the potential importance  of
    such documents clear findings should have been made.

14.  Perhaps of greater concern, however, is the way in which the Judge  has
    sought to approach the appellant's faith were he to be returned in  the
    light of country guidance case  of  MN  &  Others  (Ahmadis  -  country
    conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).

15.  The Judge did  not  find  that  the  appellant's  behaviour  whilst  in
    Pakistan amounted to proselytising. She accepted that the appellant did
    not engage openly but was rather concerned to relate on a  one  to  one
    basis.  The  Judge however went on to comment "nor am I satisfied  that
    the appellant has shown any desire to act differently  or  demonstrated
    that he would do so should he be returned to Pakistan."  Little  reason
    is given for that conclusion.

16.  It is clear that in his account the appellant has frequently  indicated
    that he was careful with whom he spoke about  his  faith.   MN  however
    requires a decision maker to consider what the appellant would wish  to
    do were he to return, discretion for fear of  the  authorities  is  not
    sufficient.

17.  I raised those concerns for the considerations of the  parties  at  the
    hearing. Mr Walker who represents the respondent most fairly  indicated
    that he too was concerned as to those elements.  He conceded that there
    was therefore an error of law in the approach such that there should be
    a re-hearing of the matter.

18.  I discussed with Miss Whitehouse, who represents the appellant,  as  to
    the way forward. On one view it would be sensible to  send  the  matter
    back to Judge Woolley for her to consider  MN  in  particular  and  the
    documents also.

19.  I was informed that the appellant had changed his solicitors from  Howe
    & Co to  his current  solicitors  of  Longfellow  Solicitors.   Further
    documents were to be sought and instructions to be given.

20.  Looking  at  the  matter  overall  it  seems  to  me  that  the  Senior
    President's Practice Directions paragraph 7 is satisfied.  There  would
    need to be new evidence presented and arguments on a  large  number  of
    documents.  In those circumstances a rehearing seems to me  to  be  the
    appropriate and fair course to take in all the circumstances.

Directions

    1.   The decision of Judge Woolley shall be  set  aside  save  for  the
         findings that the appellant was at a material time a policeman  and
         that he is a member of the Ahmadi community.


    2.   The hearing of the appeal  will  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


    3.   An interpreter in the Urdu language is required.


    4.   The hearing of the appeal will take place  on  7  October  in  the
         morning at Hatton Cross.


    5.   All documents to be relied upon should be served no later  than  5
         days before the  hearing.   A  paginated  bundle  of  documents  is
         required.


    6.   Mr Walker indicated  that  the  respondent  would  be  seeking  to
         present  the  visa  application  at  that  hearing.   Any   further
         directions  will  be  issued  as  appropriate  by  the   First-tier
         Tribunal.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
