

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 05847 2010

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 5 March 2014                               |                             |
|                                              |7 March 2014                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                             VIJAYAKUMAR KESAVAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Interpreter:  Mr S Ananthavarathan, Tamil/English
                                DETERMINATION

 1. This appeal comes before me by reason of a consent  order  made  by  the
    Court of Appeal on 27 January 2014 that "the matter be remitted  to  the
    Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) for reconsideration".

 2. It concerns an appeal by a citizen of Sri Lanka against  a  decision  of
    the respondent to remove him from the United Kingdom. The appellant says
    that he is a refugee and that removing him is  contrary  to  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  but  that  decision
    was wrong in law and was set aside  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  which  re-
    determined the  appeal.  Regrettably  the  determination  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal was so delayed that the Upper Tribunal's  decision  was  itself
    unsatisfactory and the Court of Appeal ordered  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    reconsider the case. Significantly the Upper Tribunal was not ordered to
    re-hear the case.

 4. No findings of fact have been preserved and the case needs to  be  heard
    again. The appellant wishes  to  amend  his  evidence  by  updating  his
    evidence about his personal circumstances and, possibly, by adducing new
    evidence about the risk he claims to face in Sri Lanka.

 5. Both parties agree that, in the circumstances,  the  case  can  be  best
    dealt with by the First-tier Tribunal and, with  their  consent  and  at
    their invitation, I order that the appeal be  determined  again  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 6. To assist that end I give the following directions:
                                 DIRECTIONS

A. The appeal will be listed for hearing at Hatton  Cross  on  7  July  2014
   with a time estimate of 3 hours.

B. A Tamil interpreter will attend.

C. No later than 30 June 2014 the appellant shall serve  on  the  respondent
   and the First-tier Tribunal a paginated bundle of all written material on
   which he seeks to rely including,  if  he  wishes  to  give  evidence,  a
   witness statement from the appellant drawn to stand as evidence in  chief
   without the need for further questions.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 5 March 2014                   |










