
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05518/2014
                                                               AA/05519/2014
                                                               AA/05520/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 January 2018                    |On 21 February 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                    [A R], his wife and minor daughter, R
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellants:    Mr L. Rahman, the Chambers of M.M. Hossain
For the respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The principal appellant,  [AR],  ('the  appellant')  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh  who  was  born  on  [  ]  1988.  He  appeals  against   the
    determination  of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Scott-Baker and Reid) promulgated following  a  hearing
    on 26 February 2015  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the
    decision of 18 July 2014 made by the respondent refusing to  grant  him
    asylum and to give directions under paragraph 10A of Schedule 2 to  the
    Immigration Act 1971. His wife  and  daughter  are  dependants  to  his
    claim.


 2. At the hearing before the panel, Mr Hossain, who appeared on behalf  of
    the appellants, conceded that the appellant could not come  within  the
    terms of the Refugee Convention. Accordingly, the panel determined  the
    appeal on the basis that the issue was whether the appellant or members
    of his family were at risk of serious harm on return to  Bangladesh  or
    whether he or they were at risk  of  a  violation  of  their  protected
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul
    expressly stated that it was arguable the panel erred in its assessment
    of letters provided by Bangladeshi lawyers which purported  to  support
    the appellant's claim. However, he permitted all grounds to be  argued,
    without otherwise giving his view as to their merit.

 4. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 23 July 2009 as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student with permission to remain until 31 October  2011.  He
    travelled to Bangladesh in December 2010, having in the previous  month
    married his wife [S] by proxy on [ ] 2010. He  re-entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 24 February 2011 and his wife arrived in the United  Kingdom
    on 8 May 2011. Their daughter, R, was born on [ ] 2012 in  the  United
    Kingdom. She is now five years old.

 5. The basis of his claim was that his wife was  and  remains  a  Buddhist
    whilst he is a Muslim.  They  married  without  the  consent  of  their
    families. In particular, his wife's family has pursued a prolonged  and
    vindictive campaign against him. In doing so, the appellant claims they
    have sought to invoke the  law  against  him  by  pursuing  a  criminal
    prosecution on a charge of kidnapping and abduction.

 6. It goes without saying that these allegations are completely false  and
    that there is no  credible  evidence  to  that  effect,  save  for  the
    unsupported claims of those who wish the couple  harm.   They  will  be
    able to establish that his wife left her family home;  that  they  bear
    the  appellant  ill-will  but  that  is  no  evidence   of   abduction.
    Furthermore, the allegation of kidnapping and abduction  is  belied  by
    the fact that they married on [ ] 2010, have lived a happy and  loving
    family life together in the United Kingdom for many years past in  what
    is often described as a genuine and subsisting relationship and have  a
    child as the most obvious and visible sign of their commitment to  each
    other. It is inconceivable that his wife would not support him  in  any
    prosecution and any prosecution  is  bound  to  fail  unless  there  is
    evidence from his wife as a complainant. Hence,  we  would  regard  the
    animosity that he claims is directed towards the couple by both his and
    his wife's families as being incapable of delivering the harm which  is
    the centrepiece of the claim.

 7. It only requires a limited  consideration  of  the  claim  to  see  how
    threadbare it is. It relies upon the claim that he will be  prosecuted,
    convicted  and  sentenced  (so  it  is  said)  to  as  much   as   life
    imprisonment.  He claims this unfortunate result is  established  as  a
    reasonable likelihood when there is no truth in the allegation whatever
    and that the Bangladeshi justice system  is  incapable  of  determining
    truth and falsehood. Inevitably, it relies  upon  a  finding  that  the
    police, the prosecuting authorities, the judges both at first  instance
    and on appeal are either complicit  in  what  will  be  a  travesty  of
    justice or will be persuaded by  whatever  false  evidence  his  wife's
    family  are  able  to  produce,  notwithstanding  her  claim  that  the
    allegations are nonsense and the embittered fabrication of her  family.
    The claim pays scant regard to the fact that the appellant  has  access
    to lawyers (indeed, his claim includes letters purporting to come  from
    several lawyers) who have a right of audience and are able to  pinpoint
    the obvious flaws in the  allegations  made  against  him.  We  do  not
    consider it remotely possible that the safeguards that exist would  not
    afford the appellant adequate protection against the  malign  influence
    of his wife's family.

 8.  Furthermore,  although  it  is  said  that  his  wife's   family   are
    'influential',  such influence as they may wield  has  to  be  assessed
    against the lack of any obvious motivation likely to be felt by police,
    prosecutors and judges to harm the appellant and his family. Why should
    a prosecutor adopt a perverse antipathy against the appellant  and  his
    family without any personal animus? To be 'influential' (about which we
    shall say more  later)  is  one  thing  but  to  be  the  malign  force
    controlling  the  strings  of  innumerable  individuals  in  places  of
    authority is, in our judgment, quite another.

 9. The basis of the appellant's claim is both implausible and  incredible.
    It is against this background that we come to assess the critique  that
    is made of the panel's determination concerning the weight that  should
    be attached to the lawyers' letters. As will shortly  become  apparent,
    none of the letters speak of these fundamental flaws in the prospect of
    a successful prosecution. Whilst it may be said that the  lawyers  were
    not asked to give an opinion on that matter, we would expect any lawyer
    worth his salt to have at least some  regard  to  the  prospects  of  a
    successful prosecution, rather than confining himself  to  an  entirely
    speculative outcome, were this to occur. Many  lawyers  might  properly
    give their opinion that we would be sentenced  to  a  lengthy  term  of
    imprisonment if we were to rob the Bank of England but  we  reckon  few
    would do so without saying that the chances of our doing so  were  non-
    existent. This is not simply a matter of speculation but  a  commentary
    grounded upon experience.

10. We approach this appeal by accepting the premise upon which  it  stands
    that his wife is a Buddhist and continues to practice as one,  that  he
    is a Muslim and that their union is disapproved of by their parents. We
    are  not  persuaded  that  his  wife's  assertion  in  their   marriage
    certificate that she was  a  Muslim  is  probative  because  there  was
    evidence that their marriage could not have taken place in the  absence
    of such a declaration.

11. It is unnecessary to us to recite the background  material  upon  which
    the panel relied.  Suffice it to say that no challenge is made  to  the
    general proposition that Bangladeshi law recognises mixed marriages and
    that extreme Muslim groups may sometimes attempt to  prevent  them  but
    rarely succeed.  Discrimination is more likely  to  be  felt  in  rural
    areas and amongst those who are less well-off or are  poorly  educated.
    As the panel recorded in paragraphs 69 to  76,  there  is  a  level  of
    societal discrimination but the relatively well-off and better educated
    would not face harassment from the general population.

12. The panel also pointed out the prevalence of false  documentation  that
    is available.  This point should  obviously  be  approached  with  some
    caution.  This does not mean that  all  documentary  evidence  must  be
    rejected for this reason alone.  All that such a factor  can  establish
    is that a decision maker is entitled to  examine  documentary  evidence
    with care and is permitted a critical  examination  of  it  within  the
    framework of an assessment of the evidence as a whole.

13. It was part of the appellant's case that his family was so  politically
    powerful that they were able to arrange almost  unimaginable  feats  of
    surveillance upon him and his wife.  Thus,  for  example,  using  their
    mobile telephones, 'they' (by which he  meant  his  wife's  family  and
    their associates in collusion with the authorities) were able to  track
    them down using the mobile telephone network  to  do  so.   This  would
    suggest that their power or influence extended beyond the legal  system
    and extended into the network providers in Bangladesh.  We know that it
    is possible to track an individual's mobile telephone and that,  within
    the United Kingdom, there have been high-profile  cases  where  missing
    persons have been traced using the signal from their  mobile  telephone
    to locate where it was being used.  The appellant's case goes  further.
    In paragraph 37 of the determination, the panel recorded that his  wife
    adopted an anti-surveillance routine by changing Sim  cards  so  as  to
    enable her to use  her  mobile  without  being  traced.   Nevertheless,
    'they' countered this by extending the web of surveillance  to  tracing
    not his wife's mobile but her friends' mobiles by which they were  able
    to trace her indirectly (as she explained).

14. We frankly confess that we would regard this claim as nothing short  of
    fantastic.  Nevertheless it was by this method, so it is claimed,  that
    'they' were able to trace her as his wife moved through various  cities
    including being present at a bail hearing that took place in  Dhaka  in
    January 2011.  No explanation was given as to how 'they' were  able  to
    obtain the appellant's telephone number, given her  evidence  that  she
    had taken action to avoid being traced by changing her  Sim  card.   We
    recall that this level of surveillance is not directed by the  security
    services in order to foil a major terrorist incident but was engaged to
    trace a young couple who had eloped in opposition to their parents.

15. Nevertheless, in spite of the influence that it is claimed  her  family
    were able to exert over the authorities in Bangladesh, when her  family
    attended the court in Dhaka and met up with the appellant's wife,  they
    were unable to re-take her, either themselves or with the assistance of
    the police.  Instead, the couple managed to escape by getting on a  bus
    [39].   If the authorities really believed she had been kidnapped, this
    would have been an attempt to 'rescue'  her  from  the  appellant,  her
    kidnapper.  This hypothesis sits uneasily with  her  claim  that  'they
    escaped by getting on a bus'.

16.  These  elements  of  the  claim  were  considered  by  the  panel  who
    (understandably, we think, but certainly  lawfully)  rejected  them  as
    incredible.  They rejected the claim that the  Bangladeshi  authorities
    had sought to track the  appellant  or  his  wife  through  the  mobile
    telephone network [80].  They rejected the claim that the wife's family
    exercised  the  power  that  was  attributed  to  them  and  yet   were
    ineffectual in securing her return to them when they  met  outside  the
    court in Dhaka [82].


17. It is against this background that the panel came to assess  the  three
    letters from lawyers  submitted  in  support  of  the  claim  that  the
    appellant was at risk from being falsely prosecuted.

18. In addition there is an  arrest  warrant  dated  29  March  2011  which
    purports to establish the appellant is to be arrested as he:

         "... stands charged with the offence of kidnapping Women."

19. There is also a record of a hearing in the Supreme Court in  Bangladesh
    in relation to the pending case before  the  Magistrate  in  Chittagong
    dated 4 January 2011.  In this, the Supreme Court ordered the appellant
    be allowed his  freedom  on  anticipatory  bail  for  4  months.   This
    hearing, of course, predates the arrest warrant.  It appears to suggest
    the appellant being granted bail before his arrest whilst at  the  same
    time recording that  proceedings  were  already  in  train  before  the
    Magistrate in Chittagong.

20. The first letter dated 26 September 2012, which post-dates  the  arrest
    warrant but does not refer to it, speaks of the criminal  case  against
    him before the Magistrate  in  Chittagong.   It  records  that  he  was
    granted anticipated bail from the High Court on  4  January  2011.   Mr
    Karim said that he advised the appellant that there was  no  chance  of
    obtaining bail:

         "Due to its very strict nature of operation by which granting  bail
         is impossible until the trial is finished but the trial  would  not
         take place in less than 3 years time.  Therefore  given  the  above
         facts together with the fact that Mr Robin  has  already  left  the
         country  would  definitely  put  him  into  prison  for  indefinite
         period."

21. Pausing there, the letter raised a number of  difficulties.   The  High
    Court, so it is said, granted him 'anticipatory bail'.  Mr Karim refers
    to this as 'anticipated bail', an obvious lapse in language.   However,
    the concept of the High Court granting anticipated or anticipatory bail
    for an offence for which the granting of bail is  'impossible'  strikes
    us as being somewhat anomalous, or at the very least as calling for  an
    explanation.  The High Court order speaks on 4 January 2011 of the case
    'now pending' before the Magistrate.  It is the same offence for  which
    bail is impossible.  Nevertheless, the appellant was granted bail for 4
    months (until 4 May 2011?).  He is then subject to an arrest warrant on
    29 March 2011 for an offence for which bail is impossible.   The  panel
    could not be expected to know the refinements of  the  bail  system  in
    Bangladesh but it is to be expected  that  they  should  be  adequately
    advised about it.   If  they  are  not,  it  is  neither  unlawful  nor
    irrational for the  panel  to  express  the  view  that  they  are  not
    satisfied the material is adequate to establish the risk relied upon by
    the appellant.

22. The letter goes on to record that Mr Karim understands that photographs
    have been circulated throughout the police station in the  country  for
    his arrest '... so he cannot hide in any part of the  country'.   Quite
    apart from Mr Karim  failing  to  explain  how  he  has  come  by  this
    information, it strikes us as being surprising that each  of  the  many
    police stations in Bangladesh is routinely provided with photographs of
    an individual in relation to whom there is  an  arrest  warrant.   Once
    again, this calls for an explanation or  at  least  provides  food  for
    thought.  Is this done electronically in relation to all those  subject
    to criminal proceedings?  If not,  who  produces  the  photographs  for
    circulation?  Is it done only for some offences?  If so, what  are  the
    criteria?

23. Finally, the letter goes on to  state  that  the  punishment  that  the
    appellant faces is up to 10 years: 'In  any  event,  most  accused  are
    convicted in the Court in this kind of cases'.  We are bound to ask: Is
    this his professional view as to an individual who is  innocent?   What
    if there is no evidence against the individual?  What if his wife gives
    the lie to these fabricated allegations?  If this is  his  professional
    opinion as to the outcome, we would expect his opinion to be based upon
    the  evidence  in  an  individual  case,  rather  than  a   gloom-laden
    generalisation.  We are bound to wonder why he takes on a case  if  his
    efforts are bound to be in vain.  Would he not do better to advise  his
    client to flee the country?  Accordingly, we consider it  was  open  to
    the panel to question the weight to be attached to this  letter.   This
    is not to dismiss it out of  hand  but  to  consider  it  with  anxious
    scrutiny.

24. The second letter is from Mr  Debonath  dated  24  November  2014.   It
    records the appellant as being treated as an absconder.  This  suggests
    the arrest warrant has been served  upon  him  and  he  has  failed  to
    appear.  Without his being served, it is problematic to  think  of  his
    being an absconder.  He left the United Kingdom in  December  2010  and
    departed from Bangladesh lawfully, re-entering the United Kingdom on 24
    February 2011.  The arrest warrant is dated 29 March 2011  and  he  has
    never been personally served with it.  Once again, the anomaly  has  to
    be explained if he is  to  be  treated  under  Bangladeshi  law  as  an
    absconder.

25. The letter repeats that he will not be granted bail; that  the  offence
    does not permit bail and the case will take between 2 and  3  years  to
    resolve.  So much is consistent (or roughly so) with the letter  of  Mr
    Karim.

26. The third letter is from Mr Adil.  He states that,  if  proved,  he  is
    liable to imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term not
    exceeding 14 years.  This is in contrast to the letter of Mr Karim  who
    stated that he would face up to 10 years' imprisonment.   The  two  are
    inconsistent.

27. The panel considered the letters in paragraph 83.  They did not  accept
    that the arrest warrant was a genuine document  with  its  accompanying
    letter from Mr Debonath.  The panel said in relation to  Mr  Debonath's
    letter which

         "... stated that the relevant law did not allow bail until the case
         was finally determined which ran counter to the  appellant's  claim
         that he had been granted anticipatory bail in January 2011."

28. Mr Rahman sought to explain that there was no contradiction  here.   He
    said anticipatory bail was bail granted before the  legal  process  was
    fully in place.  Once the case was 'up and running' (as it  were)  then
    bail was out of the question.  There is no warrant for this distinction
    in the background material or the evidence submitted by the  appellant.
    It would be curious that a person  might  be  arrested  for  a  serious
    offence and then granted bail in anticipation of his being  charged  at
    which point there would be  no  question  of  bail.   Furthermore,  the
    anticipatory bail that was granted was described as  being  granted  in
    the course of pending proceedings, that is, proceedings  that  are  'up
    and running'.  This sits oddly with bail being anticipatory.

29. The panel went on in paragraph 83:

         "Mr Debonath stated he was acting for the appellant in  the  matter
         before the Chittagong magistrates but his evidence was different to
         that of Mr Karim who also acting for the  appellant  in  connection
         with the criminal matter before the Chittagong magistrates but  his
         evidence was different who had not referred to the  arrest  warrant
         in his letter of 2012 -  the  evidence  from  the  two  lawyers  is
         internally inconsistent."

30. It is obvious that it is not internally inconsistent for  a  lawyer  to
    say he is acting for the appellant in 2012 and for another to say he is
    acting in 2014, since an individual may change his lawyer.  However, Mr
    Adil's letter and Mr Karim's letter give inconsistent maximum sentences
    for, apparently, the same offence.

31. For these reasons, whatever the criticism made of the panel's treatment
    of the letters, what is perfectly clear  is  that  the  panel  was  not
    prepared to attach significant weight to them in the assessment of risk
    on return.  We are satisfied that this conclusion was properly open  to
    the panel and, from our own examination of  the  material,  we  are  as
    bewildered as the panel obviously was with the documentation  provided.
    The assessment required an holistic approach which was  bound  to  take
    into account the appellant's  claim  that  he  was  the  victim  of  an
    entirely  unjustified  allegation   made   against   him   but   which,
    nevertheless, (so he claims) would result in a miscarriage  of  justice
    of such  magnitude  as  to  result  in  his  being  sentenced  to  life
    imprisonment (or alternatively 10 years' imprisonment)  and  there  was
    nothing that anyone could do to prevent it.  At the very least he would
    be imprisoned for 2 or 3 years without the prospect of bail.   Such  an
    inherently unlikely claim is bound to have been  viewed  by  the  panel
    with a proper degree of scepticism.

32. This is the crux of the appeal advanced by the appellant before us and,
    for the reasons we have provided, we reject it.

DECISION

33.  The  panel  made  no  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the  original
    determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                             16 January 2018
