
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05245/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 4th January 2016                  |On 11th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     XL
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge  C  Mather
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 28th July 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant arrived in the United Kingdom in April  2009  and  claimed
    asylum on 8th April  2014.   Her  claim  was  based  upon  her  imputed
    political opinion, and membership of a particular  social  group  as  a
    victim of trafficking and the mother of a child born  out  of  wedlock.
    The Appellant has a daughter who was born in this country on  26th  May
    2014.  The Claimant is a Chinese citizen.

 4. The application was refused on 10th March 2015.  The Secretary of State
    did not accept the credibility of the Claimant's account, and  did  not
    accept that she would be at risk if returned to China.   The  Secretary
    of State decided therefore that the Claimant  was  not  entitled  to  a
    grant of asylum or humanitarian protection, and that her  removal  from
    this country would not breach her human rights.

 5. The Claimant appealed and her appeal was heard by the FtT on 14th  July
    2015.  The FtT found  the  Claimant  to  be  a  credible  witness,  and
    accepted the submissions made  in  a  skeleton  argument  submitted  on
    behalf of the Claimant, and also accepted the conclusions  set  out  in
    two expert reports.  The FtT allowed the asylum appeal, and found  that
    the Claimant's removal would breach Article  3  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention),  and  found  that  it
    would not be in the best interests of the  Claimant's  daughter  to  be
    returned to China, and found that the Claimant would  face  significant
    obstacles in integrating into China, and the appeal was therefore  also
    allowed pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the grounds may be summarised as follows.

 7. Firstly it was submitted that the FtT had failed to give reasons or any
    adequate reasons for findings on material matters.   It  was  submitted
    that the FtT had  failed  to  provide  any  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings of fact made but had in  paragraphs  16-26  of  the  decision,
    provided a list of accepted facts,  without  any  adequate  reasons  to
    support them.  The FtT had not made  reasoned  findings  based  on  the
    evidence.  It was further submitted that the FtT had failed to  provide
    reasons why the FtT had not  followed  country  guidance  decisions  AX
    China CG [2012] UKUT 00097, ZC & Others China CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00028,
    and HC & RC China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027.  It was  also  submitted  that
    the FtT had failed to provide any adequate reasons for finding that the
    Claimant  and  her  daughter  would  face  significant   obstacles   in
    integrating into China.

 8. Secondly the Secretary of State contended  that  the  FtT  had  made  a
    material misdirection in law on a material matter by failing  to  apply
    the findings in several of the  relevant  country  guidance  cases  and
    failure to follow a country guidance  decision  without  giving  cogent
    reasons, amounted to a material misdirection in law.  The FtT  had  not
    referred to any of the country  guidance  decisions  mentioned  in  the
    preceding paragraph.

 9. Permission to appeal was given by Judge Pedro of the FtT who concluded;

         "The grounds disclose arguable errors of law."

10. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

11. Mr Harrison relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal.

The Claimant's Submissions

12. With reference to the country guidance decisions, Ms Easty pointed  out
    that the Secretary of State had not specified how the decision  of  the
    FtT conflicted with any country guidance decision  and  submitted  that
    the FtT decision disclosed no incompatibility with the country guidance
    cases.

13. In relation to adequacy of  reasoning,  Ms  Easty  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State had not taken direct issue with the Claimant's case,
    and  that  there  was  little  dispute  as  to  the   factual   matrix.
    Credibility issues had been addressed in paragraph 5  of  the  skeleton
    argument submitted to the FtT.

14. Ms Easty submitted that it was the contents of that  skeleton  argument
    and the expert reports that  had  been  adopted  by  the  FtT  and  had
    provided the reasons for the decision to allow the appeal.

15. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

16. The FtT materially erred in law in not providing adequate  reasons  for
    the findings made in paragraphs 16-26.  I set out below the headnote in
    MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC);

         "(1) It is axiomatic that a  determination  discloses  clearly  the
             reasons for a Tribunal's decision.

         (2)   If  a  Tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
             incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no  weight
             whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and
             for  such  findings  to  be  supported  by  reasons.   A  bare
             statement that a witness was not believed or that  a  document
             was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the  requirement
             to give reasons."

17. Further guidance was given in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014]
    UKUT 00341 (IAC) the headnote of which is set out below;

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost."

18. I disagree with the submission made on behalf of the Claimant that  the
    Secretary of State had very little dispute with the factual  matrix  of
    the Claimant's case.  My  understanding  of  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter dated 10th March 2015, is that the Secretary of  State  accepted
    the Claimant's nationality, but rejected other elements of her account,
    and for ease of reference I set out below the conclusions in  paragraph
    32 of that letter;

         "32. In summary your nationality has been accepted.   However,  the
             remainder of your  claim  has  been  rejected  including  your
             arrest due to a land dispute, any adverse  interest  from  the
             Chinese authorities, your journey to the UK  and  your  escape
             from the Snakeheads."

19. The Secretary of State considered the Claimant's account in  paragraphs
    19-32 of  the  refusal  letter,  and  gave  reasons  for  reaching  the
    conclusion set out in paragraph 32.

20. The FtT has not engaged with the reasons  given  by  the  Secretary  of
    State for not accepting the credibility of the Claimant's account.   It
    is understandable that the Secretary of State complains that she cannot
    understand why no weight has been attached to the issues raised in  the
    reasons for refusal letter relating to the Appellant's credibility, and
    no adequate reasons given as to why the Appellant was  found  to  be  a
    credible witness.

21. I set out below paragraphs 16-18 of the FtT decision;

         "16. In reaching my conclusions, I have taken into account all  the
             evidence put before me, including the background  information.



         17.  I accept the Appellant to be a credible witness.

         18.  I accept the conclusions set out in  the  reports  of  Natalia
             Dawkins and Stephanie Gordon.  I accept the arguments set  out
             in Mr Bradshaw's skeleton argument."

22. Having read the above paragraphs, the question that is  posed  is  why?
    One  would  expect  paragraphs  16-18  to  be  followed  by  paragraphs
    containing an analysis of the issues raised by the Secretary of  State,
    and reasons given for the findings made.  The FtT decision discloses no
    such analysis and no adequate reasons.

23. The decision of the FtT contains reference to submissions made  on  the
    Claimant's behalf, but there is no reference to any submissions made on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.

24. The failure to provide adequate reasons for findings  and  conclusions,
    is a material error of law and means that the decision of  the  FtT  is
    unsafe and is set aside with no findings preserved.

25. It is therefore unnecessary to consider in  detail  the  second  ground
    relied upon by the Secretary of State, in relation  to  departure  from
    country guidance decisions.  I note  that  only  one  country  guidance
    decision was referred to by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  refusal
    letter, that being HC & RC, and the relevance of  the  other  decisions
    has not been explained.

26. Both representatives agreed at the hearing, when I reserved my decision
    to consider submissions on error of law, that if a  material  error  of
    law was found, as contended by the Secretary of State, then it would be
    appropriate to remit the appeal back to the FtT to be heard again.

27. I have considered  paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements dated 25th September 2012, and find that it  is  appropriate
    to remit the appeal back to the FtT because of the nature and extent of
    judicial fact-finding that will be necessary in order for this decision
    to be remade.

28. The appeal will be heard at the FtT hearing centre  in  Stoke  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge C Mather.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings of  fact  preserved.


Anonymity

The FtT made an anonymity direction and  I  continue  that  anonymity  order
pursuant to rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.



Signed   Date 6th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed   Date 6th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

