
IAC-FH-AR-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05660/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2015                  |On 25 March 2015                     |
|Prepared 26 February 2015            |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS FREWEINI NEGASH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Howard, Counsel, instructed by Fountain
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The claimant, a national of  Eritrea,  date  of  birth  3  March  1992,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 28 July 2014, to make
    removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    1999, an asylum and human rights based  claim  having  failed,  and  an
    IS151A having been issued on 14 June 2014.

3.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Camp (the judge) who, on 17 December 2014,  allowed  the  appeal  on  a
    Refugee Convention ground and upon Article 8 ECHR grounds on the  basis
    that the Claimant faced the real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment
    and punishment or torture as a result of perceived  political  opinion.
    The judge did not go on to consider the issue of  whether  or  not  the
    Claimant formed  part  of  a  PSG  for  the  purposes  of  the  Refugee
    Convention [decision [D]30].

4.   It is fair to say that the judge's analysis of the  Refugee  Convention
    issue did not include internal relocation and domestic protection  were
    not assessed, apparently because it was  considered  the  threats  were
    posed by the state.

5.   The critical issue helpfully identified by Mr Mills was whether or  not
    the Claimant should be regarded as exempt from military service because
    of blindness in her left eye  as opposed to be required to do other, if
    non fighting, military service; when she had only one eye.

6.   This appears to me to have been an issue that could readily  have  been
    resolved by appropriate enquiries by the parties as to what is meant by
    being "blind for the purposes of military exemption" but it never  was.
    The judge found the  Secretary  of  State's  view  on  the  matter  was
    speculation. So the judge was  invited  to  consider  whether  such  an
    exemption did or did not apply to  the  factual  circumstances  of  the
    Claimant in assessing whether or not the Claimant was a draft evader.

7.   The invitation of the parties left the judge in the  position  that  he
    was to consider the matter on a  rational  basis  but  ultimately  upon
    speculation, which he duly did. His  conclusion  was  not  rational  or
    perverse.

8.   Mr Mills with some effort  sought  to  persuade  me  that  the  judge's
    speculation was simply unwarranted because there was no  clear  answer,
    but that was indeed the problem the judge faced and one which he sought
    to resolve.  Whilst I might not have reached the same conclusion by any
    means, it does not seem  to  me  that  that  is  the  proper  basis  to
    interfere with the judge's findings, particularly when  the  respondent
    did not provide any possible answer to the question.

9.   In the circumstances I find that the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the Claimant was at risk under  the  Refugee  Convention  for  the
    reasons he gave and as such that a similar  risk  under  the  basis  of
    Article 3 of the ECHR.  Unfortunately those matters were not resolved.

10.  I do not find the Original  Tribunal  made  an  error  of  law  on  the
    critical issues arising. The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

11.   The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Signed        Date 20 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
