
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05452/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     U R
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, instructed by Nag Law solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                    (Delivered orally on 19 January 2016)

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 6  December  1982.  He
    was granted a student visa on 17 August 2007, such visa being conferred
    until 31 October 2009. The appellant first entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 22 September 2007, returned to  Sri  Lanka  in  December  2008,  and
    thereafter lawfully re-entered the  United  Kingdom.   The  appellant's
    student leave was subsequently extended until 18 November 2012.

 2. The appellant claimed asylum on 25 September 2012. This application was
    refused and on 13 March 2015 a decision was made to remove him  to  Sri
    Lanka.  That decision was the subject of an appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Plumptre
    on 3 September 2015 and dismissed in a decision of 17  September  2015.
    On 9 October 2015 FtT Judge Baker granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and thus the matter came before me.

 3. The primary ground of appeal in this matter has at its core  the  issue
    of procedural  fairness  and,  in  particular,  the  refusal  by  Judge
    Plumptre of an application to admit new documentation; such application
    having been made at the outset of the hearing before her.

 4. It is prudent at this juncture to set out paragraphs 14 to 17 of  Judge
    Plumptre's decision:

         "14.     I ruled the letter from the  attorney  inadmissible  after
             referring myself to Rules 4, 6, 12 and  14  of  the  Procedure
             Rules 2014 - none of which dealt specifically with  any  power
             to admit evidence late but only a general  power  to  waive  a
             direction. I took into account the fact the appellant had been
             represented throughout by Nag Law Solicitors and that they had
             both been sent a notice of direction and notice of hearing  as
             long against as 31 March 2015. I also took  into  account  the
             reply notice completed by Nag Law  Solicitors  which  made  no
             mention  of  further  evidence  other  than   "objective   and
             subjective evidence" and that the  reply  notice  specifically
             stated 'Any further documentary evidence  (papers  about  your
             appeal) you send us must be received by  the  Tribunal  by  29
             August 2015 and must be copied to  the  respondent'.  Hence  I
             found that more than  one  set  of  directions  had  not  been
             complied with either by the appellant or his solicitor.

         15.      I ruled the arrest warrant admissible since this has  been
             photocopied in the appellant's bundle (pages  25-26)  which  I
             found to have been faxed to the Presenting Officer's  Unit  on
             27 August 2015 although the Tribunal's copy of the appellant's
             bundle had not been received until 1 September 2015 and  hence
             found  that  the  copy  arrest  warrant  had  been  served  in
             compliance with directions.

         16.      I also took into account that the  attorney's  letter  had
             been sent in  a  DHL  envelope  to  the  appellant  personally
             although her instructions are from Nag Law  Solicitors  (pages
             31-33) and also took into account the fact that no request  to
             adjourn had been made by Nag Law Solicitors even  though  they
             must  have  expected,  given  that  correspondence  was  first
             entered into on 14 August 2015, there  was  a  risk  that  the
             attorney would not be able to respond in a timely manner  such
             as to ensure compliance with  directions.  I  also  took  into
             account that Nag  Law  Solicitors  had  only  instructed  this
             attorney on 14 August  2015,  i.e.  some  three  months  after
             receipt of the refusal letter.

         17.      Miss Anzani [who represented the appellant at the  hearing
             before the First-tier Tribunal] had  understandably  submitted
             that the appellant would not receive a  fair  hearing  if  the
             attorney's letter was not  submitted  since  it  contained  an
             explanation as to how the attorney  had  obtained  the  arrest
             warrant which was crucial to the appellant's  claim.   I  took
             this into account when making my ruling but found  that  given
             the arrest warrant was admissible that I should consider  this
             document in the round with all the other evidence and that any
             explanation from the attorney would add little if anything  to
             my consideration of the arrest warrant and that there  was  no
             unfairness to the appellant in not having evidence as  to  how
             it was obtained before the Tribunal, given the late production
             of the arrest warrant."

 5. The appellant's legal representatives are far from  blameless  for  the
    situation that the appellant now finds himself in.   They  should  have
    put the First-tier Tribunal, and the  Secretary  of  State,  on  notice
    before the hearing as to the possibility of an application to admit new
    evidence being made; indeed, it is difficult  to  understand  why  such
    application was not made in writing prior to the date of hearing.

 6. Nevertheless, the starting point for my consideration and, indeed, what
    should have been the  starting  point  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    consideration, is paragraph 2 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 which reads:

         "(1)     The overriding objective of these Rules is to  enable  the
             Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

         (2)      ...

         (3)      The Upper  Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the
             overriding objective when it (a) exercising  any  power  under
             these Rules or, (b) interprets any Rule or practice direction.
              Rule 4 of the Procedure Rules gives power to  the  First-tier
             Tribunal to adjourn or postpone a hearing. "

 7. The issue of fairness has recently  been  considered  in  a  number  of
    recent decisions of the Upper Tribunal, including that of the President
    in Nwaigwe (Adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418.  Although  this
    case  considered  the  previous  version  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Procedure Rules it is, nevertheless, instructive on the  approach  that
    should be taken in cases such as the instant one.

 8. Miss Harris submitted, with some force, that First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre "misconstrued" or "underestimated" the  extent  to  which  the
    attorney's letter  was  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  credibility,
    finding incorrectly in paragraph 17 of the determination  that  it  was
    relevant only to the question of the origins  of  the  arrest  warrant.
    This, it was asserted, led to the irrational conclusion that  exclusion
    of this evidence would not result in unfairness.

 9. The letter from the attorney dated 18 August 2015 relevantly states  as
    follows:

         "I was instructed on 16 August 2012 by your client's father-in-law,
         and Reverend [P]. This was after your client's father was  detained
         as a result of the authorities having gone in search of your client
         as he was suspected of having assisted in collating evidence of war
         crimes committed by the Sri Lankan authorities.  Due  to  the  fact
         that your client was in the UK at the time,  his  father  was  into
         custody [sic].

         O was instructed on 16th August  2012...  .  This  was  after  your
         client's father was detained as a result of the authorities  having
         gone in search of  your  client  as  he  was  suspected  of  having
         assisted in collating evidence of war crimes... . Due to  the  fact
         that your client was in the UK at the time,  his  father  was  into
         custody.

         The authorities are still in pursuit of your client ...  and  I  am
         forwarding true [sic] an open arrest warrant which I  was  able  to
         procure on his behalf from the courts for our records. ...

         I confirm that I am  a  practising  Attorney-at-law,  and  have  no
         objections in your using this letter of  evidence.   I  am  issuing
         this letter on the request of his father-in-law."

10. This  evidence  must  be  viewed  in  the  context  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's conclusions in relation to  the  arrest  warrant,  found  in
    paragraph 50 of its decision:

         "I find that after giving weight  to  its  certification  some  ten
         months after it was issued, its late production and the  fact  that
         the  attorney  apparently  sent  this  original  document  to   the
         appellant although she had been instructed by Nag Law Solicitors on
         27 August 2015, four months after his asylum interview, and  nearly
         three years after his asylum claim made on 20 September 2012  which
         facts, coupled with  the  altered  date  and  the  failure  of  the
         appellant to mention his arrest warrant at several  points  in  his
         asylum interview that when considering this arrest warrant  in  the
         round as required by the reasoning in Tanveer Ahmed, I find that it
         is an untruthful document whose contents I can give no  weight  and
         that it was produced at a very late stage to bolster a false asylum
         claim."

11. Previously, at paragraph 41 of its decision, the FtT stated:

         "I give weight to the fact that there is no evidence at  all  other
         than oral evidence that his father was arrested and detained on  15
         August 2012 as claimed." [emphasis added]

12. In my conclusion the First-tier Tribunal erred in its consideration  of
    the potential relevance of the  attorney's  letter.   Had  it  properly
    understood the potential significance of this evidence over, and  above
    simply identifying how the arrest warrant was obtained, I have no doubt
    that it would have been apparent that to proceed in its  absence  would
    lead to procedural unfairness.

13. As a consequence I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal's decision  is
    vitiated by legal error. The failure to admit  the  attorney's  letter,
    even in circumstances where the appellant's solicitors appear  to  have
    been dilatory in both their attempts to obtain  it  and  to  secure  an
    adjournment of the hearing before the  FtT,  was  procedurally  unfair.
    This undermines the entirety of the FtT's decision and for this  reason
    it must be set aside.

14. I gave my decision at the end of the hearing and it was agreed  by  the
    parties that the appropriate course is for the matter  to  be  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo. I pass no  comment
    on the other of the grounds and my absence of  consideration  of  those
    grounds should not be taken as an acceptance that they are, or are not,
    made out. There is simply no need to extend this decision  any  further
    to deal with the additional points raised.



Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to determine de novo.




Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 2 February 2016

