
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 November 2016             |On 2 December 2016              |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                                     k g
                         (ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel (instructed by A & P
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Brockelsby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
                    Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.   The Appellant  appealed  with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Ransley on 27 June  2016  against  the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  made  in  a  decision  and  reasons
         promulgated on 27  May  2016  dismissing  the  Appellant's  asylum,
         humanitarian protection and human rights appeals.

    2.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born on 7 July 1981.  He
         had appealed the Respondent's  decision  dated  11  March  2015  to
         remove him from the United Kingdom.  The Appellant had entered  the
         United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant  on  22
         September 2008 and returned to Sri Lanka on 3 September  2010.   He
         came back to the United  Kingdom  on  25  September  2010.   On  19
         February 2011 he was granted leave to remain as a Post  Study  Work
         Migrant.  His wife joined him in the  United  Kingdom  in  November
         2011 and they have since had a  child.      The  Appellant  claimed
         asylum on 8 March 2013.   He stated that he feared to return to Sri
         Lanka because of his LTTE involvement and family connections.

    3.   When granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Ransley considered that it was arguable that  Judge  Ford  had  (a)
         erred in her approach to the medical evidence, (b) failed  to  make
         findings on all  of  the  evidence  presented,  (c)  erred  in  the
         assessment of the consequences of the Appellant's TGTE  involvement
         and (d) failed to consider whether GJ and Others  (post  civil  war
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) was now out of date
         in the light of the Respondent's COIS dated May 2016.

    4.   The Respondent filed notice under  rule  24  dated  19  July  2016
         indicating that the appeal was opposed.  Standard  directions  were
         made by the tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of
         whether or not there was a material error of law.

    Submissions

    5.   Mr Muquit for the Appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal and on the grant of permission to  appeal.   He  applied  to
         adduce further evidence from the Appellant's expert medical witness
         clarifying the report which had been placed before Judge Ford.  The
         original appeal  had  been  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         previously because  the  medical  evidence  had  not  been  treated
         correctly and the same problem had recurred.  The judge had  relied
         on the medical report as part of her adverse credibility  findings,
         but had misunderstood what the expert had said.   The  age  of  the
         scars was important.

    6.   The judge had further erred, it was submitted, by failing to  make
         findings on the evidence of all of the witnesses, such as  the  Sri
         Lankan MP.  It was not possible to know how that evidence had  been
         included or treated in the judge's findings.

    7.   Nor had the judge taken proper account of the Appellant's diaspora
         activities.   The  TGTE  was  a  proscribed  organisation  and  any
         connection was likely to result in a risk on  return.   This  issue
         was the subject of a forthcoming appeal hearing  in  the  Court  of
         Appeal in another case.  Whether the Appellant had a malign  motive
         in such involvement was immaterial, as Danian [1999] EWCA Civ  3000
         showed.  The judge had failed to deal  with  those  issues.   As  a
         result the decision and reasons was unsafe.  The decision should be
         set aside and the appeal reheard in the First-tier Tribunal.

    8.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's
         rule  24  notice  and  submitted  that  the  decision  and  reasons
         disclosed no error of law.  There was no need for further  evidence
         from the Appellant's expert at the  error  of  law  stage  and  the
         Appellant's application was opposed. The Appellant's complaints  at
         most were just a  disagreement  with  the  judge.   The  judge  had
         explained why he found that there was no real depth to the evidence
         and that the Appellant was not credible.  GJ (as above) showed that
         the Sri Lankan authorities had sophisticated intelligence gathering
         and were able to distinguish those such as the Appellant who  posed
         no risk.   The  judge  had  dealt  with  the  medical  evidence  in
         reasonable way.  The medical evidence had not been simply dismissed
         and had been the subject of a proper evaluation.  The Appellant had
         not claimed to be a member of the TGTE.  The decision  and  reasons
         should stand.

    9.   Mr Muquit in reply  emphasised  the  judge  had  gone  beyond  the
         reasons  for  refusal  letter  when  reaching  adverse  credibility
         findings.  The section 8 point had, for example, not been taken  by
         Respondent.

    No material error of law

    10.  In the tribunal's view, the terms of the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal were a generous response to what was  mostly  a  speculative
         and over hopeful reasons challenge.  The submissions  made  on  the
         Appellant's behalf were not persuasive.  The  tribunal  refused  to
         grant  permission  to  admit  into  evidence  a  letter  from   the
         Appellant's medical expert explaining his report: the decision  and
         reasons had to be assessed on the evidence available to  the  judge
         and the expert could not be permitted  to  rewrite  his  report  to
         answer the concerns identified by the judge.

    11.  The fact that the  Upper  Tribunal  has  had  to  provide  country
         guidance on claims from Sri Lanka at various times is an indication
         of the large number of appeals from that source.   Indeed,  despite
         the defeat of the LTTE on 17 May 2009, now over 7 years ago, asylum
         claims continue  to  be  made  in  what  might  be  thought  to  be
         surprising numbers.  Some claims are recognised as well founded  by
         the Home Office and hence are never seen on appeal, so that  judges
         see only the contested claims which as a group  are  likely  to  be
         much weaker.  It is beyond dispute that Sri Lanka is an endemically
         corrupt country with low standards in public life.  False  official
         documents are readily available. For  a  striking  example  in  the
         public  domain  of  the  depths  of  such   corruption,   see   the
         www.Tamilnation.org report on the Katunayaka Airport bombing by the
         LTTE on 24 July 2001, which states that serving Sri Lankan military
         officers were bribed.

    12.  It is possibly too trite to  say,  but  asylum  claimants  in  the
         United Kingdom have little or nothing to  lose  from  pursuing  the
         process as far as they can.  The worst that can happen is that they
         might be returned at no expense to themselves at the end of what is
         all too often a long drawn out appeals process, during  which  time
         they are supported by the state if unable  to  work.   Establishing
         the truth of a claim (or rather, the level of risk on return to the
         standard of a reasonable  likelihood)  can  often  be  a  difficult
         process.

    13.  Experienced First-tier Tribunal judges such as Judge Ford would be
         expected to recognise certain over familiar elements to  an  appeal
         such as that advanced by the present Appellant, of which  entry  to
         the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant,  a  long
         and wholly unsatisfactorily  explained  delay  in  claiming  asylum
         (measured in this instance in years)  are  frequently  encountered.
         Evidence was provided by a medical expert whose work  is  regularly
         seen by the First-tier Tribunal.  The  tribunal  refused  to  admit
         into evidence a  recent  letter  seeking  to  explain  his  report,
         because that was not evidence available to Judge Ford  and  so  was
         not a proper basis on which to  determine  whether  the  judge  had
         fallen into material error of law. That was the background  to  the
         appeal.  It has to be said that it was  on  its  face  a  weak  and
         possibly contrived claim.

    14.  Despite those familiar and unpromising elements noted  above,  the
         judge examined the case put forward by the Appellant in the  round,
         with evident anxious scrutiny, which  included  discussion  of  all
         parts of the evidence.  It was submitted that no findings had  been
         made about the evidence of the Appellant's witnesses  such  as  his
         mother, but that assertion has no substance.   At  [25]  the  judge
         pointed out that the mother's  evidence  was  plainly  implausible,
         which must be right.  Another witness, who failed to attend to have
         his evidence tested, contradicted the Appellant: see  [26]  of  the
         decision and reasons.  It is perfectly obvious that the judge found
         that none of the Appellant's witnesses was reliable  and  that  was
         clearly explained.

    15.  Judge Ford's  discussion  and  careful  analysis  of  the  medical
         evidence was extensive:  see  [20]  of  the  decision  and  reasons
         onwards.  At [37] the judge gave good and  sufficient  reasons  for
         placing little weight on Dr Martin's report, amongst other  reasons
         because of the expert witness's reference to the Appellant  working
         as a policeman, a claim the Appellant had never made.  It was  open
         to the judge to find (in the context of the evidence  as  a  whole)
         that the Appellant's account of the causation of his  injuries  was
         not supported by Dr Martin's report.

    16.  It is true that, at the time GJ was decided, the BTF and TGTE  had
         not been placed on the list of proscribed  organisations,  but  the
         judge  found  that  of  the  Appellant's  connection   with   those
         organisations was purely nominal, i.e., they meant nothing  to  him
         and the evidence had been produced solely  to  promote  his  claim.
         Judge Ford dealt adequately with the submission that GJ (as  above)
         had been overtaken by recent developments: see [42] and  [43].  The
         judge examined the  Appellant's  claimed  diaspora  activities  and
         found as a fact in any event that the  Appellant's  activities  and
         involvement in the TGTE had been minimal and of no likely  interest
         to the Sri Lankan authorities even if they knew of it.  The judge's
         observations at  [56]  about  the  Appellant's  motivation  were  a
         general comment on his total lack of credibility and  the  lack  of
         weight which could be given to his various assertions.

    17.  It was open to the judge to draw an  adverse  inference  from  the
         absence of relevant witnesses such as the  Appellant's  sister  and
         wife when assessing  the  likely  significance  or  impact  of  the
         Appellant's attendance at demonstrations  in  the  United  Kingdom.
         Similarly, the judge placed no weight on  the  photographs  of  the
         Appellant at demonstrations in the United Kingdom, obviously events
         attended by large numbers of people, as was  not  in  dispute.   At
         [335] and [336] of GJ and Others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
         Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that
         attendance at demonstrations outside Sri Lanka was  not  in  itself
         sufficient to create a real risk of adverse attention on return  to
         Sri Lanka.

    18.  In the tribunal's judgment, the judge dealt  adequately  with  the
         Appellant's limited diaspora activities.   The  Appellant  who  had
         travelled on his own passport was of no conceivable interest to the
         authorities and his whole claim was a  sham.    There  was  nothing
         reasonably likely to cause the Sri Lankan authorities  to  question
         the Appellant on return, whether at the  airport  or  subsequently.
         He had left as a student on his own passport without hindrance  and
         anything he had done while abroad was not capable of  arousing  the
         adverse attention of the authorities. The judge's  decision  was  a
         comprehensive reflection  on  the  various  issues  raised  in  the
         appeal.  There was no material error of law.  There is no basis for
         interfering with the judge's decision to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
         appeal, which dismissal must stand.




    DECISION

    The tribunal finds that there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    original decision, which stands unchanged




    Signed                     Dated 2nd December 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


