
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05476/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated             |
|On 28 May 2015                       |On 18 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                                     I T
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani of Counsel instructed by Legal Rights
                    Partnership.
For the Respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, in this appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  contends  that
    Judge Cassel, a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal, made a material error
    of law by not considering the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum.  It  is
    suggested that the Judge was under a misapprehension that the appellant
    had withdrawn her asylum  claim  and  was  only  pursuing  claim  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. Judge Cassel allowed the appeal finding  that  the  appellant's  rights
    under Article 3 would be at real risk as she "would commit  suicide  if
    she were returned to Pakistan and that there is a real risk of harm  to
    her child  to  whom  there  is  a  further  risk  of  homelessness  and
    destitution." It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  respondent  has  not
    challenged the decision of Judge Cassel to allow the appeal.

 3. In granting permission to appeal Judge Brunnen, a Judge  of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal said inter alia "It is submitted  that  in  view  of  the
    Judge's finding in relation to Article 3 he ought  also  to  have  fund
    that the appellant was a refugee. These grounds are arguable"

 4. Mr Bandegani argued before me that he had not withdrawn the appellant's
    claim to asylum, as Judge Cassel had appeared  to  think.  He  drew  my
    attention to his written grounds of appeal upon which  he  had  secured
    permission to appeal wherein he had explained that the  observation  of
    Judge Cassel in paragraph 4 of the determination, where the Judge  said
    that Counsel for the appellant confirmed that a breach of Article 3  of
    the ECHR was the only matter to be determined, had to be looked  at  in
    its proper context. Mr Bandegani said that during  the  hearing  before
    Judge Cassel he had been asked whether and if so  which,  human  rights
    other than Article 3 ECHR were engaged, namely Article 8. In answer  to
    this query the counsel had confirmed that  only  Article  3  claim  was
    being pursued and not any claim under Article 8 of the ECHR. He had  at
    no time withdrawn "the refugee convention ground of appeal  as  can  be
    seen from paragraph 2 of the determination." The counsel  asked  me  to
    not that Judge Cassel  had  recorded  in  his  determination  that  the
    counsel for the appellant had relied on  his  skeleton  argument.  That
    being the case paragraph 2 of that  skeleton  argument  clearly  stated
    that the real risk of  serious  harm  or  persecution  will  be  for  a
    Convention reason. The Counsel also  asked  me  to  note  that  in  her
    decision letter refusing the appellant's  application,  the  respondent
    had conceded that the appellant is a  member  of  a  particular  social
    group.

 5.  Mr  Esen  for  the  respondent  argued  that   irrespective   of   the
    misapprehension of the First Tier Judge in respect of the asylum claim,
    such claim could not succeed in any event as according to the  decision
    in the case of AA (paragraphs 27 and 28)  Country  Guidance  Case,  the
    appellant would not be at real risk  of  persecution  through  out  the
    country. Her appeal had been allowed on the grounds that the Judge  had
    concluded that she faced real risk from her family in  Lahore.  If  the
    Judge had considered her claim for asylum, it would have been dismissed
    based on relevant country guidance case. Mr Esen asked that if I  found
    a material error of law in the determination of Judge Cassel,  I  could
    make the decision on asylum claim myself but he would not be opposed to
    the matter being remitted to the First Tier for determination of asylum
    claim.

 6. Mr Bandegani asked that the claim for asylum should be remitted to  the
    First Tier Tribunal for determination in the light of all the  relevant
    evidence.

 7. Having paid close attention to the determination  of  Judge  Cassel,  I
    find that he misunderstood Mr Bandegani in believing that Mr  Bandegani
    had withdrawn the asylum claim. It is clear to me that Mr Bandegani had
    simply clarified his position on human rights claim. It  is  worthy  of
    note that Mr Bandegani is not recorded as having said that  the  appeal
    was only (underline is mine) on the basis of Article 2 and  3.  In  the
    circumstances and  given  that  the  claim  for  asylum  had  not  been
    withdrawn, Judge Cassel made a material error of law in not determining
    it. Although I am tempted  to  determine  that  claim  myself,  I  have
    concluded that it is best to remit this aspect of the appeal to a Judge
    of the First Tier Tribunal for a decision on the outstanding  claim  of
    asylum. I should make it clear that the decision  of  Judge  Cassel  on
    Article 3 stands irrespective of the result in the asylum claim.

 8. This appeal is allowed to the limited extent of being remitted  to  the
    First  Tier  Tribunal  for  making  a  decision  on   the   appellant's
    outstanding claim for asylum.



K Drabu CBE
Date: 14 June 2015
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

