
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05310/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th February 2016                     |On 4th April 2016                |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                                    [P C]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Morgan - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe  born  [  ]  1990.  She  appeals
    against the decision of the Respondent  made  on  11th  March  2015  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom as an  illegal  entrant  by  way  of
    directions under paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration
    Act 1971.  The Appellant appealed against that decision and her  appeal
     was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge C  J  E  Nicholls  on  27th
    August 2015.  On 19th November 2015 having heard  submissions  I  found
    that there was a material error of law in the  determination  of  Judge
    Nicholls and I set his decision aside with  no  preserved  findings  of
    fact.  I found that Judge Nicholls failed to make  proper  findings  on
    the factual basis of the Appellant's claim and gave no reasons  and  no
    authority for his expressed view of the situation in Zimbabwe  and  the
    likelihood of the Appellant getting a fair trial.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK on  14th  October  2013  using  someone
    else's passport.  She contacted the Asylum  Screening  Unit  two  weeks
    after she arrived here.  There was some confusion about  when  she  got
    here and the route she took, there being some suggestion that she  came
    via Dubai.

Basis of the Appellant's Claim for Asylum

 3. The Appellant is of Shona ethnicity.  She has a  child  who  is  looked
    after by her mother in Chivhu and she also  has  three  siblings.   Her
    mother has indefinite leave (ILR) to remain in the UK and she also  has
    a brother here.

 4. The Appellant's mother had been involved in politics but the  Appellant
    did not become involved, having seen how dangerous it was.  In 2008 the
    authorities had gone to their house looking for her mother and  accused
    her of "selling out".  The Appellant's aunt had applied for a visa  for
    the UK for the Appellant at that time which was refused.

 5. The Appellant worked as a bus conductor.  Her manager,  Mr  S,  was  an
    active supporter of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) and in the
    days leading up to the 2013 elections he put MDC posters on the  buses.
    No-one seemed to have any problem with the  posters.   The  buses  were
    being used to ferry people to MDC rallies and conferences and those  on
    the bus would sing, shout and wear t-shirts with  MDC  slogans.   After
    the elections the posters  stayed  on  the  bus.   Occasionally  people
    taunted them but the Appellant was not concerned because she  does  not
    support any party.

 6. On 10th August 2013 four Zanu-PF supporters approached the  bus  driver
    who was called Mr M.  One was wearing a police uniform and  the  others
    Zanu-PF t-shirts.  The Appellant said she recognised them  because  she
    had seen them previously a few blocks from her house.  The men  taunted
    and mocked her but she was not bothered  as  she  was  used  to  people
    hurling insults because of the posters on the bus.  Mr M retaliated and
    this started an altercation. The men started punching and kicking  him.
    The Appellant ran away.  She decided to leave the country.  On her  way
    to Chivhu her manager sent her a text to say that the  bus  driver  had
    been found dead and a policeman had been to the office looking for her.
     She stayed at her grandmother's house for about a month  during  which
    time she was informed by a tenant  living  at  her  own  house  that  a
    warrant had been issued for her arrest after she had failed to  respond
    to a subpoena.  She sold her father's cattle to raise the money to  pay
    the agent to bring her to the UK.

The Decision of the Secretary of State

 7. On the day she made the decision the Secretary of State had before  her
    a subpoena dated 12th August 2013  and  an  arrest  warrant  dated  9th
    September 2013.  The subpoena is addressed to the Appellant  in  Harare
    and was issued by the Magistrates' Court. The law that  is  alleged  to
    have  been  broken  is  "Undermining  authority  of  or  insulting  the
    President" and "Assaulting or resisting a Police Officer".  The warrant
    was issued also on 9th September 2013 because she had failed to turn up
    at the hearing intimated in the subpoena set  down  for  9th  September
    2013.

 8. The view of the Secretary of State is that it is inconsistent given the
    Appellant's previous experiences and her claim that what  had  happened
    to her mother had made her cautious that she would continue to work  on
    a bus exhibiting MDC posters.  The fact that she had said that the time
    before the elections was peaceful so she did not try to leave  her  job
    shows the level of awareness she had of the potential  dangers  of  the
    situation.  Despite this she continued to work in a job where  she  was
    taunted as an MDC supporter and indeed said  it  did  not  bother  her.
    The Secretary of State does not therefore accept that she worked  on  a
    bus displaying MDC posters and carrying MDC supporters.  The  Secretary
    of State notes that in her interview the Appellant  had  at  one  point
    said "One of the police officers that attacked  my  colleague",  having
    previously stated that there was only one police officer  and  gave  an
    explanation for this which the Secretary of State did not accept.   The
    Secretary of State does not accept that  the  Appellant  witnessed  the
    assault on Mr M.

 9. With regard to the subpoena and the warrant,  the  Secretary  of  State
    said that they are originals insofar as they are copied documents which
    have been written on and have had  what  appears  to  be  a  wet  stamp
    applied but the method by which the Appellant  came  to  have  received
    them is considered inconsistent.  She said that they had been delivered
    to her home address and the people she lived with brought them  to  her
    place of work from where she collected them.  When she  was  asked  the
    names of the people who brought  them  she  could  not  remember.   Her
    explanation for this was that she had lived there for a  year  but  she
    would move back and forth to her mum's and the  lodgers  were  not  the
    same lodgers all the time.  The Secretary of  State  said  that  it  is
    inconsistent, that if the lodgers knew her well enough to  be  able  to
    bring the documents to her place of work, she did not know their names.



10. The Secretary of State mentioned a further inconsistency  in  that  she
    said in her statement that she had received a  telephone  call  from  a
    tenant to tell her that a warrant had been received  in  her  name  but
    this is at odds with her claim at interview that she  found  out  about
    the warrant when her employer telephoned her to tell her about it.  She
    had said too that she picked up the document when she was on her way to
    the UK which means that she must have carried it  over  the  border  to
    South Africa.  The Secretary of State does not accept  that  she  would
    have done such a dangerous thing.

11. I have a statement from the Appellant which is dated 25th  August  2015
    in which she confirmed that  her  son  is  still  in  Chivhu  with  his
    grandmother.   The father of her son has never wanted  anything  to  do
    with either her or him.  Her mother was not happy that she  had  become
    pregnant so young.  She managed to secure a job  as  a  bus  conductor.
    She earned about $10 a week, a sum which left her unable  to  care  for
    her son and her father who was critically ill so she took the child  to
    her grandmother.

12. In response to the points made in the refusal letter she said that  the
    elections in 2013 were generally very peaceful.   There  was  not  much
    violence.  She had no choice but to work.  She had to take whatever job
    she could get.  No-one seemed to have a problem with the posters.   The
    driver had become angry and was calling the men names.   The  Appellant
    was afraid.  She knew she could not go to the  authorities  because  no
    Judge would believe her account, especially given that a policeman  was
    involved.  By this time Mr M was lying on the floor  unconscious.   She
    ran away.  She took a couple of essentials from her house and  fled  to
    her grandmother's house in Chivhu.  If she had remained in Zimbabwe  it
    would have put her son and her grandmother at  risk.   On  her  way  to
    Chivhu her manager sent her a text message saying that Mr  M  had  been
    found dead on the pavement.  He also told her that a policeman had come
    to the office looking for her.  From the description she  knew  it  the
    man looking for her was one of the four men who had killed her  friend.
     She stayed at her grandmother's house for about a month.

13. She has established a strong family life in the UK with her mother  and
    brother.  She is often depressed and feels isolated and alone.

14. The Appellant gave oral evidence adopting her statement.

15. The Appellant was asked why she said in her  screening  interview  that
    she had arrived in the UK in 2010 when she later said it was 2013.  She
    said she had made a mistake.  She was asked about the bus  company  she
    worked for and said it was a small private one.   Mr  Sadduma  was  her
    manager.  She always worked on the same bus with Mr M.   She  confirmed
    that her case is solely based on what happened to Mr  M.   She  had  no
    political involvement herself at all.  She did not see  Mr  M  actually
    being killed because when she left they were still  kicking  him.   The
    text that she received would still be on her phone but her phone is  at
    her grandmother's house in Zimbabwe.

16. With regard to the subpoena and the warrant, she said she carried  them
    across the border into South Africa in an  envelope  in  her  suitcase.
    She denied that the agent had had anything to do  with  the  documents.
    He did not see them and she did not tell him about  them.     She  said
    she was safe at her grandmother's house but she left because  she  knew
    the police were going to be looking for her. Chivhu is a two hour drive
    from Harare

17. In cross-examination she confirmed that all three  buses  belonging  to
    the owner had MDC posters put on them.  I asked her if  it  was  common
    for posters to be put on business vehicles and she said it was.  It was
    a sixteen seater minibus and they stopped at bus stops to  pick  people
    up.  The men had pulled Mr M out of the bus.   Other  people  came  and
    were watching.  She said there was a  big  crowd  about  twenty  to  40
    people at the bus station.  She was sitting at  the  back  of  the  bus
    where there is a sliding door which she used to exit the bus  when  she
    decided to run away.  At that point the men were still shouting.   They
    were not hitting Mr M.  He asked her about the text and  she  said  she
    got it when she was at her grandmother's house.  Mr Wilding pointed out
    to her that that is not what she said at paragraph 10 of her statement.
     She repeated that she had been at her grandmother's.   The  text  told
    her that Mr M was dead.  It was the same day that  her  manager  phoned
    her and told her the police were looking for  her.   She  had  said  at
    paragraph 10 of her statement that when she was on her  way  to  Chivhu
    she got a text that said the police were looking for her.  Her response
    was that she could not really remember.  She just knows it was all  the
    same day.

18. Mr Wilding asked her about the warrant and she said it  was  about  two
    weeks after she arrived at her grandmother's that  she  received  this.
    She said that she had phoned her housemates to tell them that she would
    not be around.  There are approximately four housemates.  She  did  not
    go to get the warrant because she was frightened.  Mr  Wilding  pointed
    out to her that she had said that she lived with her grandmother for  a
    month but there was a two month gap between her  going  there  and  her
    leaving the country.  She conceded that it must have  been  two  months
    she was at her grandmother's.  He put it to her that she had given  two
    different answers to the question of when she had found  out  that  the
    police were after her.  She could not say when she found out about  the
    warrant or how long it was before she left her grandmother's  that  she
    had found out about it. She said her  mother  had  not  come  to  court
    because she had not been asked to come.

19.  In re-examination Mr Morgan, having noted that the Appellant had  said
    that she had no money to go to her home to collect the documents, asked
    her where she got the money for the  agent.   She  said  she  sold  her
    father's cars for US $5,000 and gave the agent $4,500.

20. In his submissions Mr Wilding said that he would rely  on  the  reasons
    for refusal letter.   He  submitted  that  the  account  given  by  the
    Appellant is entirely lacking in credibility and plausibility.   It  is
    inconsistent.  She gave two different accounts of  how  she  found  out
    about the letter.  There is indeed a catalogue of discrepancies.   When
    the incident happened no-one spoke to her or approached her.  There  is
    no credible explanation for anyone having any interest in her.  She was
    subpoenaed two days later on 12th August.  She could not say  how  long
    she had been at her grandmother's.   There  is  no  evidence  that  the
    authorities have been looking for her since she  left.   He  questioned
    why her mother was not called to give evidence.

21. Mr Morgan said that the account given by the Appellant  is  simple  and
    was clearly  told.   She  could  have  claimed  asylum  on  account  of
    political opinion but it is clear that she has not made up a story.  He
    said it is reasonable to infer that the police are looking for  her  to
    keep her quiet.  He submitted that the Respondent had erred in  failing
    to check the two documents that the Appellant provided. It is not  open
    to her to simply say they are false without providing evidence of that.



22. Mr Morgan also provided a skeleton argument which  I  have  taken  into
    account.

Burden and Standard of Proof

23. The burden is on the Appellant to show with regard to the asylum appeal
    that returning him would expose him  to  a  real  risk  of  an  act  of
    persecution for reasons set out in  Regulation  6  of  The  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006.  With regard to Humanitarian Protection he  would  have  to  show
    substantial grounds for believing that he would face  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm as defined by paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules  or
    face a real risk of a breach of his protected human rights.

My Findings

24. I have given very careful consideration to all the evidence put  before
    me in this case.  I did  not  find  the  Appellant  to  be  a  credible
    witness.  There were discrepancies, some of them small but  it  is  the
    core of her account that I have  difficulty  comprehending.   I  do  of
    course bear in mind that she has provided a  subpoena  and  a  warrant,
    both documents on the face of it having been issued  by  the  court  in
    Zimbabwe.

25. What the Appellant says is that she worked with a bus company and there
    was an incident when four men came and started to harangue  the  driver
    because there were MDC posters on the bus.  The driver got annoyed  and
    the men started to beat up him so badly that he died.  She told  us  in
    oral evidence that she was at the back of the  bus.   She  did  not  go
    forward at all.  She was not particularly clear about when she ran away
    but it is clear that no-one spoke to her. She  was  inconsistent  about
    whether or not Mr M was unconscious or dead when she ran away. I  think
    it unlikely that she recognised the men or that they knew who she  was.
    The men did not show the slightest bit of interest in her.  If the  bus
    had been in an isolated place and there was no-one else  there,  I  may
    have taken the view that the men would have  seen  her  and  wanted  to
    silence her but that is not what happened.  Her evidence was that there
    were 30 or 40 people standing watching    I  have  some  doubts  as  to
    whether the  Zanu-PF or the police in Zimbabwe would care about  anyone
    witnessing them murdering someone but the fact is that there were 30 or
    40 people who saw what happened. The submission of Mr Morgan  was  that
    the police are after her to 'keep her quiet', but  what  of  the  other
    witnesses?

26. With regard to the court documents, the charges set out on the subpoena
    and the warrant have no basis in the account of events as described  by
    the Appellant.  On her account there is nothing to  indicate  that  the
    men even saw her. I question why she would phone her housemates to tell
    them she would not be back. She said that she phoned her housemates  to
    tell them she would not be coming back to the house and  that  is  when
    they told her about the documents. Why would she phone  them  when  she
    was allegedly  hiding  from  the  authorities.  Her  friends  may  have
    willingly or under pressure passed on information about where she  was.
     There is no reasonable  explanation for her not knowing the  names  of
    her flatmates  and her belated  explanation  for  not  having  gone  to
    collect the documents was that she had  no  money,  not  that  she  was
    afraid.  I question why she would leave her mobile phone with the  text
    on it behind when she went to so much trouble to bring  the  two  court
    documents, taking a risk in going to collect them and in carrying  them
    over the border. I find it highly unlikely that it is the case that  at
    a busy border such as that between South Africa and Zimbabwe it can  be
    said that 'no searches are made'.  It may well be that not everyone  is
    thoroughly searched but that does not mean that there  is  no  risk  of
    being searched.

27.  I do not accept that she cannot remember where she was  when  she  got
    the text.  She had worked with Mr M.  She said she  never  worked  with
    anyone else which presumably means that he was never off work  for  any
    reason. I do take the view that in general, human nature dictates  that
    people remember where they were when bad news is  delivered.   I  would
    have expected her to remember where she was when she was told that Mr M
    had been killed and that the police were after her.  I  do  not  accept
    that she would be confused about that and her evidence about  this  was
    vague and confused.

28.  One significant inconsistency in her evidence is  the  fact  that  she
    kept repeating that she had been with her grandmother for one month and
    it was only when it was put to her that this was impossible  given  the
    dates she had given that she conceded it must  have  been  two  months.
    However long she was there her evidence is that  she  had  no  problems
    there.

29. I do not accept the Appellant's account. I accept that  the  Respondent
    did not check the two court documents and that there is no  documentary
    evidence before me to say that they are false. My task is  to  consider
    the documents in the round with the rest of the evidence. The  evidence
    before me points to the fact that the documents were  obtained  by  the
    Appellant for the purposes of her asylum claim in the UK.  Her  account
    of the way she found out about them,   how they came into her hands and
    how she  got them out of  Zimbabwe  is  inconsistent  and  implausible.
    Applying that to  my finding that there is no credible   evidence  that
    the authorities would have any reason  to  be  interested  in  her,   I
    attach no weight to the documents.

30. For the reasons given above I do not accept the Appellant's account  as
    true. I find that she has not established that she would  face  a  real
    risk of persecution on return if she were removed to Zimbabwe.  It  was
    not out to me that there is anything in the Country  Guidance  decision
    CM (EM country guidance; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00059
    (IAC) to assist the Appellant but for completeness  I  have  considered
    this and find that there is not.

31. It was submitted that the Appellant has a family life with  her  mother
    and  that  removing  her  would  give  rise   to   a   disproportionate
    interference with that family life. I have considered this in terms  of
    Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27  and Kugathas v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31  and  am  not  satisfied   that  the
    Appellant has established that she has a family life  with  her  mother
    that engages Article 8. She apparently lives with her but there  is  no
    evidence that their relationship is one that  goes  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties that exist between adult relatives. I have  no  evidence
    of any private life and note that the Appellant has only been in the UK
    since 2013.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds

The Appellant has not established a right to Humanitarian Protection in  the
UK.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date: 14th March 2016

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






