
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/05261/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 November 2014                           |On 8 December 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     M M

                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Gayle, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

There is an anonymity direction in relation to the appellant  in  this  case
and I order that this continues pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  2008  Procedure
Rules.  The Appellant is granted  anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings,
unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise.  No report of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  and  her  date  of  birth  is  16
    September 1985.

2.   The appellant came to the UK on 3 January 2010 having  been  granted  a
    student visa.  She made an application for asylum on 3 March  2011  and
    this was refused in a decision of 26 April 2011.  She appealed  against
    this decision and her appeal was dismissed on 27 June 2011 by the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant successfully applied  for  permission  to
    appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.   The
    decision was remade in the Upper  Tribunal  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Plimmer who dismissed the appellant's appeal.

3.   The appellant made a fresh claim for asylum and  this  was  refused  by
    the respondent in a decision of 9 July 2014.  She submitted a  document
    that was issued on 25 December 2011 by the Islamic Revolutionary  Court
    of the city of Orumieh which is a court verdict against the  appellant.
    She submitted a warning notice or  summons  issued  against  her  on  3
    December 2011 summoning her to attend court on 25 December  2011.   She
    submitted a  property  ownership  deed  in  relation  to  her  father's
    property which according to her was put up as surety for her release on
    bail in 2009.  She had not submitted these documents previously.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Amin
    having been heard as a fast-track appeal on 1 September 2014.  On  this
    occasion the appellant was represented by Mr K Gayle and Mr K  Williams
    represented the Home Office.  The appellant  successfully  applied  for
    permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Amin.  Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cheales in a
    decision of 20 October 2014.

5.    The basis of the appellant's claim is that  she  is  an  Iranian  Kurd
    from Mahabad.  She started a blog in 2008 which led to her arrest on 15
    June 2009 as the result of her attending a post-election demonstration.
     She was  ill-treated  and  raped  during  detention  and  subsequently
    released without charge when her father put his house up as surety.  In
    February 2011 the blog was traced and made inaccessible.


The Findings of the FtT

6.   The Judge refused an adjournment  application  by  the  appellant.  The
    relevant paragraphs are as follows:

         "14. Mr Gayle, on behalf of the Appellant made  an  application  to
             adjourn the proceedings at the outset  of  the  hearing  under
             Rule 21 of the 2005 Rules.  His reasons  for  the  application
             were:


         a.   That he did not believe that I can determine the appeal justly
             today   because   the   Appellant   wishes    to    rely    on
             Psychotherapist's evidence in support of her asylum appeal;


         b.   that the Appellant had referred to ongoing sessions  with  the
             psychotherapists in her witness statement  (p.2)  (although  I
             noted these were with a psychiatrist);


         c.   That the Appellant was very vulnerable following the traumatic
             events in Iran and  in  particular  as  her  account  was  not
             believed on the last appeal.


         19.  Having heard  the  arguments  on  both  sides  I  refused  the
             adjournment because Mr Gayle had not shown good reason  as  to
             why the adjournment should be granted.  He had  provided  some
             evidence (email dated  28  August  2014)  in  support  of  his
             application.  I was satisfied that the appeal  can  be  justly
             determined today not least because the  solicitors  have  been
             acting for this Appellant since at least 2011 and have had the
             benefit of the same counsel.


         20.  As Mr Gayle pointed out the Appellant raised her mental health
             issue in her Asylum Interview (A1) on  7  April  2011  so  the
             solicitors would have been on notice to explore that avenue at
             that  time.   Some  three  years  have  now  passed  and   the
             application is made late  in  the  day  on  the  door  of  the
             hearing.  I also note that the Appellant  was  at  liberty  to
             give evidence at the hearing about her treatment  and  matters
             relating to her ongoing mental health issues.  For  all  these
             reasons the adjournment was refused."


         52.    I have considered  all  the  evidence  before  reaching  any
             conclusion  in   this   appeal.    I   bear   in   mind   that
             inconsistencies may arise in evidence for many reasons and are
             not  necessarily  indicative  of  an  account  that  has  been
             fabricated or embellished.  I  have  endeavoured  to  set  the
             Appellant's account in the context of the country condition in
             Iran.


         53.  I am bound to consider Section 8 of the 2004 Act and  to  take
             account of any behaviour that is damaging to  the  Appellant's
             credibility to which the section applies when deciding whether
             to believe a statement made by or on behalf of  a  person  who
             makes the asylum claim.  The  Section  applies  to  'deceptive
             conduct' and 'late claims'.


         54.  As noted and accepted by both sides, my starting point in this
             appeal is the decision of  Judge  Plimmer  (Devaseelan  [2002]
             UKIAT 00702.


         55.  The Respondent dealt with the property  deed  in  its  refusal
             letter (page 6 of 12, paragraphs 20-24) and relying  on  Judge
             Plimmer's assessment of the Appellant's  core  claim  of  what
             happened to her in Iran, rejected her account.


         56.  The Appellant has merely repeated her evidence that she relied
             upon as  to  what  happened  to  her  in  Iran  (see  previous
             statements of evidence adopted today as  evidence  in  chief).
             This was the same evidence that was put before  Judge  Plimmer
             and which he rejected in paragraph 28  of  that  determination
             and cited in paragraph 22 of the refusal letter.  There is  no
             new evidence put before me and the property deed was  part  of
             the evidence before  Judge  Plimmer.   On  the  contrary,  the
             Appellant is not credible in my view, in  her  evidence  about
             the property in question.


         57.  I do not accept Mr Gayle's submissions that the vague evidence
             or lack  of  details  is  due  to  the  mental  state  of  the
             Appellant.   Mr  Gayle  went  much  further  in  his   closing
             submissions on the reasons for seeking medical  evidence  than
             he did when he made the application to adjourn.  None of these
             detailed arguments were advanced in support of his adjournment
             application.  I saw and observed the Appellant give  evidence.
             She was able to give evidence and answer questions put to  her
             without  any  particular   difficulty,   albeit   through   an
             interpreter.


         58.  I therefore find that Judge Plimmer's findings in relation  to
             the Appellant's detention claim in 2009 or the  issuing  of  a
             summons against her and her father's infrequent  interrogation
             are credible for the reasons set out by  Judge  Plimmer.   She
             was not detained  or  raped  in  detention.   No  further  new
             evidence or facts have been put before me  today  to  dislodge
             those findings.


         59.  The Appellant's evidence on the details of  the  property  and
             what has happened to the property leads me  to  further  doubt
             her evidence about  her  detention  and  this  undermines  her
             credibility further.  She was not able to provide  an  address
             for the property; she was not able to explain the size of  the
             property.  This is notwithstanding  that  she  is  in  regular
             contact with her sister.  The Appellant  could  have  produced
             this evidence earlier to Judge Plimmer but failed  to  do  so.
             She has not provided a reasonable explanation for the delay in
             producing this document and this  undermines  her  credibility
             under Section 8.


         60.  In relation to the lack of bail documents Judge Plimmer  dealt
             with this in paragraph 23 of her determination.  The Appellant
             relied today on a warning  notice  issued  against  her  on  3
             December 2011 requesting her to attend court  on  25  December
             2011.  I find the Appellant's evidence inconsistent.  She told
             me that she obtained these documents from her  sister.   Judge
             Plimmer noted at paragraph 23 of her  determination  that  the
             Appellant had indicated in her June 2011  statement  that  she
             was going to ask her father if he had anything  and  that  she
             would have it sent if available.   The  Appellant  told  Judge
             Plimmer that her father did not know about  her  asylum  claim
             made in 2011.  Judge Plimmer noted that this was  inconsistent
             with her earlier evidence that she was going to ask her father
             to produce the warning notices and moreover her sister did not
             have the bail documents.


         61.  Today the Appellant  told  me  that  her  father  had  stopped
             speaking to her in 2011 and had disowned her around that time.
              The Appellant in fact stated that her sister was the one  who
             obtained the property documents and  informed  her  about  the
             bail documents and made arrangements to  send  these  to  her.
             These  inconsistencies  are  significant  and  undermine   her
             credibility and affect the core asylum claim.   I  place  very
             little  weight  on  the  warning  notice  /  summons  as   the
             Appellant.


         62.  I do not accept the Appellant's  evidence  that  she  did  not
             appeal the conviction in her absence.   The  Appellant  is  an
             intelligent and well educated woman.  She did not even attempt
             to appeal the conviction and this leads me  to  doubt  whether
             she has been convicted in her absence.  Furthermore, there was
             a delay in the Appellant making an asylum claim and her timing
             for claiming asylum on the first occasion coincided  with  the
             expiry of the appellant's extended period of leave  to  remain
             (as noted by Judge Plimmer, paragraph 25).


         63.  I have taken all the evidence in the round and  the  documents
             which also need to be considered  in  the  round  and  in  the
             context  of  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the   background
             evidence.   Background   evidence   demonstrates   that   such
             documents are easily obtainable in Iran and the fact  that  an
             envelope was produced today  does  not  demonstrate  that  the
             contents of  the  envelope  were  the  ones  produced  to  the
             Hearing.


         64.  For all these reasons,  notwithstanding  the  new  documentary
             evidence, I find that Judge Plimmer's findings at paragraph 28
             of her determination stand.


         65.  The Appellant did not address, with any new evidence, her risk
             on return  that  she  would  be  forced  to  marry  a  cousin.
             Applying  the  principles  of  Devaseelan,   Judge   Plimmer's
             findings at paragraphs 29,  30  and  31  still  stand  as  the
             Appellant  has  not  dislodged  those  findings  by  any   new
             evidence.  For all these  reasons  her  appeal  fails  and  is
             dismissed."


        The Findings of the UT

7.   It is also necessary to refer to  set  out  the  relevant  findings  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer as follows:

         "18. I now turn to the appellant's claimed  account.   I  begin  by
             observing that the appellant's account is  broadly  consistent
             with the known  background  evidence.   This  means  that  her
             account is generally plausible.  The burden is still upon  her
             to establish that her specific account is reasonably likely to
             be true.  The finding that the account  is  broadly  plausible
             assists in this assessment but it is not determinative of  it.




         19.  I note that in parts the appellant's written account  is  full
             and detailed.  I found that this was in direct contrast to the
             appellant's oral evidence, which was lacking in detail.


         20.  I found her to be  evasive  when  answering  questions  during
             cross-examination.  By  way  of  example,  the  appellant  was
             unable to recall  which  month  she  was  told  the  important
             information contained in her  more  recent  statement  to  the
             effect that her parents home had been raided, her computer was
             confiscated and her father interrogated twice.  She  indicated
             that the raid took place in May 2011  but  she  was  not  told
             about it by her sister until months later,  even  though  they
             had remained in regular contact.  Upon further questioning she
             explained that this is because her  family  did  not  wish  to
             upset her.  When she was asked why they then  told  her  about
             the raid more recently she was unable  to  give  any  credible
             explanation for the decision of the family.  The appellant did
             suggest that her family  did  not  tell  her  about  the  raid
             because she had not directly asked her family  for  an  update
             until after her last hearing.  She did  not  outline  why  she
             asked for an update from her family after the hearing and  not
             before, when she remained in regular contact throughout.  I do
             not accept that the raid took place in May 2011  or  that  her
             father has been interrogated twice.   The  appellant  has  not
             been able to credibly explain why her family members held back
             this important information until after her first hearing.


         21.  The appellant has also  provided  inconsistent  oral  evidence
             which is difficult to reconcile with what is contained in  her
             statement.  In her recent statement the  appellant  said  that
             her father was very annoyed with her and wanted nothing to  do
             with her.  This is inconsistent with her oral evidence to  the
             effect that they did not talk at length, he  said  don't  come
             back and the rest was general 'chit-chat'.  The appellant  was
             unable to explain this difference.   During  cross-examination
             the appellant also maintained that her father  remains  'keen'
             for her to marry her cousin.  This is difficult  to  reconcile
             with her earlier oral evidence and the contents of her  recent
             statement in which she says that it is clear to her  that  her
             father 'wanted nothing more to do with' her since the raid  on
             her parents home and the interrogation of her father.


         22.  The appellant knew no details of the two  occasions  when  her
             father was interrogated.   She  said  that  her  sister  could
             provide her with no information at all.  The appellant did not
             have any information relating to  the  approximate  date,  the
             average length of  detention,  the  nature  of  the  questions
             asked.  In my view this is incredible.  The appellant had  not
             provided any reasons why other family members (apart from  her
             father who she claimed was not really speaking to  her)  would
             not  be  prepared  to  provide   her   with   this   important
             information.


         23.  I note that although the appellant claims that she was  bailed
             in 2009 she has not provided the bail documents.  There is  no
             requirement to corroborate claims in asylum appeals.  This  is
             however an issue directly raised  by  the  respondent  in  the
             decision letter (para 25).  In response to this the  appellant
             said in her June statement "I will ask him [father] if he  has
             anything  and  have  it  sent  if  available".   I  asked  the
             appellant if she had asked  her  father  about  this  and  she
             replied she had not.  She implied that  this  is  because  her
             father did not know about her asylum claim.  This is difficult
             to understand for two reasons.   First,  this  explanation  is
             inconsistent with her stated intention to ask her father about
             this as recently as her June statement.  Second,  it  is  also
             inconsistent with the appellant's allegation that  her  father
             does not wish for her to return to  Iran.   Mrs  Holmes  asked
             whether the appellant  asked  her  sister  to  send  the  bail
             documents but she simply responded that  her  sister  did  not
             have them.  She did not attempt to explain why she did not ask
             her sister to obtain the documents for her father.  In my view
             the appellant did not ask for the bail documents because there
             are none.  There are none because it is not reasonably  likely
             that this appellant was detained in 2009 as claimed.


         24.  In oral evidence the  appellant  claimed  that  her  boyfriend
             finished with her after she received the summons  yet  at  her
             interview (Q 64) she stated that her boyfriend  asked  her  to
             move out before  she  heard  about  the  summons.   When  this
             inconsistency was put to  the  appellant  she  said  that  the
             summons took some time to reach the UK and her boyfriend asked
             her to leave before it arrived.  Although I have some concerns
             with this evidence I am prepared to  give  the  appellant  the
             benefit of the doubt in light of her response to Q  68.   This
             does not mean I accept the summons is genuine.  It means  that
             I  will  not  draw  adverse  inferences  from  this   apparent
             inconsistency.


         25.  The appellant knew about the closure of her blog site and  the
             delivery of a summons in February yet she delayed in making an
             asylum claim until 3 March 2011, after the expiry of her visa.
              Although the length of the  delay  is  not  significant,  the
             timing of the events said to give rise to the claim for asylum
             coincide with the expiry of the appellant's extended period of
             leave to remain.  This timing is  highly  suspicious.   It  is
             made worse by the further claim that there was a raid together
             with interrogation of her father after the  last  hearing  and
             before this one.


         26.  Notwithstanding the findings set out above I  am  prepared  to
             find on the lower standard of proof  that  the  appellant  did
             contribute to a blog.  I base this on the documentary evidence
             relating to the blog - see the page example  at  H101  of  the
             bundle.  I am also prepared to find it may have been closed by
             the authorities.  I do not however accept that the authorities
             have taken steps to go further than  blocking  access  to  the
             site.  I do not accept that the authorities  have  issued  the
             summons relied upon by the appellant.  Mrs Holmes put  to  the
             appellant that it was likely that her blog was stopped  for  a
             reason  not  connected  with  her  political   opinion.    The
             Appellant agreed there was  nothing  more  to  her  blog  than
             articles, poems etc from other websites.


         27.  I have taken into account the summons itself but this need  to
             be  considered  in  the  round  and  in  the  context  of  the
             appellant's own evidence.  This is particularly so, bearing in
             mind the background evidence that such  documents  are  easily
             obtainable in Iran.  I note that the appellant  has  not  kept
             the envelope which was sent from  Iran.   The  respondent  has
             provided detailed reasoning for questioning the reliability of
             the summons (para 40).  Mr Gayle reminds me that  the  summons
             has been issued from a new court in Iran and there  is  little
             evidence on the proceedings from this court.  I bear  this  in
             mind but the appellant has not addressed why a document  would
             be issued for the double purpose of a summons and a warning or
             why the authorities have not  followed  the  summons  up  with
             further enquiries/documents.  I accept that practices vary  in
             Iran however I  must  consider  the  evidence  in  the  round.
             Although I have been prepared to accept that  the  appellant's
             evidence to a very limited extent, I find that she has  deeply
             embellished and exaggerated her claim.


         28.  I do not accept that the appellant was  detained  in  2009  as
             claimed  or  that  the  authorities  have  been   sufficiently
             interested in her to issue a summons  against  her,  raid  her
             home and interrogate her father.  Having considered all of the
             appellant's evidence, together with the  documentary  evidence
             she relies upon in the context of the background  evidence  on
             Iran I do not accept  the  appellant  gave  credible  evidence
             about what happened to her in Iran even to the lower  standard
             of proof.  I am only prepared to accept that  she  contributed
             to a blog and this was shut down by the authorities.  I do not
             accept there has been follow up action following  this.   This
             is because I found the appellant's evidence  concerning  these
             events to be evasive, inconsistent and incredible.


         29.  I must also consider the appellant's claim  that  upon  return
             she will be forced to marry her cousin  and  her  family  will
             find out that she is not a  virgin.   The  appellant  has  not
             established that she is not a virgin, on the lower standard of
             proof.  I do not accept that she was detained in 2009 or  that
             she was raped in detention.  In any event  the  appellant  has
             provided  contradictory  evidence   regarding   her   father's
             intentions.  She alleges that her father wants nothing  to  do
             with her and will not speak  to  her  at  the  same  time  she
             suggests that he will force her  to  marry  a  cousin  of  the
             family.  I do not accept  that  this  family  will  force  the
             appellant to marry anyone.  They were prepared to  permit  her
             to study in the UK for a substantial period and  this  is  not
             indicative of a family who are very  protective  and  strictly
             conservative.


         30.  The appellant  is  an  educated  woman  who  could  reasonably
             relocate away from her family in order to avoid any feared ill-
             treatment.   Although  the   background   evidence   describes
             virginity tests in Iran, they are not mandatory.  When all the
             appellant's circumstances as I  have  found  them  to  be  are
             considered in the round it would not be unduly harsh  for  her
             to relocate should she fear family members."


The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

8.   The grounds of appeal  argue  that  the  Judge  erred  in  refusing  to
    adjourn the  hearing.   Mr  Williams  who  represented  the  Presenting
    Officer did not object to an  adjournment.   According  to  Mr  Gayle's
    recollection the Judge rose for 45 minutes to consider the  application
    and when she returned to court to  give  her  decision  she  mistakenly
    stated that the Presenting Officer  had  objected  to  the  adjournment
    whilst this was not the case.

9.   The appellant had been found  by  Judge  Plimmer  to  be  a  vague  and
    evasive witness; however, there was a reasonable explanation for  this.
    A very short adjournment had  been  requested  in  order  to  obtain  a
    medical report.  It had only recently been discovered by the solicitors
    that the appellant was seeing a therapist and had been doing  so  since
    2011.  The appellant was previously reluctant to reveal her  dependence
    on therapy.

10.  The treatment that the appellant  had  received  predated  her  initial
    asylum application.  The appellant had maintained that  she  was  raped
    whilst in detention in Iran.  This caused serious mental  trauma  which
    undermined her ability to provide clear evidence of later events.

11.  The Judge noted that the appellant was at liberty to give  evidence  at
    the hearing about her treatment and matters  relating  to  her  ongoing
    mental  health  issues.   However,  the  Judge  materially   erred   by
    suggesting that an appellant's evidence  would  be  accorded  the  same
    weight as a professionally drafted medical report.

12.  The Judge also erred in relation to Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702.   At
    paragraph 56 of the determination the Judge stated that  there  was  no
    new evidence before her and the property deed was part of the  evidence
    before Judge Plimmer, but this was not the case.  Judge Plimmer based a
    core adverse credibility finding on the appellant's failure to  produce
    the property deed and it represented compelling corroborative  evidence
    of the truthfulness of the appellant's account.

13.  The Judge failed again to acknowledge  documentary  evidence  submitted
    in support of the fresh claim at paragraph 58 and  she  merely  adopted
    the previous findings of Judge Plimmer.   At  paragraph  59  the  Judge
    based adverse credibility  findings  on  the  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to the  property.  The  Judge  completely  misunderstands  the
    details  of  the  property  as  described   in   the   property   deed.
    Measurements given refer to the perimeter walls rather than the overall
    area.

14.  At paragraph 60 the Judge makes confused and contradictory findings  in
    relation to the court documents relied on by the appellant.  The  Judge
    conflates the documents relied on by  the  appellant  in  her  original
    claim with those submitted in support of her fresh claim.  At paragraph
    61  the  Judge  bases   adverse   credibility   findings   on   alleged
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence relating  to  contact  with
    her father and her sister's  help  in  obtaining  documents.   However,
    there are no inconsistencies.

15.  The appellant provided a wholly plausible and credible reason  why  she
    did not appeal her conviction in Iran consistent  with  the  background
    evidence on judicial proceedings there.  The  Judge  fails  to  provide
    sustainable reasons for rejecting the appellant's account.

16.  In oral submissions Mr Gayle argued that the Judge had failed  to  make
    a finding in relation to the appellant's sister's evidence.

17.   Mr Walker made oral submissions.  He asserted that the  appellant  had
    raised psychological problems in her  asylum  interview  in  2011.   He
    argued that there was no material error of law.

18.  Mr Gayle responded and in answer to my questions  he  stated  that  the
    appellant has seen the psychotherapist once a month since 2011 and  the
    psychotherapist does not charge the appellant for sessions.   Mr  Gayle
    submitted a copy of an email which was put before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Amin.  This is from the solicitors of 28 August 2014 requesting a
    letter regarding  the  appellant's  state  of  mental  health  and  any
    treatment she has received or is receiving.  The response of  the  same
    day from Mitra Babak indicates that she is away until 5  September  and
    not available to write a report.  Ms Mitra Babak indicates in her email
    that she is a specialist consultant psychotherapist.





Conclusions

19.  The appellant initially made a claim for asylum in 2011 and during  her
    asylum interview she raised psychological problems as a result  of  how
    she had been treated in detention.   She  has  had  three  unsuccessful
    asylum appeals to date.  She did not adduce any evidence in relation to
    her mental health during the first or second appeal.  I appreciate that
    there may be valid reasons why an appellant may be hesitant to disclose
    evidence relating to mental health, but the appellant in this  case  is
    an intelligent and educated person and it is difficult to  accept  that
    she would not appreciate  the  importance  of  adducing  such  evidence
    should it be capable of corroborating her claim.

20.  In support of the application before the  FtT  Mr  Gayle  submitted  an
    email exchange between the solicitors and Ms Babak.  The  email  in  my
    view is wholly unsatisfactory.   The  author  of  it  calls  herself  a
    specialist  consultant  psychotherapist.   Her  email  shows   a   poor
    understanding of the English language and there is no evidence from her
    confirming that the appellant is  a  patient  and  that  she  has  been
    suffering from mental health problems, how long she  has  been  seeking
    psychotherapy and any other information  that  may  have  assisted  the
    appellant in seeking an adjournment.

21.  I appreciate that it  appears  that  the  Presenting  Officer  did  not
    object to an adjournment; however, the decision was one for  the  Judge
    to make.  It was one that in my view she  was  entitled  to  reach  and
    there was no procedural irregularity.   There  is  nothing  to  suggest
    that the Judge was influenced by the position that she wrongly  assumed
    the Presenting Officer had taken in relation to the  application.   She
    was aware that the Presenting Officer did not object to the adjournment
    when she ultimately made the decision  and  had  ample  opportunity  to
    reconsider in the light of this. The  fact  that  she  did  not  do  so
    indicates that the false assumption was not material.

22.  I have considered whether unfairness has been caused to  the  appellant
    by the decision to refuse to adjourn her case.  Mr  Gayle  informed  me
    that  there  has  not,  as  far  as  he  is  aware,  been  any  further
    correspondence between the solicitors and Mitra Babak since  28  August
    2014.  In the light of the history of this case and the assertions made
    by Mr Gayle in relation to the appellant I was surprised by this.   The
    grounds of appeal do not disclose that there has  been  any  unfairness
    caused to the appellant as a result of the Judge refusing to  grant  an
    adjournment.  It would not be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant  to
    submit a full and detailed expert report for the purpose of an error of
    law hearing (in the light of the directions issued by the UT); however,
    there is nothing in the email from Mitra Babak and  nothing  before  me
    that would indicate that the failure to adjourn has led  to  unfairness
    in this case.  The Judge was entitled to conclude  that  the  appellant
    could give evidence about her  own  mental  health.  I  note  that  the
    appellant did not do so. She had  not  made  reference  to  it  in  her
    statement or in oral evidence.  She could have given evidence about her
    sessions with Ms Babak and her reluctance to tell her solicitors  about
    this, but she did not do so.

23.  At the start of the hearing before  me  I  clarified  the  position  in
    relation to the documents that the appellant relied on in  relation  to
    the fresh claim and those that were before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer.   There was a court summons or warning that was issued  on  23
    February 2011.  This document was before Judge Plimmer.  In support  of
    her fresh claim the appellant submitted a court verdict  issued  on  25
    December 2011, a warning notice issued on 3 December 2011 summoning her
    to attend court on 25 December 2012 and a property  ownership  deed  in
    relation to her father's home.  These were not before Judge Plimmer.

24.  The Judge correctly noted that the starting point  in  the  appeal  was
    the decision of Judge Plimmer.   At paragraph 56 she  stated  that  the
    property deed was part of the evidence before Judge Plimmer,  but  this
    is not  the  case.  However,  paragraph  56  must  be  considered  with
    paragraph 59 where it is clear that the Judge realised that this  piece
    evidence was not before the Judge Plimmer and she went on  to  consider
    it and found that the appellant's evidence  (about  the  property)  was
    lacking  in  detail  and  that  she  had  not  provided  a   reasonable
    explanation for the delay in producing the document.   In my view,  the
    Judge understood that this document was not before Judge Plimmer.   The
    property deed was in existence before the date of  the  hearing  before
    Judge Plimmer. In my view at paragraph 56 the Judge in concluding  that
    there was no new evidence before her is referring  to  the  appellant's
    direct evidence, because when reading the decision it is  obvious  that
    she understood that the  appellant  relied  on  additional  documentary
    evidence which was not before Judge Plimmer.

25.  The Judge went on to consider the warning  notice  issued  against  the
    appellant on 3 December 2011 requesting that she attends  court  on  25
    December 2011; however, she found the  appellant's  evidence  about  it
    inconsistent.  The appellant's evidence was that she had obtained  this
    document from  her  sister;  however,  Judge  Amin  found  this  to  be
    inconsistent with the evidence that the  appellant  gave  before  Judge
    Plimmer that she was going to ask her father if  he  had  anything  and
    that she would have it sent if  available.  This  is  an  inconsistency
    which the Judge was entitled to consider and what weight to  attach  to
    it was a matter for her. The documents to which  the  Judge  refers  at
    paragraph 60 are the  two  additional  documents  which  the  appellant
    submitted with her fresh claim (the above mentioned warning notice  and
    the court conviction). It is clear  that  she  appreciated  that  these
    documents were not in existence at the time of the  previous  hearings.
    However, the Judge did not accept the appellant's  evidence  about  how
    they came to be in her possession and as a result places little  weight
    on them.

26.  The Judge considered the reliability  of  the  new  evidence  and  made
    independent findings about this in the context of  the  evidence  as  a
    whole. The Judge did what was required of her in  accordance  with  the
    guidance in Devalseelan.

27.   Mr  Gayle  raised  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  sister's  witness
    statement.  This  was  not  raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    statement did not form part of the appellant's bundle before  the  FtT.
    It was faxed to the Tribunal on 29 August 2014.   The  Judge  does  not
    refer to it.  The evidence is broadly speaking corroborative with  that
    of the appellant.  However, there is no reason for me to  believe  that
    that this evidence was not taken into account by the Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  It is not incumbent on the Judge to  make  findings  on
    each and every piece of evidence relied upon by  the  appellant.   Like
    the property deed there was no cogent or persuasive evidence  from  the
    appellant explaining why this evidence was not produced until 29 August
    2014.  Had it not been taken into account I am not persuaded that  this
    would amount to a material error.

28.  There is no material error  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  Judge  to
    dismiss the appellant's asylum claim is maintained.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 2 December 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

