
[pic]
IAC-AH-sar-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/05496/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2016                           |On  9 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ahmad, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, AT, was born in 1980.  He  is  a  male  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka.  He was refused asylum on 30 March 2015 when a decision was also
    made to remove him from the United Kingdom by way of  directions.   The
    appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Housego) dated 1 October 2015 which dismissing the appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are six grounds of appeal.   Ground  1  asserts  that  the  judge
    failed to take a "global view" of the evidence and in particular  found
    that the appellant was not  credible  before  considering  the  medical
    evidence (contrary to Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367).  The ground goes on
    to assert that the judge "had no reason to doubt the narration  of  the
    appellant's history of  his  life  up  to  10  April  2010"  but  found
    significant problems accepting the account of his life after that date.



 3. I find that the ground has no merit.  I do not  accept  the  judge  has
    only considered the medical evidence relating to this  appellant  after
    he had found, by reference to  other  evidence,  that  the  appellant's
    account was not  credible.   As  the  Tribunal  found  in  HH  (medical
    evidence -  Mibanga)  Ethiopia  [2005]  UKAIT  00164,  Mibanga  is  not
    supposed to impose a forensic straightjacket upon judicial fact-finders
    [21]. The judge had to start somewhere with his analysis and  the  fact
    that he has made findings doubting the appellant's  credibility  before
    he considered the medical report does not necessarily indicate that  he
    has departed from his stated intention to consider the  evidence  as  a
    totality.  At [123 1.2] the judge concluded the appellant had not  been
    arrested and tortured as he claimed.  He  noted  the  evidence  of  the
    doctors (Martin and Calloway) as to the  scarring  on  the  appellant's
    body "covers all that is required  of  them".   But,  indeed  with  the
    remainder of the  evidence,  the  judge  was  not  persuaded  that  the
    appellant's claim was credible.  I can find no  error  in  the  judge's
    approach to the various items  of  evidence  or  in  any  part  of  his
    analysis.  I also find [see 123 1.6] that the  judge  was  entitled  to
    find that  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  claimed  mental  health
    difficulties carried little weight because the appellant had been  "not
    entirely truthful with the doctor".

 4. The second ground of appeal asserts that, notwithstanding  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant's account was not  credible,  the  appellant
    would still be at risk because  he  fell  within  the  risk  categories
    identified in GJ [2013] CG UKUT319 (IAC). The  decision  is  challenged
    for having failed at all to engage with  the  country  guidance  having
    found that the appellant was not credible. [201

 5. I find that the ground is without merit.  It is true that the judge has
    not engaged in any detail with GJ or any other  country  guidance  but,
    having found that the appellant's account of past events in  Sri  Lanka
    was not credible and that any activities in which he had  been  engaged
    sur place had been, at best, low level, there was little need  for  him
    to do so.  Indeed, if the judge had gone on to discuss GJ he would only
    have done so in order to state the obvious, namely that the  appellant,
    on the facts as the judge found them, did not fall into any of the risk
    categories identified in the country guidance.

 6. The third ground of appeal asserts that the  judge  placed  too  little
    weight upon the medical evidence of the  scarring  on  the  appellant's
    body and also the mental difficulties which  the  appellant  claims  to
    suffer and which were discussed in Dr Dhumad's report.

 7. It is simply not the case  that  the  judge,  as  the  grounds  assert,
    "failed to give good reasons for departing where the medical report  is
    strongly supportive" of the appellant's claim.  As I have noted  above,
    the scarring reports are not incompatible with the judge's finding that
    the appellant had not been arrested and tortured as he claimed.   I  am
    thoroughly satisfied that the judge has adopted a holistic approach and
    has only concluded that the appellant is  not  a  credible  witness  by
    reference to all the evidence before him.  However, within the  context
    of that overall finding,  I  can  identify  no  error  in  the  judge's
    conclusion  that  the  weight  attaching  to  Dr  Dhumad's  report  was
    "dependent on Dr Dhumad accepting that the belief of the appellant  [as
    regard past events] is genuine".  [97].  I refer again to the  case  of
    HH; the judge had to start somewhere in his analysis  of  the  evidence
    and his conclusion that the appellant is  not  credible,  a  conclusion
    achieve following  a  holistic  analysis,  fully  justified  the  judge
    attaching little weight to a medical report which was based on a  false
    account of past events.

 8. Ground 4 refers to the sur place claim of the appellant in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge found that the appellant's activities had been  low
    level if they had  occurred  at  all,  and  that  his  account  of  the
    activities "may be manufactured" to support the claim  [120].   I  find
    that the judge did not err in concluding [121]  that,  "the  activities
    which have been proven are not such as to put the appellant at risk  on
    return".  The judge's findings as regards  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities are wholly consistent with the guidance of GJ.

 9. Ground 5 asserts that the appellant would be  subjected  to  Article  3
    ECHR ill-treatment if detained in Sri Lanka.  The judge  accepted  [123
    1.1] that the appellant may have been a low level civilian employee  of
    the LTTE for a short period, ending  over  ten  years  ago.   There  is
    nothing in the guidance provided by GJ which would indicate that such a
    profile would give rise to the real risk that the  appellant  would  be
    detained on return to Sri Lanka and, if detained, ill-treated.

10. Ground 6 asserts that the judge failed to consider Article  8  ECHR  as
    regards the  appellant's  physical  and  moral  integrity.   The  judge
    accepted that the appellant did have some  mental  health  difficulties
    including moderate depression.  However,  it  is  not  clear  from  the
    grounds why that fact alone would engage Article 8 ECHR and entitle the
    appellant to remain living in the United Kingdom.

11. For the reasons I have given above, I find that the appellant's  appeal
    should be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

12. This appeal is dismissed.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 20 April 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

