
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05800/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 April 2016                     |On 17 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     SL
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T.  Royston,  Counsel  instructed  by  Heath  and
                    Power
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge A. C. Holt, promulgated on 6 July  2015,  in  which  she
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:
         "It is arguable that the judge may have erred in law by setting out
         as a preliminary matter the provisions of section  8  of  the  2004
         Act, and who considered the appellant's failure to claim asylum  in
         Belgium a safe third country and the  short  delay  in  failing  to
         claim asylum on arrival in the United Kingdom as a  starting  point
         for her assessment of credibility contrary to the  decision  in  SM
         (section 8; Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116.

    Other grounds such as conflating plausibility with  credibility  and  a
    failure to adequately reason why a  granite  merchant  would  not  have
    power and influence to trace the  appellant  in  Albania  may  also  be
    arguable."

 3. I heard oral submissions from both representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision which I set out below with reasons.

Submissions

 4. Mr. Royston relied on his skeleton argument.   He  submitted  that  the
    primary failure of the judge in relation to section 8 was  her  failure
    to apply the full ratio of SM (section 8; Judge's process)  Iran.   She
    failed to treat credibility in the round, and separated out her section
    8 consideration.  That was not the right approach.

 5. At paragraphs [15] to [20] the judge set out the Appellant's journey to
    the United Kingdom.  In paragraph [19] she addressed the likelihood  of
    the Appellant being traced in Belgium.  This was  a  serious  error  as
    there was no issue of the Appellant being at risk on return to Belgium.
     The only pertinence of mentioning her fear in Belgium related  to  her
    subjective fear of being found there.  The judge had failed to consider
    the Appellant's belief that she may have been found  in  Belgium  which
    led her to make a decision not to claim asylum there.   The  subjective
    and the objective basis for her fear had been elided together.

 6. In relation to risk from her family, I was referred  to  paragraphs  2a
    and 2b of the skeleton.  The judge had dismissed the risk posed by  the
    Appellant's intended husband ("HH") in fairly short  order,  [22].   If
    the judge meant that the Appellant had not  suffered  violence  at  the
    hands of HH, this was correct, but it was not a basis for rejecting the
    risk of violence.  The judge needed to go further to dismiss the  risk.
    The judge erred by going no further than identifying that the Appellant
    had not suffered violence yet.

 7. In relation to relocation, the judge had failed to have regard  to  the
    country guidance in relation to the social status of HH, the person she
    feared.  I was referred to paragraphs 54, 186 and  187  of  AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women)  Albania  CG  [2010]  UKUT  80  (IAC).   A  business
    enterprise could be a range of sizes, and more had to be  done  by  the
    judge to identify the power and reach of HH.   She  had  neglected  the
    available evidence.  It was not necessary for HH to have greater  power
    in order to be able to locate her given that a trafficker, someone  who
    did not have a particularly developed social status, was able to  trace
    someone.  Although there had been no finding  that  the  Appellant  had
    been trafficked, if a trafficker could trace someone, so could HH.

 8. Mr. McVeety submitted that the point in relation to the application  of
    the country guidance case was not relevant.  Whether or not a  criminal
    group would be able to track the Appellant down was not relevant to her
    case.  She feared her father,  and  maybe  HH,  an  individual  in  the
    granite trade.  It was not a question of a trafficking  group  tracking
    her down.  AM and BM at [183] was dealing with internal  relocation  of
    trafficking victims, but she had fled of her own volition.  The ability
    of a criminal gang to track someone down had no  relevance  here.   She
    feared a granite salesman.

 9. In relation to ground 1, there had to be something behind her  fear  of
    return and her fear was speculative.   Her  intended  husband  had  not
    threatened her, and nothing had happened to her  before.   Nothing  had
    happened to her in the two months prior to leaving Albania.  There  was
    no evidence that HH was the "Harrods" of granite salesmen.   There  was
    no objective evidence to show that a granite salesman with two shops in
    Albania had power and influence.   The  burden  of  proof  was  on  the
    Appellant to show the influence.  He was not  a  criminal,  such  as  a
    trafficker, but a businessman.

10. In relation to section 8, he conceded that it was  unfortunate  when  a
    judge started the credibility assessment with section 8, and  this  was
    not the best approach.   However,  it  must  be  shown  that  this  had
    infected the other findings.  SM (section 8; Judge's process) Iran held
    that section 8 could be treated as part of the  assessment  of  overall
    credibility.  The judge had not used section 8 in such a  way  that  it
    undermined her overall credibility findings.

11. He accepted that Mr. Royston was correct in relation to paragraph  [19]
    of the decision.   This  was  not  a  claim  in  relation  to  Belgium.
    However, this could not be a material error.   In  paragraph  [18]  the
    judge had found that the Appellant was intent  on  coming  to  England.
    She had not been tracked down in Tirana  or  Brussels.   There  was  no
    artificial separation of the judge's credibility findings under section
    8 and her other findings.  She had given other reasons for not  finding
    the Appellant credible.  Her treatment of section 8 was not a  material
    error when the decision was read as a whole.

Error of law

12. The judge commenced her findings in paragraph [15].  In paragraphs [16]
    to [18] she set out the Appellant's immigration history and her journey
    to the United Kingdom.  Paragraphs [19] and [20] state:
         "I therefore find that  the  appellant  had  a  firm  objective  of
         travelling all the way to the United Kingdom.  She had no intention
         of staying in Belgium.  I find that she could have  claimed  asylum
         in Belgium as it is a safe country.  Further, for the reasons which
         I will set out below, I am not satisfied by her  account  generally
         and even applying a lower standard do not find it remotely credible
         that her family or intended husband in Albania would have been able
         to trace and find the appellant in Belgium.

    Consequently the fact that: (i) the appellant did not apply for  asylum
    in Belgium; and (ii) delayed for four days  when  she  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom both significantly undermine her credibility pursuant to
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc.)
    Act 2004.  Her behaviour  is  not  consistent  with  somebody  who  was
    allegedly fleeing for their life and in desperate circumstances.   Such
    a person would have claimed  asylum  in  Belgium.   The  appellant  has
    failed to give a satisfactory explanation for failing to  claim  asylum
    in Belgium."

13. The headnote to SM (section 8; Judge's process) Iran states:
         "Even where section 8 applies, an Immigration Judge should look  at
         the evidence as a whole and decide which parts are  more  important
         and which less. Section 8 does not require the behaviour  to  which
         it applies to be treated as the starting-point of the assessment of
         credibility."

14. The first part of the Appellant's account which the judge considers  is
    her journey to the  United  Kingdom,  and  therefore  section  8.   She
    considers this before considering the Appellant's account of events  in
    Albania.  As accepted by Mr. McVeety, it is not the  best  approach  to
    start with a consideration of section 8.  However, it is the extent  to
    which this has infected the other findings which is  relevant.   As  is
    clear from SM (section 8; Judge's process) Iran, section 8  should  not
    be determinative, but should be considered in the round.

15. The judge has taken section 8 as her starting point.   Looking  at  the
    way in which she has approached the rest of the evidence, I  find  that
    her section 8  findings  have  affected  her  treatment  of  the  other
    evidence.   She  states  in  paragraph  [20],  prior  to   turning   to
    consideration  of  the  Appellant's  account,  "Her  behaviour  is  not
    consistent with somebody who was allegedly fleeing for their  life  and
    in desperate circumstances".  Similarly, the opening to paragraph  [21]
    also indicates that the judge's  approach  has  been  affected  by  her
    section 8 findings: "Turning to the  Appellant's  alleged  reasons  for
    leaving  Albania...".   At  this  point  she  has  not  considered  the
    Appellant's account of what happened in Albania, and has not given  any
    consideration to whether her account is consistent or credible,  and/or
    corroborated by background evidence.

16. Further, I find that the judge has erred in her  consideration  of  the
    fact that the Appellant did not claim asylum in  Belgium,  [19].    She
    fails to identify that it is the Appellant's belief that she  could  be
    traced in Belgium, her  subjective  fear,  which  is  relevant  to  her
    failure to claim asylum.  The judge was not required to assess  whether
    objectively the Appellant was at risk in Belgium.  Failing to  consider
    the Appellant's subjective fear of being found has affected the  extent
    to which the judge finds that the  Appellant's  behaviour  falls  under
    section 8, and the extent therefore to which her credibility is damaged
    as a result.  In turn, her finding that the  Appellant's  behaviour  in
    failing to claim asylum in Belgium is  not  behaviour  consistent  with
    someone fleeing for her life affects her consideration of the  core  of
    the Appellant's account.  She has  already  decided  that  the  reasons
    given are not credible on the basis of her finding that the Appellant's
    failure to claim asylum in Belgium, and of delaying for  four  days  in
    the United Kingdom, is not consistent  with  someone  fleeing  for  her
    life.

17. The judge made other credibility findings in addition to the section  8
    findings.  However, I find that  having  addressed  section  8  at  the
    start, the judge's findings in respect of section 8 affect her findings
    in respect of the rest of the evidence.  I find that she has failed  to
    look at the evidence as a whole.

18. In relation to paragraph [32] and her fear  of  HH,  the  judge  states
    that, as  there  is  no  evidence  of  HH  being  violent  towards  the
    Appellant, "the risk from him is speculative".   I find that it is  not
    necessary for the Appellant to have suffered violence at the  hands  of
    HH in order for the risk to  be  present.   I  find  that  the  judge's
    findings, infected by her section 8 findings, mean  that  she  has  not
    given any weight to the Appellant's claim  that  she  was  at  risk  of
    violence, and therefore she has failed to consider or  give  weight  to
    the background evidence which may  have  corroborated  the  Appellant's
    claim that she was at risk.

19. The extent to which HH would  be  able  to  locate  the  Appellant  was
    relevant, and the judge addressed this in paragraphs [28] and [29].  It
    was not submitted before me that this was a case  where  the  Appellant
    had been trafficked.  AM  and  BM  made  findings  about  the  ease  of
    locating people in Albania.  However, AM and  BM  was  considering  the
    ability of traffickers to locate people.  While traffickers may not  be
    of a high social class, it  is  also  the  case  that  traffickers  are
    criminals, part of criminal gangs.  It was not alleged that  HH  was  a
    criminal, but a businessman.  While I find that the judge  should  have
    done more than merely find that HH  would  not  be  able  to  find  the
    Appellant,  which  findings  are  based  largely  on  discounting   the
    Appellant's own evidence, HH's situation as a businessman is not  on  a
    par with criminal traffickers.

20. I find that the judge erred in law in failing to consider the  evidence
    as a whole, and in treating section 8 behaviour as  the  starting-point
    of her credibility assessment.  I find that this error is material.

21. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

22. I have made an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

23. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    it aside.

24. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.


Signed   Date 11 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

