
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05402/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2016                   |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                     MR ZERIT (aka Daniel Debasay) MLASH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the home DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert of counsel instructed by Montague
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the appellant who appeals against a decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal  against  a  decision
       taken on 10 March 2015 to refuse his asylum claim.







  Background Facts

    2. The appellant's Nationality is at  the  heart  of  the  dispute.  The
       appellant claims that he is a citizen of Eritrea, born on 19 December
       1971. The respondent considers that the appellant  is  a  citizen  of
       Ethiopia born on 25 May 1973.  The  background,  as  claimed  by  the
       appellant, is that he left Eritrea in 1995 and went to  Ethiopia.  He
       remained in Ethiopia until 2000 when he left for Sudan. On 13  August
       2008 he obtained a visa from the British Embassy in Khartoum Sudan to
       come to the UK for the purpose of family reunion. On 29 November 2013
       the appellant claimed asylum on the basis of a well-founded  fear  of
       persecution if he were to be  returned  to  Eritrea  because  he  had
       deserted from the army. That  application  was  refused  because  the
       respondent considered that the appellant was an  Ethiopian  National.
       The appellant was granted limited leave to remain in the  UK  on  the
       basis of his relationship with his children in the UK.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    3.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 25 September 2015, Judge Dean  dismissed
       the appellant's appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
       appellant had not demonstrated that he was an Eritrean  National  and
       therefore that he was not a refugee and  also  was  not  entitled  to
       humanitarian protection.

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    4. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
       raising issues of procedural impropriety, that the judge had  made  a
       factual error, had ignored parts of the evidence  and  erred  in  her
       assessment of Nationality.  On 13 October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Astle granted the appellant  permission  to  appeal  indicating
       that it was arguable that a procedural impropriety may have occurred.
        Thus, the appeal came before me.

    5. The appellant and Mr Suleiman Hussein (the interpreter engaged by the
       appellant's representative) attended  the  hearing.  Mr  Hussein  had
       attended the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and in support of
       the  grounds  of  appeal  provided  a  witness  statement.   At   the
       commencement of the hearing Mr Gilbert invited me to consider firstly
       the other error of law issues as if I were to find a  material  error
       of  law  the  procedural  impropriety  issue  may  not  need  to   be
       considered. Mr Hussein was asked to wait  outside  the  hearing  room
       whilst submissions were made.

  Summary of the Submissions

    6. The grounds of appeal assert in summary:

         . That the conduct of judge gave rise for concern - it is asserted
           that this was raised in the course of the hearing.

         . That the judge did not accept the bona fides of the  appellant's
           interpreter/translator who gave evidence at  the  hearing  about
           his qualifications.

         . That a document (a Sudanese driving licence) had  been  produced
           at the hearing confirming the appellant's Eritrean nationality -
           the judge was not happy with the interpreter's translation.  The
           representative suggested  that  the  court's  interpreter  could
           verify the translation but the judge refused. This document  was
           significantly material to the case

         .  That during the hearing  it  became  apparent  that  the  court
           interpreter  was  not  correctly  translating  the   appellant's
           evidence. This was raised with the judge. The  judge  said  that
           any issues could be dealt with at the end  of  the  hearing  but
           said  that  the  appellant's  interpreter  could  not   take   a
           contemporaneous note of the issues with the translation.

         . That the judge made a  factual  error  at  paragraph  8  of  the
           decision - the appellant did not use an  Ethiopian  ID  card  or
           Ethiopian driver's license to support his application to come to
           the UK. The appellant used an ID card issued by UNHCR  in  Sudan
           which recognised him as a refugee.

         . The judge, at paragraph 8, accepts that the respondent applies a
           higher standard of proof to  establish  identity.  However,  the
           visa application forms  were  not  produced  by  the  respondent
           despite a  formal  application  at  the  hearing  to  have  then
           adduced.

         . That the  appellant  has  continued  to  use  a  false  identity
           undermines his claim. The First-tier Tribunal was fully apprised
           of difficulties the appellant  has had trying to change his name

         . In his substantive interview the  appellant  answered  questions
           about Eritrea correctly and in detail.

    7. In his oral submissions Mr Gilbert submitted that the judge failed to
       record adequately or at all the evidence of the appellant. The  judge
       failed to consider relevant evidence and failed to make findings with
       regard to that evidence. On reading the First-tier Tribunal  decision
       he submitted that it is  not  ascertainable  what  any  of  the  oral
       evidence was. He submitted that the judge appears to have taken  only
       the evidence that she considered to be against the appellant but  has
       not referred to anything that  is  supportive  of  his  account.  For
       example the  appellant  speaks  Tigrinya  the  national  language  of
       Eritrea, he gave very detailed and correct answers to  the  questions
       regarding Eritrea and in the reasons for refusal letter at  paragraph
       10 the Secretary of State accepts evidence given in his interview  is
       correct. The appellant gave a plausible account of his activities  in
       Eritrea and his escape and how he spent the  intervening  years.  The
       judge has not made  any  findings  or  addressed  this  evidence.  He
       submitted that it is impossible to know  whether  or  not  the  judge
       considered those aspects of the evidence. Mr Gilbert  relied  on  the
       case of AK (Failure to  assess  witnesses'  evidence)  Turkey  [2004]
       UKIAT 00230. The judge has not engaged with the evidence. Even if she
       rejected the evidence in favour  of  the  respondent's  evidence  she
       needs to say why she prefers that evidence.

    8. Mr Gilbert submitted that the judge erred in not taking into  account
       the reason why the appellant had continued to use his false identity.
       His children are known under that name and family proceedings were in
       his false identity.

    9. At paragraph 8 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision the judge made 2
       errors. The first was in the acceptance of the respondent's  position
       that a visa application is much more detailed when  no  evidence  had
       been  provided  by  the  respondent  as  to  what  checks  had   been
       undertaken. He submitted that in accepting that there  was  a  higher
       standard of proof in visa applications the judge  imported  a  higher
       standard than that required in an asylum claim on  the  appellant  to
       prove his case. The second error was asserted to be  that  the  judge
       accepted the  respondent's  assertion  that  the  appellant  used  an
       Ethiopian ID card in support of his visa  application.  It  is  clear
       from the interview (at q75) that the appellant clearly stated that he
       did not have an Ethiopian  ID  card  and  at  q75  and  76  the  only
       Ethiopian document he had was an Ethiopian driving licence. The judge
       failed to resolve this material difference. In answer to a question I
       asked of him Mr Gilbert confirmed  that  the  document  used  by  the
       appellant to obtain the visa to come to the UK was the UNHCR ID card.
       This was set out in the grounds of  appeal  and  in  the  appellant's
       witness statement  at  paragraph  2(i).  I  referred  Mr  Gilbert  to
       questions 117 and 121 of the substantive asylum  interview  where  it
       clearly states that the UNHRC document recorded  his  nationality  as
       Eritrean and was in his real name i.e. Mlash.  Mr  Gilbert  submitted
       that the document used to obtain the visa has not been resolved - the
       respondent cannot say what document was used.

   10. Mr Gilbert raised the issue of the  appellant's  children  submitting
       that the judge failed to consider the impact of his  removal  on  the
       appellant's children. I confirmed with  the  Home  Office  Presenting
       Officer that the appellant had been granted limited leave to  remain.
       Mr Gilbert was content not to pursue this point in light of that.

   11. Ms Everett relied on the Rule 24 (of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal)  Rules  2008)  response  which  concerned  exclusively  the
       procedural impropriety point. She submitted that the best  she  could
       do in respect of the First-tier Tribunal decision is to  submit  that
       the judge did not err in law. The  judge  mentions  on  a  couple  of
       occasions that she has considered all the evidence  -  see  paragraph
       18. She  accepted  that  on  reading  the  determination  one  cannot
       ascertain what the oral evidence was. She  submitted  that  what  the
       judge saw to be the critical issue was the Nationality. Regarding the
       Entry  Clearance  Officer  applying  a  higher  standard  Ms  Everett
       submitted  that  the  standard  applied  is  the  civil  balance   of
       probabilities which is a higher standard than reasonable  likelihood.
       The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  accepted  that  the   appellant   was
       Ethiopian. It is an Entry Clearance Officer's role to check  that  an
       applicant is who they say they are and that they are the  nationality
       that they claim to be. I asked Ms Everett if she had any evidence  of
       what checks were routinely carried or what an Entry Clearance Officer
       did when checking an application. Ms Everett indicated that  she  did
       not know. Ms Everett indicated that a record would not  generally  be
       made on the visa form of a positive response to checks on validity it
       was only generally where there was some  doubt  that  you  would  see
       references  on  the  visa  forms.  In  relation  to  this  particular
       application  Ms Everett indicated that as the application was made in
       2008 the information as to what documents  were  submitted  and  what
       checks were carried out will not be readily  available  as  this  was
       before forms were recorded electronically. I indicated that the  visa
       application form indicated a passport number and asked Ms Everett  if
       where there was no passport to support a visa application what  would
       be recorded there. Ms Everett did not know  whether  or  not  another
       form of identification reference number would  be  recorded  in  that
       space.

Discussion

   12. In considering the ground of appeal that the  judge  did  not  engage
       with the evidence, did not set out findings in sufficient detail  and
       did not resolve  differences  in  the  evidence  giving  reasons  for
       preferring the evidence of the respondent I have taken  into  account
       the factors set out in AK (Failure  to  assess  witnesses'  evidence)
       Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230 at paragraphs 9 and 10:

           "9.    ... Whilst there is of course no general requirement  for
           an adjudicator to set out at  length  the  oral  evidence  given
           before him, and in many cases no useful purpose would be  served
           by doing so, nevertheless he ought as a matter of good  practice
           to summarise at least the material parts of the  evidence  which
           he has heard so as to enable an informed reader to ascertain the
           nature and content of that evidence, and also to enable  him  to
           be satisfied that the adjudicator has directed his mind properly
           to the material aspects of the evidence. In general, it  is  not
           sufficient for an adjudicator merely to record  that  a  witness
           has relied on his or her witness statement, although  there  may
           be particular circumstances in which that  would  suffice,  e.g.
           where the evidence in question relates to facts which are not in
           dispute between the parties, or  which  are  irrelevant  to  the
           issues on which the outcome of the appeal will turn.

           10.    ... Save in those exceptional cases  where  the  material
           facts are not in issue between the parties, it is  an  essential
           part of an adjudicator's responsibility to make  clear  findings
           of fact on the material issues, and to give proper, intelligible
           and adequate reasons for arriving at those findings ..."

   13.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  sets  out,  at  paragraph  7,  that   the
       appellant's claim is  as  set  out  in  the  documents  mentioned  in
       paragraph 4 of the  decision.  In  paragraph  4  the  only  documents
       mentioned are a copy of a guardian newspaper report and a copy of the
       US Department of State report of 2013 on Eritrea. There is no mention
       of the appellant's witness statement or any  reference  to  his  oral
       evidence. The only reference that may be inferred is to the record of
       proceedings. It is clear that the judge has not only  taken  the  two
       documents referred  to  in  paragraph  4  as  these  would  not  have
       contained the evidence that the judge summarises in paragraph 7. What
       is not clear is what evidence the judge has taken into account.

   14. It is apparent from the record of proceedings that the appellant gave
       oral evidence as to why he used a  false  Ethiopian  false  identity;
       namely, that he was afraid and didn't want to be known as Eritrean in
       Ethiopia. He also gave an account of his time in  the  Eritrean  army
       and his role as a spy for  the  Eritrea  authorities.   There  is  no
       record of this  evidence  and  neither  is  there  a  record  of  the
       appellant's evidence set out in his witness statement. The  appellant
       asserts that he did not obtain an Ethiopian ID card.  He  obtained  a
       forged Ethiopian driving licence. He also asserts  that  he  answered
       all the questions in his asylum interview on Eritrea correctly and he
       speaks Tigrinya.

   15. I find that the First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  engage  sufficiently
       with the evidence. The main thrust of the decision  and  reasons  for
       the findings appears to be the use of the false identity in obtaining
       a visa to come to the UK. The appellant did not deny that he  used  a
       false identity and gave reasons in his oral and written  evidence  as
       to why he did that. For example in relation to the use  of  an  false
       identity, at paragraph 18 of the decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       judge when considering certain behaviour as damaging the  appellant's
       credibility (as she was required to do) the judge finds:

           "... I find the appellant used documents designed or  likely  to
           conceal  information  and  designed  or  likely  to  mislead.  I
           therefore  find  that  this   goes   against   the   appellant's
           credibility and undermines the credibility of his claim to be an
           Eritrean national ..."

   16. At paragraph 19 the judge considers that  the  appellant's  continued
       use of the false identity whilst in the  UK  further  undermines  his
       claim. There is no  engagement  with  the  reasons  asserted  by  the
       appellant as to why he continued to use the false identity in the  UK
       or why he had used a false identity during his time in  Ethiopia  and
       to obtain his visa.

   17. The appellant gave an account of his activities in  Eritrea  and  his
       escape and how he spent the intervening years. The judge has not made
       any findings or addressed this evidence at all.

   18. At paragraph 14 the judge refers to the name on the Sudanese  driving
       licence as being Zerit  Mlash  Ghebrat.  The  judge  notes  that  the
       appellant has never used the  name  Ghebrat  and  that  this  further
       undermines his credibility. Whilst the judge is perfectly entitled to
       take this into account, it  is  not  clear  that  the  appellant  was
       afforded an opportunity to explain this issue.

   19. The judge has set out in some detail the  documentary  evidence  that
       she has considered and has given reasons as to why she has  made  her
       findings but she has not set out why she has rejected the appellant's
       evidence. The judge accepted  the  respondent's  assertion  that  the
       appellant  used  an  Ethiopian  ID  card  in  support  of  his   visa
       application (at paragraph 9). It is clear from the interview (at q75)
       that the appellant clearly stated that he did not have  an  Ethiopian
       ID card and at  q76  the  only  Ethiopian  document  he  had  was  an
       Ethiopian  driving  licence.  The  respondent  did  not  provide  any
       evidence as to what documents  were  used  in  support  of  the  visa
       application  and  at  the  hearing   before   me   the   respondent's
       representative could not provide an indication as to  what  documents
       were used. In the reasons for refusal letter the  respondent  asserts
       that the appellant said  that  he  used  an  Ethiopian  ID  card  and
       Ethiopian driving licence to support his visa  application  referring
       to q75 and 81 of the substantive  interview.  The  answers  to  those
       questions do not support the respondent's position. The judge  failed
       to resolve this material difference in the  evidence  so  it  is  not
       clear why she came to the conclusion that she did.

   20. The judge, at paragraph 9, accepts the respondent's assertion that  a
       visa application is much more detailed and of a  higher  standard  of
       proof and takes judicial notice of that as a fact. The judge  appears
       to have discounted the answers given  correctly  in  the  appellant's
       asylum interview on the basis of the higher standard of proof applied
       by an Entry Clearance Officer as she referred  to  'simply  answering
       questions at screening and asylum  interviews.'  There  is  no  other
       engagement with the fact that the appellant appears to have  answered
       the vast majority of the questions correctly. No doubt  an  applicant
       can  learn  sufficient  information  or  have  the  knowledge  of   a
       particular country for reasons other than being  a  National  of  the
       country to answer sufficient questions correctly. However, there  was
       no real analysis by the judge of why she considered that the  correct
       answers to the questions, which are designed to test  knowledge  that
       will either support or damage a claim to be of a certain Nationality,
       were to be disregarded particularly where  the  appellant  has  never
       denied entering the UK using  an  Ethiopian  false  identity  and  no
       specific evidence was produced by the respondent on  the  issue.  The
       respondent had not provided any specific evidence as to  what  checks
       had been undertaken. I accept that the respondent will not and  ought
       not to be required to reveal methods used to undertake checks In this
       case there was no indication in the visa  documentation  as  to  what
       document was used to support the visa application (a passport  number
       was indicated on the form). Whilst it might  be  the  case  that  the
       Entry Clearance Officer will apply a rigorous  approach  to  ensuring
       the validity of documents and this will no doubt be,  as  Ms  Everett
       submitted,  a  core  component  of  their  role  in  assessing   visa
       applications, they are not  infallible.  I  accept  that  due  weight
       should be  afforded  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  expertise.
       However, given the anxious scrutiny  required  in  asylum  cases  the
       approach of the judge is inadequate.

   21. Whilst the judge's finding were open to her and the decision  is  not
       unreasonable, for the above reasons I find that there was a  material
       error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and  I  set  aside
       that decision. I communicated my decision orally at the hearing.

   22. I canvassed the views of the appellant's representative and the  Home
       Office Presenting Officer with regard to proceeding  to  re-make  the
       decision or alternatively adjourning the hearing for the matter to be
       re-heard before the Upper Tribunal. Mr Gilbert invited  me  to  remit
       the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  there  needs  to   be
       considerable findings of  fact.  Ms  Everett  agreed  that  this  was
       required. I considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer  of
       proceedings. I am satisfied that the nature and  extent  of  judicial
       fact finding that is necessary in  order  for  the  decision  in  the
       appeal to be  re-made  is  such,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
       objective, that it is appropriate to remit the matter to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

   23. I remit this  matter  for  a  de-novo  hearing  before  a  First-tier
       Tribunal judge other than Judge Dean. I considered whether or  not  I
       could preserve any of the findings of fact. Whilst this may have been
       possible with regard to some of the findings on the documents as  the
       findings were inextricably linked to the  appellant's  credibility  I
       decided that it would not be possible to do so without hampering  the
       First-tier Tribunal when re-hearing the matter. A new hearing will be
       fixed at the next available date.

   24. I have considered whether any parties require the  protection  of  an
       anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously.
       Having considered  all  the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
       consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

   25. I have not considered the  grounds  of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
       procedural impropriety point having found a material error of law  as
       set out above. Although this does not form  part  of  my  decision  I
       indicate that it does appear that the appellant may not have  had  an
       opportunity to have a fair hearing. Although the judge was correct to
       point out that the role of a third party is not  to  comment  on  the
       interpretation being undertaken by an authorised  court  interpreter,
       if there may have been some issues with the  interpretation  then  by
       refusing to permit the appellant's  representative's  interpreter  to
       take a note of the issues so  that  they  could  be  put  forward  in
       submissions might amount to a risk that the hearing was not fair. The
       judge has not had an opportunity to comment but a note  on  the  file
       appears to indicate that the judge  indicated  that  the  interpreter
       should not take notes.

Decision

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law.  I set aside that decision. The matter is  remitted  to
       the First-tier Tribunal for a de-novo  hearing  before  a  First-tier
       Tribunal judge other than Judge Dean.

   27. I have not given any specific directions (other than the matter is to
       be heard by a judge other than Judge Dean) with  regard  to  the  re-
       hearing leaving those matters for the First-tier Tribunal  to  decide
       what is appropriate. I did, however,  discuss  with  Ms  Everett  the
       desirability of the respondent producing the evidence with regard  to
       what documents were considered by the Entry Clearance  Officer  (with
       copies  if  available)  in  respect  of  the  application  for  entry
       clearance. Ms Everett indicated that she would endeavour to ascertain
       whether such evidence could be obtained.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 16 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
