
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05014/2015
     AA/05015/2015
     AA/05016/2015
     AA/05017/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 5th August 2016                         |On 31st August 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                            te (first Appellant)
                            se (second Appellant)
                            ae (third Appellant)
                            ae (fourth Appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Knight, Counsel instructed by Jacobs & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are a family of Sri Lankan citizens comprising the first
    Appellant, TE born on [ ] 1976, her husband SE born on [  ]  1976,  and
    their two children born respectively on [ ] 2007 and  [  ]  2014.   The
    first Appellant, TE, visited the United Kingdom between September  2006
    and October 2010, and again in 2011, returning to Sri Lanka in December
    2011.  She last came to the United Kingdom in 2012 when she  was  given
    leave to enter as a student until 26th January 2013.  She  applied  for
    asylum on 23rd January 2013, and her husband joined her in  the  United
    Kingdom on 17th June 2013.  Her application for asylum was refused  for
    the reasons given in the Respondent's letter of 5th  March  2015.   The
    other Appellants who  had  applied  as  her  dependants  were  likewise
    refused.  All  the  Appellants  appealed  those  decisions,  and  their
    appeals were heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Graham  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 19th June 2015.  She decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeals on asylum, humanitarian protection, and  human  rights  grounds
    for the  reasons  given  in  her  Decision  of  16th  July  2015.   The
    Appellants sought leave to appeal that decision,  and  on  5th  October
    2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellants case was  that  the  first  Appellant  and  her  husband
    operated two companies in Sri Lanka facilitating arrangements  for  Sri
    Lankan students to study abroad including the United Kingdom.  Starting
    in November 2009, SE was forced by the LTTE to assist LTTE students  to
    study abroad.  As a consequence in January 2011 SE was detained by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities for  one  day  and  questioned.   Following  his
    release, those authorities  demanded  money  from  him  threatening  to
    kidnap his  son.   On  29th  February  2012  SE  was  abducted  by  the
    authorities and questioned about the LTTE.  Thereafter he was  detained
    for a year during which time he was tortured.   On  18th  May  2013  he
    escaped and eventually travelled to the United Kingdom.

 4. The Judge dismissed the appeals because she found the  evidence  of  TE
    and SE lacking in credibility.  She found the credibility of TE damaged
    by  operation  of  Section  8  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act  2004,  and  the  evidence  of  SE  to  be  highly
    implausible and inconsistent.  The Judge gave a number of  examples  of
    the implausibilities and inconsistencies.  The  Judge  also  found  the
    documentary evidence submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants  to  be
    unreliable.

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Knight argued that the Judge had erred  in
    law in coming to this conclusion.  He submitted that she had failed  to
    engage with the core of the case, and had  given  insufficient  reasons
    for her credibility finding.  The Judge had failed to make  a  specific
    finding as to the  credibility  of  TE.   TE  had  been  treated  as  a
    peripheral witness whereas she was an Appellant in her own right.

 6. In response, Mrs Aboni referred to the Rule 24 response  and  submitted
    that there were no errors of law in the decision  of  the  Judge.   The
    appeal of TE was entirely dependent upon her husband's  claim,  and  if
    the Judge found this not to be credible, then TE's  appeal  must  fail.
    The Judge fully considered the case of SE and gave full reasons for her
    finding that it was not credible.  In any event the Judge  had  made  a
    specific finding concerning the credibility of TE at  paragraph  40  of
    the Decision.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  therefore  I
    do not set aside.  As Mrs Aboni said, TE's  claim  to  be  at  risk  on
    return to Sri Lanka depended entirely upon what  had  happened  to  her
    husband in Sri Lanka, and relied upon the evidence of  her  husband  as
    regards those events.  The Judge found the evidence of SE in respect of
    those events to be lacking in credibility.  She carefully analysed  his
    evidence in paragraphs 41 to 48 inclusive of the Decision and gave more
    than adequate reasons for her finding.  She found SE's evidence  to  be
    inconsistent and implausible and gave a number of examples of each.  In
    my view the Judge came to a conclusion about the evidence of  SE  which
    was open to her  on  the  evidence  before  her  and  which  she  fully
    explained.  In addition, the Judge dealt with the documentary evidence,
    and found the credibility of TE to be damaged by operation of Section 8
    of the 2004 Act.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date 31st August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
