
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05267/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th March 2016                           |On 12th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                              mr. YOUSEF AHMADI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Yousef Ahmadi in person;  No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis on 19th August 2015,  in  which  he
       dismissed an appeal against the refusal by the  Secretary  of  State
       for the Home Department on 11th March 2015 to refuse the appellant's
       fresh claim  for  asylum  and  to  serve  a  Notice  of  Immigration
       Decision, to remove the appellant to Iran.


 Background


    2. The appellant is an Iranian national who arrived in  the  UK  on  or
       about 5th April 2008. He made a claim for asylum  that  was  refused
       for the reasons set out in a decision of the  respondent  dated  5th
       November 2008.  The appellant did not appeal that decision.  On 18th
       February  2015,  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  to  the
       respondent and on 11th March 2015, the respondent made a decision to
       refuse the appellant's fresh claim for asylum and to serve a  Notice
       of Immigration Decision to remove the appellant  to  Iran.   It  was
       that decision, which gave  rise  to  the  appeal  before  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Hillis.


    3. The appellant's claim for refugee status has two facets to it.  They
       are referred to at paragraph [10] and [11] of the Judge's  decision.
       First, the appellant fears the family of a female  friend  who  have
       accused him of adultery.  He claims that he has been  tried  in  his
       absence, although he does  not  know  the  outcome  of  that  trial.
       Second, the appellant  claims  to  have  converted  to  Christianity
       whilst he was in Istanbul between 2006 and 2008.


    4. The respondent in her decision of 5th November 2008  considered  the
       first aspect of the appellant's  claim.   The  respondent  concluded
       that the reason given by the appellant for claiming  a  well-founded
       fear of persecution is not one  that  engages  the  United  Kingdoms
       obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention, but in any event  the
       respondent comprehensively rejected the account.   As  I  have  said
       before, the  appellant  did  not  appeal  that  decision.   On  18th
       February  2015,  the  appellant  submitted   fresh   representations
       inviting the respondent to treat  his  fresh  representations  as  a
       fresh claim for asylum.  The claim is set out in a letter dated 16th
       February 2015 written on  the  appellant's  behalf  by  the  Ryedale
       Citizens Advice Bureau.  Insofar as is material to the appeal before
       me, the letter states:


             "We write to submit fresh representations requesting that  you
             consider this case as a fresh claim in light of the  following
             information.  To this end we enclose evidence of our  client's
             conversion to Christianity and further objective  evidence  of
             the situation for Christian converts in Iran.


             ...


             Previous Asulym/ Human Rights Claim


             Mr Ahmadi arrived in the UK in 14th  April  2008  and  claimed
             asylum the next day. His religion was originally  recorded  as
             Zoroastrian. He was interviewed on November 2008. On that same
             day he  filled  in  a  Questionnaire  for  a  Travel  Document
             Application  for  the  Islamic  Republic   of   Iran.      His
             application for asylum was refused on 05 November 2008. He did
             not lodge an appeal against the decision.


             ..."


    5. It is conceded in that letter that the appellant had not  previously
       mentioned being a Christian.


 The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis


    6. The appellant was not represented at the hearing before  the  First-
       tier  Tribunal.   He  gave  evidence  before  the  Judge  with   the
       assistance of an interpreter.  The Tribunal also heard evidence from
       Mr J Kendall in respect of the  appellant's  Christian  faith.   The
       Judge's findings  as  to  credibility  and  fact,  are  set  out  at
       paragraph [24] to [38] of his decision.  The claim based on Apostasy
       is considered at paragraphs [26] to [35] of the decision.


    7. The claim based on Adultery is disposed of at paragraph [25] in  the
       following way:


             "The starting point for my assessment of his application based
             on the claimed prosecution on a charge of adultery is the 2008
             Determination in which he was found to be not credible in  the
             core aspects of his claim. The Appellant has submitted no  new
             evidence in respect of that  claim  and  merely  repeated  his
             account  in  his  testimony  at  the  hearing.  I,  therefore,
             conclude the Appellant has failed to show to the low  standard
             required, he faces a  risk  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment
             which would engage Article 3 of the ECHR for that reason."


 The grounds of appeal


    8. The appellant appealed on the grounds that he believes that he  will
       face dangerous circumstances if returned to Iran on account  of  his
       conversion to the  Christian  faith.  He  candidly  states  that  he
       disagrees with the Judge's decision that he is not a  Christian  and
       that it is not dangerous if you have a relationship with  a  married
       female.


    9. Permission to  appeal  was  refused  on  the  papers  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Cox on 17th September 2015.   The  appellant  renewed
       the application for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  and
       on  20th  October  2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  granted
       permission.  In doing so, he noted what had been said by  the  Judge
       at paragraph [25] of the decision, and observed  that  there  is  no
       judicial determination on  the  Tribunal  file  in  respect  of  the
       earlier claim for asylum in 2008.  He also recorded that it is clear
       from the determination and manuscript record of  proceedings  before
       the Judge, that the appellant still maintained as a significant part
       of his appeal, that he would be at risk on  return  because  of  the
       alleged adultery.


The hearing before me


   10. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response.  The respondent claimed
       that the Judge gave himself  the  correct  self  direction  when  he
       recorded in his determination at paragraph [25]  that  the  fear  of
       prosecution on grounds of adultery, had already been found not to be
       credible in the  appellant's  earlier  asylum  claim  "in  the  2008
       Determination" which had not been appealed.


   11. Mr Mangion conceded before  me  that  there  has  been  no  previous
       judicial consideration of the  appellant's  'adultery  claim'.   The
       previous claim for asylum had been comprehensively rejected  by  the
       respondent in her decision of 5th November 2008  but  the  appellant
       had not appealed that decision.  Rightly in  my  view,  he  accepted
       that at paragraph [25] of his decision, the Judge does not therefore
       adequately address that aspect of the appellant's claim.


   12. Insofar as paragraph [25]  of  the  Judge's  decision  refers  to  a
       determination in which the appellant was not found to be credible in
       respect of core aspects of  his  claim,  that  was  not  a  judicial
       determination.  Therefore, the principle established  in  Devaseelan
       (Second Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka* [2002]
       UKIAT 00702 that the first Judge's determination  should  always  be
       the starting-point, does not apply here.


   13. As the appellant maintained that he is still in fear of the family of
       his female friend in Iran who have accused him  of  adultery  despite
       their platonic relationship, in my judgement, it was  incumbent  upon
       the Judge to  properly  consider  and  address  that  aspect  of  the
       appellants claim. The failure of the Judge  to  do  so,  particularly
       when the appellant gave some explanation for why he did  not  appeal,
       discloses a material error of law.


   14. I note that the Upper Tribunal in  accordance  with  Part  3  of  the
       Practice Statement for the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
       Upper Tribunal is in terms of disposal of  appeals,  likely  on  each
       occasion to proceed to remake the decision, instead of remitting  the
       case to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       satisfied that the effect of the error of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
       Judge has been to deprive a party before the First Tribunal of a fair
       hearing or other opportunity for that parties case to be put  to  and
       considered by the First Tier Tribunal.


   15. In my view the most fair and proportionate way in which to deal  with
       this case given the nature and extent of the factual findings  to  be
       made in relation to the 'adultery claim' is to remit the  matter  for
       hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   In my judgment it was  open  to
       the Judge to make the findings that he did in relation to claim based
       upon 'Apostasy' for the reasons given at  paragraphs  [26]  to  [35].
       The adverse findings made by the Judge follow a careful consideration
       of the evidence before him.   Thus although I set aside the  decision
       of the Judge, the findings made in relation to the  'Apostasy'  claim
       can be preserved.


Notice of Decision


   16. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for a fresh hearing of the appeal,  but  with  the  findings
       made by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  as  to  the  'Apostasy'  claim,
       preserved.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and there can, therefore, be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
