
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05424/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                     S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Alice Holmes, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bird sitting at Taylor House  on  13  August
    2015) dismissing his appeal in a decision of the Secretary of State  to
    refuse to vary his leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection  grounds,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    concomitant  decision  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom   by
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.
     However, as the appellant is pursuing an asylum claim, I  consider  it
    is appropriate that the  appellant  is  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant's accepted date of birth is 9 June 1996.  He applied  for
    asylum in the UK in August  2011  having  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally.  On 15 March 2013 his asylum application was refused, and he
    was granted discretionary leave to remain until 9 December  2013  until
    he reached the age of 17� in accordance with the Secretary  of  State's
    published  policy  on  the   handling   of   asylum   applications   of
    unaccompanied asylum seeking children.

 3. In his witness statement of 21 September 2011 which he made in  support
    of his asylum claim, he said that his father originated from Jalalabad.
     He however had been born in Peshawar, Pakistan.  He initially lived in
    Pakistan with his parents, siblings and a paternal uncle.   His  father
    worked in Afghanistan, and would come home during days off.  He  worked
    as a cook for PRT,  which  was  an  organisation  related  to  American
    troops.  His father would prepare  Afghan  food  for  the  Afghans  who
    worked for the PRT.

 4. Eventually there came  a  point  when  Pakistani  government  officials
    forced them to leave their homes in Pakistan, as they had been built on
    land illegally.  They moved to an area near Jalalabad City.  His father
    continued his work with the PRT, and was able to come  home  from  work
    every day.  His father started to receive  threats  from  the  Taliban.
    The first threatening letter came about a year to a  year  and  a  half
    after they had moved back to  Afghanistan.   The  last  letter  arrived
    about eight months before the appellant left  Afghanistan.   The  first
    letter had been dropped inside their door during the  night.   The  man
    who wrote the letter said he was the commander of  the  Taliban.   Many
    things were said which he could not remember.  But he  remembered  that
    it said they were slaves of the foreign troops, and that if they caught
    them they would destroy them.  He did not read the letter  himself  but
    his parents told him about the letter.  His father had no choice but to
    continue working as he had no other way to support the family so he had
    to ignore the threats.

 5. It did not stop him going with his father to cook after  these  letters
    were received because his father said he needed to learn how  to  cook.
    He was not sure how long it was before the second letter came.  As  far
    as he knew, there were three or four letters sent in total.  He guessed
    that they would drop off a letter whenever they heard about his  father
    being at work.

 6. One day his father was seized by the Taliban when he  was  leaving  the
    mosque in the company of an old man.  Before he  was  taken  away,  his
    father was questioned by the Taliban in front  of  the  old  man.   The
    Taliban asked his father who was the boy with him when he cooked.   The
    old man told the Taliban that the boy was the  appellant.   His  father
    confirmed this, and told the Taliban that his son was at home.

 7. The police came the following morning and asked some  questions.   They
    also questioned the old man about what had happened.   About  seven  or
    eight days later, his father's  body  was  dropped  outside  the  house
    during the night.  He could see that his father had been  hanged.   His
    mother and uncle then decided that he should go to the city.  They told
    him he had to go away because  otherwise  he  would  be  killed  if  he
    stayed.  They sold some land which his father had bought.  He  did  not
    know how much it was sold for.  His uncle also took out a loan, so that
    he had enough money to pay for him to leave.  It was two days after his
    father's funeral that  his  uncle  and  mother  told  him  about  their
    intentions.  Around fifteen days later, he left the house to start  his
    journey.  He travelled alone to Jalalabad City and stayed the night  at
    a hotel, and in the morning the agent came to collect him.

 8. On 15 July 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing to
    vary the appellant's leave to  remain.   She  reiterated  the  original
    reasons for refusing his asylum claim.  He may on some  occasions  have
    accompanied his father when he worked as a cook.  But he  had  remained
    in the same house for nearly a month, and he had not been approached by
    anyone.  He also had not been stopped on his way to  Jalalabad.   There
    had been  no  direct  threats  against  him  personally  since  he  was
    allegedly identified to the  Taliban.   So  it  was  not  accepted  the
    Taliban had any adverse interest in him.

 9. It was noted  that  within  his  additional  witness  statement  of  26
    November 2013 he attempted to address some of the issues raised in  the
    original reasons for refusal letter.   He  said  that  the  threatening
    letters from the Taliban threatened both him and his father.   He  said
    that the Taliban knew who his father was, and that he was  helping  his
    father and that everyone knew that he helped his father.  From what  he
    had heard about the Taliban, they did not  usually  come  to  someone's
    house to take them.  They normally took people when they  were  outside
    their homes such as on their way to work.  The fact that they  had  not
    done anything in seventeen  days  did  not  mean  that  they  were  not
    planning to do something.  Seventeen days was not a long time.

10. The fact remained that the appellant had remained in the same house for
    nearly a month.  There was a week or so while his father  was  missing,
    and then a further seventeen days at least after his burial.   In  that
    period no-one approached him.  He had  failed  to  submit  any  further
    evidence, such as the threatening letters, to  substantiate  his  claim
    any further.  The findings made in the original refusal remained valid.

11. On the topic of internal relocation, the Secretary of  State  cited  PM
    and Others (Afghanistan) CG [2007] UKAIT 0089 for the proposition  that
    those returned to the United Kingdom are  not  at  real  risk,  without
    more, of being suspected by the authorities as insurgents.   She  cited
    RQ (Afghanistan) CG [2008] UKAIT 0013 for the proposition that it would
    not be unduly harsh to expect an appellant with no  individual  profile
    to live in Kabul and assist in the  rebuilding  of  his  country.   The
    respondent asserted that the recent case of AK (Afghanistan) CG  [2012]
    UKUT 163 supported this view.

12. She had also taken into  account  the  Country  of  Origin  Report  for
    Afghanistan dated May 2013 which stated that Kabul was  currently  home
    to almost 5 million people, and it was considered that he could  safely
    relocate there.  The size of this population and the sheer scale of the
    city meant that the Taliban  would  neither  have  the  reach  nor  the
    resources to find him on return to Kabul or even to be  aware  that  he
    had re-entered into Afghanistan.  He was an 18 year old  male  with  no
    confirmed medical conditions.  He had conducted his asylum interview in
    Pashtu, one of the native Afghan  languages.   He  had  travelled  from
    Afghanistan to the United Kingdom with the use of agents.  He had  also
    been  able  to  adapt  to  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  despite  the
    differences in language and culture.  Since arriving in the UK, he  had
    studied at various educational establishments.  He could use the skills
    he had gained in the UK to assist him to find employment on  return  to
    Afghanistan.  His actions demonstrated a degree of resourcefulness  and
    ability to adjust and adapt to his surrounding environment.  So he  can
    support himself with or without the help of his  family  on  return  to
    Afghanistan.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

13. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Bird.  The appellant
    adopted as his evidence-in-chief a witness statement signed by  him  on
    17 February 2015.  Though he was now 18 years of age, he did  not  feel
    the situation was any safer in Afghanistan because  on  a  daily  basis
    they had heard news of attacks  by  the  Taliban  and  other  extremist
    groups who targeted cities throughout  the  country,  especially  Kabul
    because it was the heart of the  government.   Since  the  majority  of
    international forces had left Afghanistan  at  the  end  of  2014,  the
    situation had got worse because the Taliban were using this opportunity
    to come to power.

14. He could not go to Kabul because he had no-one there who  was  able  to
    support him in any way.  He was still unaware of the whereabouts of his
    mother and younger siblings.  He had  contacted  the  Red  Cross  again
    earlier this year and requested that his family was traced through S H,
    his paternal uncle who lived in Jalalabad, as the Red  Cross  can  only
    trace through male family members.  A Red Cross message  was  left  for
    the head of his area, Milik (Habibur Rehman) to get in contact with him
    in January 2015, and he was still awaiting  a  response  from  the  Red
    Cross.  (Earlier in his statement he had given a telephone  number  for
    the same individual, who he described as the head of his  village.   He
    said he had obtained this telephone number in 2012, and had  spoken  to
    him requesting confirmation from the National Improvement Council  that
    his father had been killed.)

15. As his father's eldest son, he maintained he would be at risk returning
    to Afghanistan from a western country, as he definitely would  be  seen
    by the Taliban in a negative light.  He  wished  to  confirm  that  the
    threat letters that his father received were addressed to both of them.
     Even though he was only a child, the Taliban had also mentioned him in
    their letters because he used to travel with his father to and from the
    PRT and they knew that he was his son.  On the date that his father was
    kidnapped in May 2011, an elderly man had seen the Taliban stopping his
    father and questioning him when he came out of the mosque after evening
    prayers.  The Taliban asked the elderly man about the identity  of  the
    boy that worked with his father, and the elderly man told them that  it
    was him (the appellant).  After his father was  killed,  he  stayed  in
    hiding indoors in the home for about seventeen days.

16. In her subsequent decision, the judge set out her findings at paragraph
    [22] onwards.  For the present purposes, it is only necessary to  refer
    to her findings at paragraphs [29] to [36], which I reproduce  verbatim
    below:

         "29.  Steps  have  been  taken  by  the  respondent  to  trace  the
             appellant's family.  Information of the family tracing  is  at
             paragraphs 32 to 34 of the respondent's letter.  The appellant
             himself has undertaken some steps by contacting the elders  of
             the village in which his family lived.  I also heard  evidence
             from his sister who has visited the village.  No trace of  the
             family was found.  To the lower standard I accept that efforts
             have been made to trace the appellant's family and that  these
             have so far proved unsuccessful.  I  have  to,  however,  take
             into account the fact that the appellant is not being returned
             to Afghanistan as a minor but  will  now  be  returned  as  an
             adult.

         30.  Essentially the appellant has to show  that  he  has  a  well-
             founded fear of being persecuted in Afghanistan.  There is  no
             objective evidence to support the appellant's belief that  the
             Taliban will be looking for him.  The appellant's own  account
             is that he remained in his village after  his  father's  death
             for nearly a month.  Arrangements were being made for  him  to
             travel out of Afghanistan whilst he was living in  the  family
             home.  He then walked to Jalalabad during the day.  There were
             no  threats  made  against  the  appellant  personally.    The
             appellant's sister has also travelled to Afghanistan recently.
              There was no evidence that there  were  any  enquiries  being
             made of the appellant.   The  sister  spoke  to  villagers  to
             enquire about the whereabouts of her mother and  siblings.   I
             heard no evidence that  the  appellant  was  being  sought  by
             anyone.

         31.  The appellant is being returned to Kabul.  I have to  consider
             whether there will be any risk of persecution in Kabul.  As  I
             have said, there is no evidence that the  appellant  is  being
             sought by the Taliban.  His father did not have a high profile
             position with any organisation.  Despite his  father's  death,
             the appellant himself could not point to any interest in  him.
             All that I have seen is a  fear  that  the  appellant  may  be
             targeted.  The appellant himself could not be  seen  as  being
             sympathetic to the government or any other agents attached  to
             the government.

         32.  The appellant has therefore been unable to show that he has  a
             well-founded  fear  of  persecution  because  of  his  imputed
             political opinion.  Further, the appellant is to  be  sent  to
             Kabul and the question is whether the appellant will  be  able
             to return to Kabul or whether the appellant has a well-founded
             fear of being persecuted if he is returned there or that there
             is a risk to him of being sought by the Taliban.  Again, there
             is very little evidence  to  support  that  the  appellant  is
             someone who will be  of  any  interest  to  the  Taliban  and,
             further, that he cannot seek the protection of the authorities
             in his country.

         33.  Further, the Country of Original Information  Report  dated  5
             May  2013  which  is  referred  to  at  paragraph  51  of  the
             respondent's bundle provides evidence  that  there  have  been
             measures put in place to  increase  the  general  security  in
             Kabul.  It is therefore likely that the  appellant  will  have
             sufficiency of protection available to him.  The appellant may
             not have family support in Kabul but he is now  an  adult  who
             will be able to re-establish  his  life  in  that  city.   The
             appellant has acquired some skills whilst he has been  in  the
             United Kingdom.  I have seen evidence that the  appellant  has
             been training as a hairdresser and will therefore be  able  to
             use these skills upon return.

         34.  The appellant, further, has been unable to  show  that  he  is
             entitled to subsidiary protection because there is a fear that
             he would be subject to serious and individual  threat  to  his
             life as defined in Article  15(c)  of  the  Council  Directive
             2004/83/EC simply because of being in Afghanistan.  In this  I
             am  bound  by  the  findings  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  AK
             (Afghanistan) [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) where the  Upper  Tribunal
             found that the level of indiscriminate violence in Afghanistan
             taken as a whole is not at such a high level as to mean  that,
             within the meaning  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
             Directive, a civilian, solely by being present in the country,
             faces a real risk which threatens his life or person.

         35.  The Upper Tribunal further found that "nor  is  the  level  of
             indiscriminate violence, even in the provinces worst  affected
             by the violence (which may ... but not to include  Kabul),  at
             such a level".   There  have  been  changes  to  this  country
             guidance.  I find therefore that if the appellant is  returned
             to Kabul there would be sufficiency of protection available to
             him there and, further, the level of  indiscriminate  violence
             does not engage Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.
             The  appellant  is  therefore  not  entitled  to  Humanitarian
             Protection.

         36.  Article 8 was no argued before me at length but even were I to
             consider this I find that the appellant  would  not  meet  the
             requirements of Appendix FM in relation  to  family  life  and
             with regard to private life,  although  he  has  been  in  the
             United Kingdom since 2011 he has not spent half  his  life  in
             the United Kingdom and, further, that  he  still  has  social,
             cultural  or  family  ties  in  Afghanistan.   The   appellant
             therefore does not meet the requirements of Rule 276ADE and  I
             find that in the particular  circumstances  it  would  not  be
             unreasonable to expect the appellant to return to his  country
             to re-establish his private life  there.   In  the  particular
             circumstances of this appeal I find there  are  no  compelling
             circumstances for me to consider under Article 8  outside  the
             Rules."

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

17. On 4 November 2015, on a renewed application for permission to  appeal,
    Upper Tribunal Judge  Taylor  granted  permission  to  appeal  for  the
    following reasons:

         "The grounds challenge  the  adequacy  of  the  First-tier  Judge's
         reasoning both in relation to the assessment of risk on return, and
         to the judge's conclusions on the proportionality of removal.  They
         are arguable."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

18. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Ahmed said that he was not pursuing the point made in paragraph
    2 of the renewed application for permission  to  appeal.   Paragraph  2
    said that the finding at paragraph [34] of the decision  was  erroneous
    as it was  not  supported  by  the  current  objective  evidence  which
    confirmed the escalating levels of violence in the  country  and  which
    was the subject of litigation in the case of R (on the  application  of
    Naziri and Others) v SSHD IJR [2015] UKUT 00437 (IAC).

19. Mr Ahmed focused his attack on paragraph  [30]  of  the  decision.   He
    submitted the judge was wrong to say there was no objective evidence to
    support the appellant's belief that the Taliban would  be  looking  for
    him.  The judge was also wrong  to  say  there  were  no  threats  made
    against the appellant personally, as it was the appellant's evidence in
    paragraph [12] of the witness statement which  he  adopted  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal that the night letters had been addressed to him as
    well as to his father.

20. On the topic of whether the  appellant  could  reasonably  relocate  to
    Kabul, he accepted that the country guidance of PM and Others  did  not
    assist the appellant's case.

21. He submitted that the appellant would be at risk from the Taliban, once
    his past history  became  known.   He  would  not  be  able  to  remain
    anonymous. He confirmed that the appellant was not pursuing an  Article
    8 claim.

22. In reply, Ms Holmes submitted that the judge had given adequate reasons
    for finding that the appellant did not  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in Kabul at the hands of the  Taliban,  and  that  internal
    relocation to Kabul was thus both safe and reasonable.

Discussion

23. As was clarified in Mr Ahmed's oral submissions, the focus of the error
    of law challenge is not whether it is reasonable for the  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul without having family members to receive  him  there,
    but simply whether  it  is  safe,  having  regard  to  the  appellant's
    profile.  Similarly, it is not suggested (by reference to the  evidence
    canvassed in the Naziri litigation) that the judge erred in law in  not
    finding that the appellant qualified  for  humanitarian  protection  or
    subsidiary protection.

24. In the witness statement that he adopted before the First-tier Tribunal
    the appellant explained at paragraph 9 that PRT stands for  Provisional
    Reconstruction Team.  Mr Ahmed referred me  to  the  UNHCR  eligibility
    guidelines for assessing the international protection needs  of  asylum
    seekers from Afghanistan dated 5 August 2013, which was included in the
    appellant's  objective  bundle  for  the  hearing  in  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.

25. Under the heading of potential risk profiles, there is a category which
    describes individuals associated with, or perceived as  supportive  of,
    the  government  and  the  international   community,   including   the
    international military forces.

26. One sub-group of these is  government  officials  and  civil  servants.
    Family  members  of  government  officials  had  been  threatened   and
    kidnapped  by  AGEs  (anti-government  elements)  to  force  government
    employees to quit their jobs; in other cases  relatives  of  government
    employees were reported to have been  killed  by  AGEs  as  an  act  of
    retaliation against these employees.

27.  Another  sub-group  is  civilians  associated  with  or  perceived  as
    supportive of the ANSF or the IMF.  AGEs have reportedly threatened and
    attacked Afghan civilians who work for the IMF as drivers, interpreters
    or in other civilian capacities.  UNAMA reports having documented  many
    cases  of  AGEs  murdering   or   mutilating   persons   suspected   of
    collaborating with pro-government forces.  In some instances civilians,
    including children, were reported  to  be  targeted  on  the  basis  of
    suspicions that members of their families work for the ANSF.

28. A further sub-group is other  civilians  perceived  as  supporting  the
    government or the international community.  AGEs are reported  to  kill
    civilians deliberately to punish them for  supporting  the  government,
    the killings intended to serve as a warning to others.  AGEs  are  also
    reported to use night letters (Shab Nameha), threatening text  messages
    and local radio broadcasts to warn  civilians  against  supporting  the
    government.

29. After discussing these various sub-groups, the  UNHCR  concludes  that,
    depending on the individual circumstances of the  case  (my  emphasis),
    persons associated with, or perceived as supportive of  the  government
    or the international community, including the IMF, may be  in  need  of
    international refugee  protection  on  the  grounds  of  their  imputed
    political opinion.  Depending on  the  specific  circumstances  of  the
    case,  family  members  and  other  members  of  their  households   or
    individuals with these profiles may also be in  need  of  international
    protection.

30. As submitted by Ms Holmes, in paragraph [30] of her decision the  judge
    was addressing the question of whether the appellant had a well-founded
    fear of persecution in Afghanistan as at the date of the hearing before
    her.  She was not saying  that  there  was  no  objective  evidence  to
    support the appellant's account of what  had  happened  in  Afghanistan
    before he left.  She was saying that there was no objective evidence to
    support the appellant's belief that  the  Taliban  will  (i.e.  in  the
    future) be looking for him.

31. She is not to be  taken  as  thereby  ignoring  the  UNHCR  eligibility
    guidelines or the risk profiles to which Mr Ahmed  drew  my  attention.
    In any event, as I explored in oral argument, arguably  the  guidelines
    undermine the appellant's case of ongoing risk, rather than  supporting
    it.  For if, as the judge found, his father had paid the ultimate price
    for his collaboration with the PRT, this made it  less  likely,  rather
    than more likely, that the Taliban would pursue a vendetta against  his
    family members, such as the  appellant.   Furthermore,  the  guidelines
    stress that the person's individual circumstances need to be looked at,
    and this is what the judge has done in reaching the conclusion that the
    appellant does not have a well-founded fear of being  targeted  by  the
    Taliban in Kabul.

32. When the judge says there were not threats made against  the  appellant
    personally, she is clearly talking  about  the  appellant's  experience
    following his father's death, while he was still living in  the  family
    home.  Mr Ahmed points out that the appellant's evidence  was  that  he
    only remained in the village  after  his  father's  death  for  between
    seventeen  and  nineteen  days.   But,  according  to  the  appellant's
    account, his father was kidnapped by the Taliban some  seven  or  eight
    days before his body was dropped outside the home. In that period there
    were no threats made against the appellant personally, and he  was  not
    in hiding.  The  fundamental  point  made  by  the  judge  holds  good:
    following his father's kidnapping and subsequent  murder,  the  Taliban
    left the appellant alone although they knew where to find him.

33. The appellant's reliance on the alleged contents of the  night  letters
    does not carry matters any further.  Indeed, arguably they  weaken  the
    appellant's case, rather than strengthen it.  For if the night  letters
    made threats against him personally, as well  as  threats  against  his
    father, because everyone knew  (including  the  Taliban)  that  he  was
    assisting his father in cooking for the PRT, the Taliban would not have
    needed to establish the  identity  of  the  boy  who  was  helping  the
    appellant's father when kidnapping his father outside the mosque.

34. It was open to the judge to find, for the reasons which she gave,  that
    the appellant would not have a risk profile on return  to  Kabul  which
    would engender a real risk of persecution in Kabul by AGEs, even if  it
    became known that the appellant's father was a cook  for  the  PRT  and
    that the appellant, when a young teenager, had accompanied  his  father
    on some of his assignments.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

