

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05024/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision Promulgated         |
|on 20 May 2016                                |8 July 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 JL (China)
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Mair instructed by Chung and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge McGarr promulgated on 16 January  2015  in  which  the  Judge
        dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondents refusal of
        her application for leave to  remain,  dated  10  March  2015.  The
        appellant had sought leave to remain as  a  refugee  and  on  human
        rights grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  initially  refused
        but granted on a renewed application, in limited terms, that it was
        arguable that the Judge erred  in  failing  to  consider  paragraph
        267ADE(1)(vi).
     3. The Judge sets out his findings and reasons from  paragraph  40  of
        the decision under challenge. It is noted in paragraph 41 that  the
        Judge found the appellant  and  her  witness  to  be  dishonest  in
        aspects of their evidence. It  was  found  the  appellant  and  her
        witness are not father and daughter or that  the  appellant  is  at
        risk of harm if returned to China, due to her connection  with  her
        witness. [41(a)].
     4. The Judge sets out the reasons for dismissing the protection  claim
        at [41(a)-(j)]. In relation to the situation  on  return,  this  is
        considered at [42] but it found the appellant  had  not  proved  an
        entitlement to protection in light of the country situation and the
        findings of the Tribunal in AX [2012] UKUT  97  [43]  or  that  the
        appellant had made out her claim to be at risk of sterilisation [44-
        45]. The Judge noted that the appellant's son  has  cerebral  palsy
        that gives rise to significant health issues but finds  "Whilst  it
        was  not  pursued  in  any  meaningful  way   by   the   Appellants
        representative, I am guided by the  case  law  in  GS  (India)  and
        Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
        40 and I am satisfied that the Appellant's son would have access to
        the required medical care in China. [46]".
     5. The Judge notes in paragraph 47 that it was  only  after  prompting
        from the Bench that the appellants representative suggested Article
        8 was an issue "although did not pursue Article 8, as part  of  his
        submissions, in any meaningful way". The finding on this aspect  of
        the case is set out at [49] in the following terms "Looking at  the
        totality of the evidence I am unable to say that the facts of  this
        case show that the decision to remove the Appellant and her  family
        would amount to a  disproportionate  breach  of  fundamental  human
        rights."



Error of law


     6. Miss  Mair  sought  to  amend  the  grounds  of  challenge  at  the
        commencement of the hearing which was not opposed  by  Mr  McVeety.
        The new, additional, grounds are (1) a failure to apply  Devaseelan
        and (2) no best interests consideration.
     7. In relation to the  Devaseelan  point,  it  was  submitted  on  the
        appellant's behalf that at pages 158-167 of the bundle  is  a  full
        copy of a previous determination of which the  First-tier  Tribunal
        is said to be on notice of. That decision was promulgated on the 18
        March 2013 and relates to an appeal against a decision of an  Entry
        Clearance Officer by a person said to be the appellant's mother. It
        is said the determination contains findings relevant to  the  issue
        of the relationship and paternity of the appellant and her witness,
        as father and daughter, contrary to the findings of the Judge.
     8. When asked how the appellant had come by this  decision  the  Upper
        Tribunal  were  advised   that   it   was   because   her   current
        representatives, who were not her original  representatives  before
        Judge McGarr, had acted for the appellant in the earlier  case  and
        had a copy of the decision on their file.
     9. It is said that at page 30 of  the  bundle  before  the  First-tier
        Tribunal in this matter is a witness statement by  the  appellant's
        witness in which Judge McGarr is altered  to  the  existence  of  a
        previous decision.
    10. In so far as it is alleged the Judge erred in law in not taking the
        earlier decision into account, no arguable legal error is made out.
    11. It was accepted by Miss Mair that proceedings in this  jurisdiction
        are adversarial and not inquisitorial. The general rule is  that  a
        judge is entitled to assume the parties will furnish  the  evidence
        they are seeking to rely upon. No legal obligation upon  the  Judge
        to embark upon a  'fishing  expedition'  to  ascertain  what  other
        evidence may be available has been made out on the facts.
    12. Although before the Upper Tribunal Miss Mair seeks to rely  upon  a
        complete copy of the earlier determination that was not a  document
        that was before the First-tier Tribunal. Sandbrook Solicitors filed
        the trial bundle under cover of a letter dated  26  May  2015.  The
        bundle has an index, item  number  13  of  which  is  described  as
        "Determination on 18 March 2013 granting mother's  appeal  to  join
        father" 62. At page 62 is  the  first  page  of  the  determination
        followed by two further pages [pages 62-64] and no more.  The  copy
        relied upon in the new bundle runs from pages 158 to 167,  this  is
        clearly  a  complete  copy  and  that  provided  to  Judge   McGarr
        incomplete. Of importance to the ground and related submissions  is
        the fact the pages provided to Judge McGarr contain no reference to
        material relevant to the issue of paternity.
    13. The appellant has not made out that the Judge failed  to  correctly
        apply the Devaseelan principles in relation to a previous  decision
        of which he was made aware, which  contained  a  previous  judicial
        finding material to an issue in the current appeal.
    14. In  relation  to  Miss  Mair's  submission  that  the  decision  in
        Devaseelan imposed a duty upon the  Judge  to  find  out  what  the
        original determination says,  notwithstanding  an  incomplete  copy
        having been provided, I do not find the case law  relating  to  the
        application of  Devaseelan  says  any  such  thing.  It  is  not  a
        mechanism whereby responsibility for obtaining best evidence can be
        transferred from the parties to the judge. There may  be  cases  in
        which a judge requires a full copy to be provided and causes one to
        be located. Such documents are not readily available to the  First-
        tier which is not a court of record with a data base  of  decisions
        that can be searched. Obtaining a copy will ordinarily require  the
        file to be sent from storage or  other  delay  in  checking  if  an
        electronic copy exists elsewhere.
    15. I find no merit in the submission  Devaseelan  creates  a  fairness
        point in this regard. This is, arguably, stretching the  principles
        in Devaseelan way beyond their intended  purpose.  The  common  law
        duty of fairness has been found to apply to the procedure by  which
        a decision is made. In a litigious system it is fair to provide the
        parties with the opportunity  to  provide  the  evidence  they  are
        seeking to rely upon and then consider that  evidence  and  make  a
        finding based upon the same. Fairness, in cases such as this,  does
        not place a legal obligation upon  a  judge  to  do  more.  It  was
        submitted by Miss Mair that the Judge could have asked the  parties
        for a complete copy but as the copy in the  new  bundle  was  taken
        from a client's file held by Chung & Co it is not  certain  such  a
        document  would  have  been  made   available   by   the   previous
        representatives. The appellant claims the incomplete  determination
        related to her mother's case. If so, why was a  complete  copy  not
        provided through the family?
    16. It may be the case that had the evidence been  provided  in  proper
        form the decision may have been different but that is not the issue
        at this stage. There has been no criticism of the  conduct  of  the
        appellant's barrister  at  the  hearing  suggesting  the  case  was
        properly handled and all the evidence the appellant was seeking  to
        rely upon provided. There is no suggestion  an  adjournment  should
        have been sought to obtain the missing material.
    17. In relation to the second additional ground, it  is  submitted  the
        Judge failed to consider the best interests of  the  child.  It  is
        said there was a lot of material before the Judge  in  relation  to
        the needs of the child. At pages 79-114 is  an  assessment  of  the
        child's needs undertaken by medical staff. It is submitted that the
        Judge should not have come to the conclusion he did in relation  to
        return without considering the  needs  of  the  chid.  It  is  also
        submitted that the Judge needed to consider  the  impact  upon  the
        child of the loss of benefits outlined in AX. The child has a  need
        for a stable multi-disciplinary approach to his care needs.  It  is
        said the Judge does not mention the  child's  needs  and  how  they
        impact upon the balancing exercise.
    18. It was also submitted that  the  ground  on  which  permission  was
        granted overlaps with this ground. There is a materiality issue. It
        is said the Judge dismissed the  appeal  under  the  Rules  without
        considering this issue.
    19. Mr McVeety referred to material in the evidence showing parents  of
        children with cerebral palsy sending their children  to  China  for
        treatment as a result of the expertise available in  that  country.
        Whilst this may be so, the problem the appellant faces  is  a  more
        fundamental one which is  that  although  some  evidence  was  made
        available there is no indication in the determination that  section
        55 was raised by the appellant as an issue in the appeal. The Judge
        was aware of the needs of the child and refers to them in paragraph
        46 of the determination but also that the needs of the  child  were
        not pursued  in  any  meaningful  way.  The  Judge  considered  the
        evidence in the round and found he was unable to say on  the  facts
        that the decision to remove was not proportionate.  Section  55  is
        not determinative but is an element of the balancing exercise.
    20. This is arguably a further example of new representatives, assisted
        by Miss Mair, suggesting how the case  should  have  been  advanced
        before the Judge and what decision should have  been  made  had  it
        been presented as they would have  done.  This  may  be  the  case,
        although in part based upon speculation as to the outcome, but that
        was not how the case was prepared or presented on the day.
    21. On the basis of the evidence made available, the case as presented,
        and the matters the Judge was asked to consider, I find no arguable
        legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal has been
        made out.
    22. As stated at the hearing, the way forward may not be  to  challenge
        the determination but, if fresh  evidence  is  available,  to  make
        fresh application that the respondent is able to  consider  on  its
        merits  in  light  of  all  the  available  evidence  and  detailed
        submissions in relation to the needs of the child.


Decision

    23. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
             (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 5 July 2016












