

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05918/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 28 April 2015                              |on 14 May 2015               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MEILAN WANG
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Latta, of Latta & Co., Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction.

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of China, born on  13  November  1988.   She
    sought asylum in the UK on the basis of her affiliation  to  the  Falun
    Gong movement.

 3. Pages 1-9 of the respondent's letter of  28  July  2014  are  concerned
    mainly with refusal of that protection claim.  At pages 9  and  10  the
    respondent turned  to  private  and  family  life  and  to  exceptional
    circumstances  under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs  276ADE-DH  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent noted  the  appellant's  immigration
    and matrimonial history and that she provided evidence of  marriage  on
    20 May 2014 to Mr Colin Tik Shun Ho, a British citizen.  The respondent
    was not satisfied that there  was  evidence  of  a  genuine  subsisting
    relationship  (paragraphs  55  and  57)  and  found  no   evidence   of
    insurmountable obstacles  "as  per  EX.1.(b)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules that would encumber Mr Ho returning to China  ...  it
    is considered reasonable to expect Mr Ho to return to China  with  you,
    should he choose to do so, to continue married life."

 4. The appellant's grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    vague, but did include nominal reliance on Article 8 of the  ECHR.   At
    the hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Dennis  on  16  September
    2014 she abandoned the protection claim and put  her  case  "solely  on
    Article 8 issues  with  respect  to  family  life  shared  between  the
    appellant and her  present  husband  and  the  disproportionate  effect
    should she be compelled to return to  China  to  apply,  properly,  for
    entry clearance as a spouse" (paragraph 12 of the judge's determination
    of 5 January 2015).

 5. The judge found that the appellant was an  unsatisfactory  witness  but
    that Mr Ho was credible and reliable.  The judge  referred  briefly  to
    Chikwamba and Hayat and  said  at  paragraph  21  that  there  was  "no
    legitimate state aim ... by requiring the appellant to  submit  to  the
    delay and uncertainty of returning to China to apply for re-entry."  At
    paragraph 22 he went on:

         This analysis has been based on standard principles rather than the
         all but  impossible  maze  of  the  present  Secretary  of  State's
         recapitulation of her understanding of the  jurisprudence  accruing
         around this important article of  the  ECHR.   Lest  there  be  any
         question, I am satisfied that under the Razgar analysis there is  a
         family life ... between the appellant and  her  husband,  that  her
         involuntary return for a matter of months or a matter of  years  as
         is possible to China would constitute a serious  interference  with
         that family life.  I am satisfied  that  the  procedure  ...  is  a
         lawful one and that the ends sought to be affected thereby in terms
         of effective immigration control and the  protection  of  the  UK's
         economic interests are  legitimate.   I  would,  however,  for  the
         reasons set out above have to conclude that the decision to  remove
         her would be a disproportionate interference  with  the  Article  8
         rights she shares with Mr Ho.  Because  the  Home  Office  was  not
         presented with an application ... under  the  Immigration  Rules  I
         have not made any attempt to try to thread my way through  the  all
         but unworkable provisions of Appendix FM -  some  may  characterise
         this, perhaps, as laziness - to state that either this decision can
         be winkled out from the provisions of the Appendix and is  thus  in
         compliance with it, or, if it cannot, then  on  its  facts  I  have
         concluded there is a good arguable case stated and  the  bases  for
         that have been established and set out herein.

The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The SSHD's complaint is that the judge failed to take  account  of  the
    statutory considerations in sections 117A and 117B  of  the  2002  Act.
    Those provisions, so far as relevant, are:

         PART 5A

         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS

         117A Application of this Part

         (1) This Part applies where a court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.

         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a) in all cases, to  the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b) ...

         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6) ....

         ...

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1) In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         ...

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a) is a British citizen, or

             (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within  the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).

 7. On 4 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, observing:

         "... The judge had regard to  the  difficulty  that  the  appellant
         could face in an entry clearance application having regard  to  her
         immigration history.

         The grounds argue that the judge had no regard to sections 117A and
         117B of the 2002 Act and the reduced weight to be attached  to  the
         appellant's relationship formed when  her  status  was  precarious.
         Regard could  also  be  had  to  ECHR  jurisprudence  ...  and  the
         observations of Simon Brown LJ in Ekinci that a failure to meet the
         Immigration Rules does not improve the argument under Article 8."

Submissions for the SSHD.

 8. The judge decided the appeal as if there had  been  no  change  in  the
    legal scheme since the Rules were amended in July  2012.   Since  then,
    any Article 8 assessment should  begin  by  reference  to  the  general
    striking of the Article 8  balance  in  the  Rules  (see  Appendix  FM,
    paragraph GEN.1.1, in particular).  Since 28 July 2014,  that  approach
    has a statutory form, in s. 117B (1).   The  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls is carried out by the Rules.  In Dube [2015]  UKUT
    90 at paragraph 20 the Upper Tribunal said that part 5A was "not  an  a
    la carte menu of considerations that it is at  the  discretion  of  the
    judge to apply or not apply.  Judges are duty bound to have  regard  to
    the specified considerations."  Dube acknowledged that the question was
    one of substance not of form, but the challenge in this  case  went  to
    the substance of the determination,  from  which  the  public  interest
    considerations are absent.

 9. The judge did not properly take into account the appellant's precarious
    status.  She entered the UK as a student, sought leave on the basis  of
    a sham marriage, made an asylum claim which she later  acknowledged  to
    be of no substance, and sought to remain on  the  basis  of  a  further
    relationship.  Her leave had long since run out.  The closest the judge
    came to an acknowledgement of the public interest was at  paragraph  18
    where  he  mentioned  the  appellant's  "deeply  troubling  immigration
    history."  He failed to keep in mind that "the maintenance of effective
    immigration controls is in the public interest".  Those controls cannot
    be considered without reference to the Rules, but at paragraph  22  the
    judge found himself entitled to do so.  Although  he  referred  to  the
    appellant's ability to speak  English  and  her  partner's  ability  to
    maintain her, those matters were to be resolved through the  Rules  not
    by way of sweeping generalities.

10. Asif Ali Ashiq [2015] CSIH 31 at paragraph 3  was  an  example  of  the
    correct approach, beginning with Appendix FM paragraph GEN.1.1.   Ashiq
    adopted the opinion of the Court in MS [2013] CSIH 52.  The  principles
    have been confirmed in a  series  of  cases  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    including SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 where at  paragraph
    32 it is said that even outside the "precarious" and "foreign  criminal
    deportation" cases the respondent had:

         "... sought to  formulate  Immigration  Rules  to  reflect  a  fair
         balance of interests under Article 8 in the general  run  of  cases
         ...  as  explained  above,  the  Rules  themselves   will   provide
         significant   evidence   about   the   relevant   public   interest
         considerations which should be brought into account when a court or
         tribunal seeks to strike  the  proper  balance  of  interest  under
         Article 8 in making its own decision."

11. SS cites Halemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558 and concurs  that  a  court  or
    tribunal has to give the new Rules "greater weight  than  as  merely  a
    starting point for the  consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an
    interference with Article 8 rights".

12. Mr Matthews referred to Khan [2015] CSIH 29 and Mirza [2015]  CSIH  28,
    decisions by the same Division of the Inner House in which the  opinion
    of the Court was delivered  by  Lord  Eassie  on  17  April  2015.   Mr
    Matthews said that these cases (Mirza at paragraph 20,  in  particular)
    found that in the assessment of proportionality it was not  appropriate
    to apply a test of "insurmountable obstacles" to  a  spouse  relocating
    abroad.  Paragraph 22 in Mirza refers to  "the  observations  expressed
    generally and obiter by the Court at paragraph 29 of  ...  MS"  ([2013]
    CSIH 32).  Mr Matthews submitted that Mirza and Khan  are  inconsistent
    with MS, with Ashiq, and with the line of authority on Article 8 in the
    Court of Appeal.  He observed that Mirza and Khan include no mention of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act, and said that they are no  authority  for  the
    approach taken by the judge in the present case.

13. Mr Matthews sought to make a  further  point  which  he  said  was  not
    explicit in the grounds but could be derived from  them  and  from  the
    grant of permission.  The appellant's character and conduct  were  such
    that she was liable to be refused re-entry to the UK in  terms  of  the
    Rules.  That did not enhance her case to be allowed to remain in the UK
    under Article 8.  Those adverse considerations were  left  out  of  the
    assessment.  The judge's vague reference to authority did  not  justify
    the decision reached.  This fell within the grounds as a further aspect
    of the failure to consider the public interest.

14. There was no  need  for  a  further  hearing.   All  the  evidence  was
    available and all the submissions had been made.  The  decision  should
    be set aside and reversed.

Submissions for the appellant.

15. Dube recognised that it was no error of law to fail  to  refer  to  the
    Part 5A considerations so long as the correct  tests  were  applied  in
    substance.  The grounds of appeal at best identified an error of  form.
    The judge considered all the evidence, including the precarious  nature
    of the appellant's immigration status.  At paragraphs 13 and 18 he made
    correct findings on her husband's ability to  support  her  financially
    and practically.   He applied the Razgar principles at paragraph 22.

16. Even if there was an error, it was not material.  The judge  considered
    the Article 8 rights of the appellant and of her  spouse.   His  rights
    were equally important.  This case was a good one even on the  approach
    set out in Ashiq.  At paragraph 24 of Ashiq the  Court  summarised  the
    nature of the circumstances it would be  relevant  to  consider.   This
    case was stronger than Ashiq, and met the tests there set out.   Moving
    to China would be significantly worse for the spouse in this case  than
    return to Pakistan would be for  the  spouse  in  Ashiq.   The  present
    spouse is a UK national, whereas the spouse in Ashiq  was  a  Pakistani
    national.  In this case there was a question of loss of employment  and
    income.  This case involved no  recourse  to  state  benefits,  as  the
    sponsor had resources adequate to  provide  for  both.   There  was  no
    difference of approach  explained  in  Ashiq  which  would  lead  to  a
    different result in the present case.

17. In Mirza there had been submissions along the lines that there  was  in
    most instances no need to go beyond the Rules, and  a  very  small  gap
    between the  Rules  and  Article  8.   The  Court  disagreed  and  gave
    significance to the right of spouses to live  together,  which  was  to
    weigh heavily in the proportionality assessment.  The  Court  found  at
    paragraph 20 that the assumption that one spouse must leave the country
    to preserve the substance of the marriage was an error  of  law.   That
    reflected the approach which Judge Dennis had  taken.   Although  Judge
    Dennis explicitly said that he would not look to the Rules, that  arose
    from the nature of the appeal, which began with an asylum claim and not
    from an application made under Article 8 of the ECHR.

18. I pointed out that the respondent's decision letter does deal with  the
    Article 8 aspect under reference to the Rules.  Mr  Latta  acknowledged
    that, and also accepted that the appellant had not attempted to set out
    her case by reference to the Rules.  However, he said  that  the  Rules
    were not a complete code and there was a requirement in  any  event  to
    proceed to the second stage outside the Rules.  The court in Mirza said
    that the observations in MS on  that  issue  were  obiter.   MS  was  a
    private life case, while this is a family life case.  The judge had not
    gone  wrong  by  treating  the  interests  of  the  UK  spouse  in  the
    preservation of the marriage in the UK as a very strong consideration.

19. Summing  up,  Mr  Latta  said  that  the  determination  should  stand.
    Alternatively, he agreed that the case did not call for further hearing
    either in the First-tier  Tribunal  or  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    decision should be remade on the basis of the evidence and submissions.



Reply for SSHD.

20. Mr Matthews acknowledged that the Court in Mirza emphasised the  weight
    to be give to the marital relationship.   However,  he  said  that  the
    difficulty is that the Court in Mirza and in Khan took  no  account  of
    Part 5A of the 2002 Act.  That might have been  because  the  decisions
    under review in those cases were prior to Part 5A  coming  into  force.
    On any view, the judge in the First-tier  Tribunal  in  this  case  was
    bound to have regard to Part 5A.  His decision could not be  reconciled
    with those provisions, and with section  117B(4)  in  particular.   The
    appellant's representative sought to find a favourable position for the
    appellant in relation to the factors set out at paragraph 24 of  Ashiq.
    However, to find the position slightly more favourable on two of  those
    numerous factors did not justify the First-tier Tribunal  decision,  or
    benefit the appellant significantly in a fresh decision.  In  the  same
    paragraph the Court went on to say that it "would have been  very  much
    in accordance with the consistent jurisprudence  of  the  ECHR  for  an
    Immigration Judge to have regard to those  factors  ...  and  to  place
    particular  weight  on  the  precarious  nature  of  the   petitioner's
    immigration status when he married".  That was  the  correct  approach.
    Indications to the contrary in Mirza and Khan were  superseded  by  the
    statute and were not to be followed.



Error of law.

21. I am satisfied on the basis of the SSHD's grounds and submissions  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  take  account  of  the  public
    interest  considerations  set  out  in  Part  5A  of  the  Act.    This
    encompasses an error of failing to approach  family  and  private  life
    firstly by reference to the Rules.  The public interest in  immigration
    controls is maintained primarily through the Rules.  The thrust of  the
    case law since July 2012 is that the Rules are not  always  a  complete
    code, but they are more than a starting point.  The Judge in this  case
    went further astray by considering that the Rules hardly needed  to  be
    considered at all (paragraphs 20 and 22).  It is not enough to refer to
    matters such as language ability  and  financial  independence  in  the
    general way the determination does and in the general language  of  the
    statute, because those bare bones are fleshed  out  by  the  particular
    requirements of the Rules.

22. The Judge also fell into the misapprehension that this is a  "Chikwamba
    case".  (The citation is [2008] UKHL 40, [2008]  Imm  AR  700.)   Hayat
    ([2012] EWCA Civ 1054) confirmed that the principle is  not  restricted
    to cases involving  children.   The  issue  generally  arises  when  an
    application may be expected to succeed from abroad, and the question is
    only whether an appellant should have to submit to a  formality.   This
    case is not of that nature.

23. A poor immigration history is the usual reason  why  an  appellant  may
    have to go through that process, even in a case where  her  application
    might succeed.  If her application is likely to fail that goes  further
    against her, not in her favour.

24.  The  errors  are  more  than  formal.   They  are  material,  so   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Remaking the decision.

25. All relevant considerations on both sides have been rehearsed.  I  have
    also checked against paragraph 24  of  Ashiq,  to  which  both  parties
    referred, although each case is different and  that  paragraph  is  not
    intended as a standard template.

26. Judge Dennis found nothing to be  said  in  favour  of  the  appellant,
    considered on her own.  No-one could realistically quarrel with that.

27. All that can be said for her appeal is about her husband, as set out by
    Judge Dennis at paragraph 20.   Although the appellant did  not  relate
    the evidence to the Rules, he may have the substance to meet  financial
    requirements.  The appellant's removal in all likelihood  means  either
    long term separation or the sponsor's relocation to China.   He  speaks
    Cantonese but not Mandarin and is not literate in Chinese.  He is a  UK
    national.  If he moves, he loses employment  and  financial  advantage.
    The  prospect  of  moving  is  understandably  unattractive   to   him.
    "Insurmountable obstacles" is not to be taken as a literal and decisive
    test,  but  nothing  has  been  shown  which  amounts  to   more   than
    inconvenience, difficulty or a degree of hardship.

28. On the other hand, the maintenance of effective immigration controls is
    in the public interest.  The appellant knows some English, but has  not
    sought  to  establish  her  ability  in  terms  of  the   Rules.    Her
    relationship  with  the  sponsor   tends   to   show   some   financial
    independence, but again she has not sought to bring her case within the
    Rules.  Article 8 is not for "near misses", but the requirements of the
    Rules are the starting point.  The  marriage  is  of  relatively  short
    duration.  There are no children to consider. The parties knew  at  the
    time of the marriage that her immigration  status  was  precarious.   I
    find that factor to carry particular adverse weight, on the  weight  of
    authority.

29. In so far as there may be any conflict, MS, Ashiq and the line of cases
    in the Court of Appeal are consistent and ought to be followed,  rather
    than Mirza and Khan, in which Part 5A of the 2002 Act did not arise for
    consideration.

30. Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 9th ed., vol 1, at  paragraph
    7.96  and  footnote  10  understandably  finds  unhelpful  the   recent
    proliferation of formulae on the tests for the application  of  Article
    8.  Whether approached in or out of the Rules, whether through  one  or
    two stages, and whatever formula is applied, I  find  that  the  public
    interest question should be answered in favour of the respondent.   The
    situation is of course an anxious one for the  appellant  and  sponsor,
    but their case presents no feature which is unusual  or  compelling  or
    not  contemplated  by  the  Rules.   Rather,  the   outcome,   although
    unpalatable, reflects exactly how a couple who marry at a time when the
    immigration status of one party is precarious may expect to be treated.
     The  appellant's  removal  would  interfere  with  her  and  with  the
    sponsor's  family  and  private  life,   but   that   interference   is
    proportionate and justified.

31. The appeal, as  originally  brought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
    dismissed.

32. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.






             [pic]


             7 May 2015
             Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
