
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05074/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 December 2013                            |On 10 December 2013          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                                     y k
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Jo Wilding, Counsel instructed by Messrs HK
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant a citizen of Sri Lanka, born  on  30
    August 1989, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  heard  at
    Taylor House on 25 September 2013, when the Appellant's appeal  against
    the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  20  May  2013  refusing  the
    Appellant's asylum claim and his application to vary his leave to enter
    the United Kingdom and to remove him by way of directions under Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999,  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant made a successful application for  permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal against that decision and in granting  permission
    on 31 October 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Martin had this to say:

         "It is arguable, as asserted in the grounds  that  the  Judge  has
         failed to take all the evidence into  account  (e.g.  that  of  the
         brother) and has failed to give  reasons  for  some  findings  (the
         evidence of scarring not being corroborative).  There  also  appear
         to be findings that matters are incredible or  implausible  without
         reasons given".


3.   Thus the appeal came before me on 5 December 2013, when my  first  task
    was to determine whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on a  point  of  law,  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

4.   In that regard and most helpfully at the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr
    Jarvis for the Respondent informed me as follows:

         "It is right to say that although Ms Wilding in her grounds  cites
         a number of factors that she submits would make this  determination
         unsafe, the Secretary of State concedes that it is unsafe in  terms
         of what is said at ground 5".


5.   In order to place Mr Jarvis' observations in context, it  would  be  as
    well to set out in ground 5 below:

         "Ground 5: Improper reliance on plausibility assertions.

         The Judge relied on the assertion that it was implausible that the
         Appellant would be released on payment of a bribe since he had been
         identified as the brother of a high profile LTTE operative that the
         authorities believed may still be alive [paragraph 12(v)(a)].


         First, it is objectively clear that bribes are a common  means  of
         securing release in Sri Lanka.  Second,  the  Appellant  cannot  be
         expected to know the authorities' reasons for accepting the  bribe.
         The authorities may have believed his explanation that his  brother
         was killed in the war; they may have hoped the Appellant would lead
         them  to  his  brother  if  released.   The  Appellant  could   not
         reasonably be  expected  to  have  an  explanation  but  it  cannot
         properly be regarded as inherently implausible that the authorities
         would release him after five days  on  payment  of  a  bribe.   The
         higher courts have cautioned on numerous occasions  against  making
         incredibility findings based on assumptions as to plausibility".


6.   Mr Jarvis continued:

         "The First-tier Judge did  not  consider  it  plausible  that  the
         Appellant could have been able to bribe himself  out  of  detention
         and leave a highly secure camp on  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's
         claimed family connections to high profile members of the LTTE.


         The First-tier Judge failed  to  show  any  consideration  to  the
         specific findings of the Upper Tribunal in  GJ  and  Others  (post-
         civil  war  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC),
         specifically paragraph 275 which  made  it  clear  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal accepted expert evidence that it was  possible,  and  also
         possible for a person to leave through the  airport  even  if  they
         were high profile themselves.


         I agree that this undermines the  First-tier  Judge's  credibility
         findings in their totality.

         In those circumstances the matter is one  that  in  my  submission
         should be heard afresh and I would not object to the  appeal  going
         back to the  First-tier  in  accord  with  the  Senior  President's
         Guidance at paragraph 7 because of the need for full fresh  factual
         findings".


7.   It would be as well for the sake of completeness to set out below  what
    the Tribunal indeed had to say in CJ at paragraph 275:

         "275.         Mr Anton  Punethanayagam's  evidence  is  that  of  a
             practitioner who has dealt with 3,000 cases of  detainees,  in
             Colombo and Vavuniya.  His evidence on the process of  bribery
             was particular useful.  We did not  have  the  opportunity  of
             hearing him give oral evidence, and some of his evidence  goes
             beyond what he can be taken to know  himself,  but  where  his
             evidence concerns the criminal  processes  in  Sri  Lanka,  we
             consider that it is useful and reliable.  We  take  particular
             account of his  view  that  the  seriousness  of  any  charges
             against an individual are not determinative on whether a bribe
             can be paid, and that it is  possible  to  leave  through  the
             airport even when a person is being actively sought".


8.   In light of Mr Jarvis' both helpful and realistic concession, I  agreed
    with the parties that for like reason the determination of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge could not stand and should be set aside.

9.   Although I was presented with further, substantial and  clearly  argued
    grounds on the part of Ms Wilding, following EK v ECO (Columbia) [2006]
    EWCA Civ 926 I do not have to determine each point raised.  My task has
    been to decide if the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is right
    in law and for the reasons above referred and as conceded by Mr Jarvis,
    it does not.

10.  The guidance of their Lordships in EK whilst  given  in  terms  of  the
    reconsideration process applicable to the previous jurisdiction of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Tribunal still has relevance today.   They  held
    that it was not necessary at the first stage of a reconsideration to go
    through each of the grounds of appeal and decide whether the  error  of
    law asserted could be made out.  It was enough if one  of  the  grounds
    disclosed an error of law.  The "second" stage of  the  reconsideration
    might then encompass all of the issues raised in the original appeal.

11.  I agreed with the parties that none of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    findings could in the circumstances be preserved, save for his findings
    at paragraph 13  of  the  determination,  that  he  accepted  that  the
    Appellant did have close  family  links  with  the  LTTE  that  he  had
    outlined  in  his  evidence.   Further  that   the   First-tier   Judge
    acknowledged the concession by the Respondent, that the  Appellant  had
    some involvement in the LTTE and he accepted the  Appellant's  evidence
    of his involvement in the LTTE.
12.  In consequence of my findings,  it  follows  that  there  has  been  no
    satisfactory hearing of the substance  of  this  appeal  at  all.   The
    scheme of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  does  not
    assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.   In
    such circumstances Section 12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires us to  remit
    the case to the First-tier or remake it  ourselves.   For  the  reasons
    that I have given above and with the agreement of the parties,  I  have
    concluded that the decision should be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Devitte  to  determine  the
    appeal afresh with all issues at large at Taylor House.  I am satisfied
    that there are highly  compelling  factors,  falling  within  paragraph
    7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice Statement decision  that  the
    decision should not be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  It is clearly  in
    the interests of justice, that the appeal of  the  Appellant  be  heard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

13.  For that purpose and so as to ensure the expedition of the  hearing  in
    the interests of justice, I have arranged for the matter to  be  listed
    at Taylor House on 25 March 2014 for substantive hearing  with  a  time
    estimate of three hours.  Further that arrangements are to be made  for
    the provision of a Tamil interpreter.

Decision

14.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that their  decision  in  the
    present appeal should be set aside.  I remit the remaking of the appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House to be heard before a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Devitte.

15.  Anonymity direction made.



Signed                                  Date: 9 December 2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

