
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05037/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31 October 2014                         |On 17 November 2014             |
|Decision given orally at the hearing       |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                                     KS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Akther, instructed by Maliks and Khan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an order, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter,  documents  or  information  likely  to   lead,   directly   or
    indirectly, to members  of  the  public  being  able  to  identify  the
    appellant or any members of his family.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 19 September 1973.   He
    both entered the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 5  October  2006.
    This application was refused by the Secretary of State  on  30  October
    2006 and a subsequent appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  Tribunal  on  29
    January 2007.

 3. The appellant made a further  asylum  claim  in  April  2007  and  sent
    additional representations  to  the  Respondent  in  relation  to  this
    application on  3  November  2008.   This  application  was  eventually
    refused in a comprehensive decision letter issued by the  Secretary  of
    State on 1 March 2011.

 4. Undeterred by this, on 4 April 2012  the  appellant  made  yet  another
    application  for  asylum.   For  reasons   which   are   not   entirely
    understandable the  Secretary  of  State  delayed  over  two  years  in
    considering this application but when she did so, on 1 July  2014,  she
    refused the application  but  nevertheless  granted  the  appellant  30
    months' leave to remain.

 5. The appellant appealed this decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   By
    virtue of Section 83 of the Nationality,  Asylum  and  Immigration  Act
    2002 he was restricted to relying on Refugee Convention grounds in this
    appeal. Despite this the  First-tier  Tribunal  also  considered  human
    rights grounds.

 6. The core of the  appellant's  claim  is  set  out  in  some  detail  in
    paragraphs 13 to 18 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.   I  do
    not propose to recite these passages herein but they should be  treated
    as being incorporated into this decision, so it  can  be  seen  in  its
    proper factual context.

 7. The appellant's challenge before the Upper Tribunal is brought  on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal erred in either failing to  consider
    relevant  evidence  or  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for   its
    conclusions in relation to the evidence put before it.

 8. This ground is particularised with reference to a number  of  documents
    provided in a sizeable bundle produced by the appellant to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, such bundle running to 426 pages, of which the first 184
    pages comprise of documentation specific to this appellant's case.

 9. Moving on to a consideration of the documents which were the  focus  of
    the grounds of application to Upper Tribunal.

10. The appellant provided the First-tier Tribunal  with  copies  of  three
    warrants for his arrest in Sri Lanka, dated 5  January  2007,  12  July
    2007 and 21 January 2008. In relation to these warrants the  First-tier
    Tribunal said as follows at [24]:

         "As regards the warrant which has been produced by the appellant at
         page 59 of the appellant's bundle this relates to failure to attend
         before a court and it does not  allege  any  involvement  with  the
         LTTE."

11. Although, as the grounds assert, the First-tier Tribunal paid no regard
    to two of three warrants produced, it cannot be said that this  failure
    was material to the determination given that the three  warrants  were,
    save for their dates, materially identical.

12. There is, nevertheless, a significant flaw in the First-tier Tribunal's
    treatment of the warrants. Although the Tribunal accurately  identified
    that the warrants do not 'allege any  involvement  [by  the  appellant]
    with the LTTE' they do state on their face that they were being  issued
    as a consequence of the appellant's failure to appear before Court  "in
    a P.T.A. case" - the reference  to  "P.T.A."  being  reference  to  the
    Prevention of Terrorism Act.

13. In my view the obvious inference to be  drawn  from  the  face  of  the
    warrant is that the appellant is alleged by the Sri Lankan  authorities
    to have had involvement or unlawful connection with the LTTE. The  fact
    that the First-tier Tribunal took this into account, or appreciated its
    significance, is not readily apparent from its determination,  and  the
    terms of paragraph 24  of  the  determination  are  supportive  of  the
    conclusion that it did not. This, I  find,  amounts  to  a  significant
    error of law.

14. As it turns out the appellant also put forward a substantial amount  of
    other evidence in support of his claim as to reasons why  he  left  Sri
    Lanka and the reasons he would be persecuted upon return, including;

      i) A letter from a Mr T Purushotthaman, a lawyer in Sri  Lanka,  dated
         in September 2008.   The  terms  of  this  letter  corroborate  the
         appellant's account of (a) his arrest and subsequent of escape from
         custody in  2006  and  (b)  the  arrest  in  2006  of  Mr  Munusamy
         Tharmaseelan, a close associate of the appellant.

     ii) A police report confirming the arrest of a Mr Munusamy Tharmaseelan
         in 2006 for being in possession of "2 live hand bombs and 200  live
         bullets";

    iii) Four letters from Members of Parliament in Sri Lanka, each of which
         provided at least some evidence corroborative  of  the  appellant's
         case; and

     iv) A letter from a Mrs Joy Mahil Mahadevan, a  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka,
         dated 8 February 2007 - relating  to  the  claimed  search  of  the
         appellant's home in 2007.

15. The Tribunal did not engage at all with this evidence during the course
    of its determination and, whilst it is right for Mr Avery to  say  that
    the Tribunal was not required to deal with  each  and  every  piece  of
    evidence put before it, these were significant documents which provided
    corroboration for important parts of the  appellant's  case.  They  are
    documents  which  ought  to  have  been   taken   into   account   when
    consideration was being given to the truthfulness of the account  given
    by the appellant. If the reliability of this documentation was rejected
    the Tribunal ought, in my  view,  to  have  given  reasons  why  it  so
    concluded. In failing to do so the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

16.  As  to  the  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the  appellant's  UK-based
    activities, the appellant produced a  letter  from  the  British  Tamil
    Forum dated 10 December 2013 identifying him as an active member of the
    organisation in the United Kingdom. This letter also provided  evidence
    that he had assisted in the organisation of pro-Tamil protests  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The evidence contained within this letter is  entirely
    consistent with the evidence given by the appellant himself as  to  his
    involvement in such activities.

17. The First-tier Tribunal said as follows of this letter:

         "The Tribunal is of  the  view  that  this  letter  may  have  been
         prepared specifically for the purpose of the appellant's appeal  as
         he [the appellant] was not  active  whilst  he  was  in  Sri  Lanka
         [23]...

         The Tribunal has noted the letter from the British Tamil Forum  but
         has given very little credit to the letter and his  activist  (sic)
         [25]

         There is also nothing to suggest he has a high profile  within  the
         Tamil movement in the United Kingdom [25]"

18. With respect to the First-tier Tribunal, its reasoning in  relation  to
    this letter, and more generally to the appellant's  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom, is at best opaque and at worst  unintelligible.  In  my
    view, it is impossible to identify from the determination whether it is
    being concluded therein that the appellant did  not  undertake  any  of
    these claimed activities in the  United  Kingdom,  or  whether  he  did
    undertake such activities but his  motivation  for  doing  so  was  not
    genuine.

19. If the latter reasoning is being relied upon by the Tribunal then in my
    conclusion it ought to have gone on to identify whether the Sri  Lankan
    authorities would in be in  a  position,  or  would  even  attempt,  to
    ascertain  whether  the  appellant  was  genuinely  motivated  by  pro-
    separatist  reasons  when  undertaking   such   activities.   No   such
    consideration was undertaken by the Tribunal.

20. If the former reasoning was being relied upon by the Tribunal  then  in
    my conclusion it ought to have engaged with the photographs produced by
    the appellant of him purportedly partaking in pro-separatist activities
    in the United Kingdom;  these  photographs  immediately  following  the
    British Tamil Forum letter in  the  Appellant's  bundle.  There  is  no
    reference to these photographs in the determination.

21. I need to say no more than that I am wholly satisfied that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's determination  contains  a  number  of  errors  of  law
    capable of affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal  brought  on  Refugee
    Convention grounds.  I also observe, once again, that the Tribunal also
    went on to consider whether the Secretary  of  State's  decision  would
    breach the  Human  Rights  Convention  which,  of  course,  it  had  no
    jurisdiction to do given that  this  appeal  was  brought  pursuant  to
    section 83 of the 2002 Act.

22. For all the reasons given above I set aside the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. Further, having considered the Senior President of
    the Tribunals' Practice Statement of 25th  September  2012  I  conclude
    that it is appropriate to remit this appeal for determination afresh by
    the First-tier Tribunal - no findings of fact to be preserved.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  for  the  reasons
set out above. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined afresh by a judge other than Judge M.A. Khan.

An Anonymity Direction is made in the terms identified in paragraph 1 of
the above decision.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

Date: 8 November 2014



