

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05899/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  9 December 2014                           |On 12 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     M T
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This appeal came before Judge Fisher on 17 September  2014  at  North
       Shields. He dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds,  not
       accepting that the appellant was a homosexual as claimed.


    2. In doing so he relied on the fact that the  appellant  disclosed  his
       claim late, after the reasons for refusal letter had been  issued  in
       relation to the claim of risk on political grounds.
    3. It was argued in the grounds that the judge did not take into account
       the appellant's explanation for the late disclosure, and that he  did
       not properly assess the background evidence.


    4. Mr Diwncyz accepted that the determination could not stand, and  that
       the proper course was a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal


    5. The case of A v Staatssecretaris van  Veiligheid  en  Justite  [2014]
       EUECJ C- 148/13, published after the judge  had  made  his  decision,
       makes it  clear  that  it  cannot  be  concluded  that  the  declared
       sexuality lacks credibility  simply  because,  due  to  reticence  in
       disclosing intimate aspects of personal life, it was not declared  at
       the outset.


    6.  It is also right to say that objective evidence in  the  appellant's
       bundle relating to the attitude of the present  Egyptian  authorities
       to homosexuality was not referred to in the  determination,  and,  if
       the credibility findings are unsafe, further  consideration  to  that
       evidence must be given.


    7. The decision of Judge Fisher is set aside. The case should  therefore
       be set down before a judge other than Judge Fisher at North  Shields,
       with all issues at large.






Signed        Date 11 December 2014


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
