
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Aa/05697/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2016                              |On 1st July 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                                     TN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Freer) dismissing an appeal by the appellant against  the  respondent's
    decision made on 12 March 2015 refusing the appellant's application for
    asylum.  Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted by the Upper Tribunal.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on [ ] 1989.   He  arrived
    in the UK with leave to enter as a student in September 2011  to  study
    for a Diploma in Business Management at  Westminster  Academy.   On  22
    August 2012 he left the UK to attend his grandmother's funeral  in  Sri
    Lanka.  It is his claim that on arrival at  Katunayake  Airport  on  23
    August 2012 he was stopped and  questioned  on  suspicion  of  being  a
    member of the LTTE.  However, he was not detained but allowed  to  pass
    through.  He went directly to his uncle's home for the funeral  due  to
    be held on 25 August 2012.

3.    The  appellant  claimed  that  later  in  that  day  and   after   his
    grandmother's funeral the authorities came to his uncle's home  and  he
    was detained.  He claimed that whilst in detention he was seriously ill-
    treated.  He was suspended upside down, a  bag  soaked  in  petrol  was
    placed over his head,  he  was  urinated  on  and  he  collapsed.   The
    following day he was questioned and confessed that in 2005 he had  come
    under the influence of an LTTE member, E, and was persuaded to  conceal
    a handgun in his school bag and deliver it to a  particular  individual
    on the basis that it was unlikely that a young student would be checked
    at the various checkpoints.  He was then burnt with cigarettes  and  he
    agreed to sign a document in Sinhalese which he did under duress.

4.   He was kept in detention for seven days and released as his uncle  paid
    a bribe to achieve this.  He then stayed with a  person  identified  as
    Mohammed who arranged for his departure from Sri Lanka on 23  September
    2012.  The appellant claimed asylum on 13 December 2012 and in  support
    of his claim produced an internet report dated 25 August  2012  showing
    his picture from Facebook and reporting that he was detained at BIA  on
    arrival from London.  Similar reports appeared on a number of  websites
    and are copied at pages 35-69 of the appellant's bundle of documents.

5.   For the reasons set  out  in  the  respondent's  detailed  reasons  for
    refusal attached to the decision letter, she was not satisfied that the
    appellant had been arrested, detained or tortured in Sri Lanka or  that
    he would be at real risk of persecution or serious harm on return.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  reached  the  same  conclusion.   The
    appellant relied on a medical report following  an  examination  on  10
    August 2015 by Dr Martin.  He recorded that the appellant had  scarring
    on his abdomen which was consistent with unwillingly and  intentionally
    caused injuries with a hot object such as cigarette  burns.  The  judge
    commented at  [51]  that  whilst  the  report  was  favourable  to  the
    appellant it was not determinative without more having  regard  to  the
    following:

     "(i)     There was a significant delay  in  seeking  medical  evidence,
             which creates a window of opportunity for delayed small  scale
             self-inflicted injury to bolster a case.   The  appellant  has
             had two firms of solicitors advising him in succession.

     (ii)     There are no major scars but in recent years  the  authorities
             are becoming more cunning in regard to the traces of  torture.
             This absence is possibly (but not certainly) indicative of  no
             major interest in him."

7.   The judge said that there was no evidence of  any  mental  harm  but  a
    very small amount of minor and undatable scarring and that was  a  very
    slender basis on which to suggest that there  was  significant  medical
    corroboration, not  that  the  law  required  corroboration  [51(iii)].
    There was no independent evidence that E had ever existed or
     behaved as described  and  that  without  that  being  established,  no
    reason was shown for  the  alleged  questioning  and  torture  to  have
    occurred.  He then said at [51(iv)]:

         "...so to establish it, I have to be  persuaded  that  more  likely
         than not it is a truthful recollection.  It is one of the factors I
         have to weigh in seeking to resolve that very question."

     The judge went on to deal with the internet  evidence  saying  that  it
    was easily created and appeared to be both self-serving and exaggerated
    and at [51(v)]:

         "It has not been shown that it was not controlled by the appellant.
          Suspicions that he did control it must be raised by (a) the  speed
         with which it occurred and (b) the use of his own (still  currently
         on Facebook by his own admission) Facebook page.  Alternatively  it
         could have been created for political propaganda purposes  by  some
         person and would be unreliable for that reason.  I  find  that  the
         respondent is justified in referring me to Tanveer Ahmed in all the
         circumstances and minimal weight at best should be  given  to  that
         evidence."


8.   The judge was not satisfied that there had  been  any  reason  for  the
    appellant's claimed detention at the airport and there was  nothing  in
    the account really showing a likely rational cause  for  it.   He  said
    that randomness was not a satisfactory alternative explanation when the
    intelligence-led nature of enquiries by the authorities was so strongly
    established in the case law.  He gave little weight to  the  statements
    from the appellant's father  and  mother  on  the  basis  that  on  the
    relevant issues, it must have been based on what they were told  rather
    than had seen for themselves.

9.   He went on to consider the inferences  that  could  properly  be  drawn
    from the fact that the internet articles had been put on the web on  25
    August 2012, the day of the funeral.  The appellant  had  said  in  his
    evidence that he did not know who put these reports out but  the  judge
    said he was very doubtful of his honesty on that  issue.   He  and  his
    immediately family would be the only ones at  first  to  know  or  care
    about what had happened at the airport and he  questioned  why  any  of
    them would be putting a report on the internet when they had  a  family
    funeral on the same day.  He questioned whether he was meant to believe
    that the authorities read those articles very quickly,  were  concerned
    presumably by the complaining or propagandist nature of them  and  then
    came looking for the appellant on the same day at his address.

10.  In summary, the judge did not accept the appellant's account that  some
    unknown person had put the reports on the internet saying that  it  was
    done by somebody who was very familiar with his  Facebook  account  and
    for that reason its owner would be the most likely person to have  done
    so.  The judge found that, given the very limited and wholly  ambiguous
    physical evidence, the complete lack of evidence as to the  appellant's
    mental health, the limited supporting  documentation  of  his  account,
    taken all in the round, he  was  almost  certainly  never  tortured  or
    beaten against his will in any country  [65]  and  that  there  was  no
    material part of the  core  account  which  he  accepted  as  factually
    correct to the low threshold other than the likelihood of a visit  from
    the authorities [70].  He had been photographed at events organised  by
    the TGTE in the UK but it would not enough to make him of  interest  to
    the authorities. The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  not  given
    credible evidence and would not be at real  risk  of  serious  harm  on
    return to Sri Lanka.

Grounds and Submissions

11.  The grounds argue firstly that the judge was wrong  to  find  that  the
    scarring could have been inflicted by third parties and not as a result
    of torture.  A consideration  of  self-inflicted  injuries  would  only
    arise if there were identified presenting  factors,  referring  to  the
    decision in KV (Scarring - Medical Evidence) Sri Lanka v  Secretary  of
    State [2014] UKUT  230.   As  neither  the  respondent  nor  the  judge
    identified a  presenting  factor  it  was  not  lawfully  open  to  the
    Tribunal, so it is argued, to suggest self-infliction  and  reject  the
    torture claim by third parties.  Secondly, it is argued that the  judge
    erred at [51(iii)] by the suggestion that medical evidence needed to be
    significant to be probative.  Medical evidence was not required  to  be
    determinative but was a factor to  provide  context  to  a  credibility
    assessment.  Thirdly, it is argued  that  at  [51(iv)]  the  judge  was
    saying that unless there was  independent  evidence  it  could  not  be
    accepted that E existed and that it  had  to  be  established  as  more
    likely  than  not.   This  indicated  two  errors,   the   absence   of
    corroboration did not mean that a fact was not true  and  "more  likely
    than not" implied the imposition of a standard of proof higher than the
    asylum standard. Further, the judge was wrong to attach  little  or  no
    weight to the internet evidence on the basis that it  was  self-serving
    and to presume that the reports were inserted by the appellant  because
    of the speed of their occurrence and the use of his own Facebook image.
     The fourth ground argues that the judge made a reference to Azerbaijan
    which would suggest a lack of care consistent with anxious scrutiny but
    permission was not granted on  this  ground  and  rightly  so.   It  is
    accepted that the references to Azerbaijan where the appellant's father
    works were correct.  Finally, it is argued that the judge was wrong  to
    refer to membership of the TGTE as it does not have members because  it
    is a government in exile.  It is a  proscribed  organisation  and  risk
    must be assessed on the basis of the proscription.

12.  Ms Jegarajah adopted her grounds arguing that it showed that the  judge
    had in fact applied a higher  standard  of  proof  thereby  giving  the
    impression that he had approached the evidence with a closed mind.  She
    argued that his assessment of the evidence was flawed by his references
    to the opportunity for delayed small  scale  self-inflicted  injury  to
    bolster a case and to whether it was more likely than not that  E  ever
    existed or behaved  as  described.   She  submitted  that  the  judge's
    reasoning at [61] about the internet  article  were  in  substance  the
    working out of a hypothesis rather than an analysis  of  the  evidence.
    These issues had not been adequately explored or put to  the  appellant
    at the hearing.

13.  Mr Tarlow submitted  that  in  substance  the  grounds  were  simply  a
    disagreement with findings which were properly open to the judge.   The
    appellant's credibility had  been  comprehensively  challenged  in  the
    decision letter and the judge was  entitled  to  draw  inferences  from
    evidence  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities   had   a   sophisticated
    intelligence-led system and to conclude that they  would  have  had  no
    interest in the appellant and would still have no such interest in him.



Assessment of the Issues

14.  The primary submission made by Ms Jegarajah is that  when  the  judge's
    decision is read as a whole there are real concerns as to whether he in
    fact applied the lower standard of proof when assessing the credibility
    of the appellant's account and whether he would  be  at  real  risk  of
    serious harm on return.  It is correct that the judge properly directed
    himself on the burden and standard of proof in [9]-[10], also referring
    to the categories of evidence that may be taken into account in a  risk
    assessment as identified in Karanakaran [2000]  Imm  AR  282.   Against
    this must be set the fact  that  in  51(iv)  the  judge  said  that  no
    independent evidence was produced that E ever existed and without  that
    being  established,  there  was  no  reason  shown  for   the   alleged
    questioning and torture to have occurred and so to establish it he  had
    to be  persuaded  that  "more  likely  than  not"  it  was  a  truthful
    recollection.

15.  In 51(v) in respect of the internet evidence the judge  commented  that
    this was easily created and it had not  been  shown  that  it  was  not
    controlled by the appellant.  He then referred to  suspicions  that  he
    did control it being raised by the speed with which it was  put  online
    and the use of his own Facebook image.

16.  When considering the medical evidence  the  judge  commented  that  the
    report was favourable to the appellant but to the very low threshold of
    proof applicable in asylum claims it was not determinative without more
    having regard to the fact that there was a significant delay in seeking
    medical advice which created a window of opportunity for delayed  small
    scale self-inflicted injury to bolster a case and that  there  were  no
    major scars, in recent years the authorities becoming more  cunning  in
    regard to the traces of torture but this absence was possibly  but  not
    certainly indicative of  no  major  interest  in  him.   However,  this
    comment appears to have left out of account the  point  noted  in  [30]
    that Dr Martin had expressed the view that it  was  unlikely  that  the
    injuries were self-inflicted.

17.  When considering alternative causes for the scarring in para  5.5.1  of
    his report Dr Martin  said  that  apart  from  torture  other  possible
    intentional causes were

         "Self-inflicted injuries - it is a possible cause  although  self-
         inflicted injuries tend to be more superficial and the larger  scar
         was caused by a deep burn.


         Caused by a third party - from  inspection  of  the  scars  it  is
         scientifically impossible to differentiate self-inflicted  injuries
         by proxy (SIBP) from injuries caused by torture.  Although SIBP  as
         a possible cause cannot be discarded, I considered that there  were
         not presenting facts to make  it  more  than  another  possibility.
         ...."


18.  When considering the evidence of the internet articles  the  judge  did
    not accept the appellant's account that some unknown person  must  have
    done this but that it was done  by  somebody  very  familiar  with  his
    Facebook account and for that reason its owner would be the most likely
    person.  The judge went on to say at [62] that  if  the  appellant  had
    been questioned at the airport, staying in Sri Lanka in order to put  a
    protest on the internet was the very last step he would have taken  and
    that surely he would have waited until he had left  the  country  [62].
    He further commented that he was surrounded  by  family  including  his
    mother and she would never have encouraged this to be  done  under  her
    own roof and such publication put his own family at risk and indeed she
    says that they have had many such visits since then.

19.  However, the judge does not seem to have considered why,  even  if  the
    appellant had not been questioned at the airport, he would have  put  a
    report online.  If the intention was to manufacture evidence to support
    a wrongful claim for asylum, he would arguably at least  have  put  the
    report online after he left Sri Lanka unless he was prepared to take  a
    chance on the report not coming to the notice of the authorities  until
    after he had left despite their sophisticated intelligence or on it not
    being of any interest to them.  So far as these reports  are  concerned
    the judge found that they were easily concocted by the  appellant  [64]
    and that  there  was  no  evidence  of  verification  checks  prior  to
    publication.  The likelihood of such verification checks  for  internet
    articles particularly if there is a possibility of their being used for
    political propaganda purposes may well be unlikely.

20.  When dealing with the issue of whether the appellant would be  at  risk
    from membership of the  TGTE  the  judge  said  that  given  his  other
    credibility  findings  he  considered  the  possibility  that  he   was
    unreliable on the question to be far  more  probable  than  not.   This
    wording is again more consistent with  weighing  the  evidence  on  the
    balance of probabilities  rather  than  on  the  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood.

21.  On the issue of injuries inflicted by  proxy  there  appear  to  be  no
    clinical or non-clinical presenting  features  which  would  justify  a
    further consideration of the likelihood or otherwise of  such  a  cause
    and this is not obviously a  case  where  there  is  a  clear  mismatch
    between the appellant's account of  when  and  where  and  how  he  was
    tortured and the facts as established.  Whilst not determinative, these
    are relevant factors to be taken into account.

22.  In summary, drawing these concerns together I am  satisfied  that  when
    the decision is read as a whole  there  must  be  real  concern  as  to
    whether the judge approached the evidence on  the  basis  of  assessing
    whether  there  was  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood   that   the
    appellant's evidence was credible.  I am also satisfied that  a  number
    of aspects of the evidence were not fully explored  such  as  the  fact
    that the possession of the appellant's image does not necessarily  mean
    that he inserted it but, even if he did, whether it  would  lead  to  a
    real risk.  The judge accepted that potentially at  least  the  medical
    evidence  was  favourable  to  the  appellant  but  has  minimised  its
    significance by saying that there was only  a  very  slender  basis  on
    which to suggest that  there  was  significant  medical  corroboration.
    Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law such  that  his
    decision should be set aside.

23.  At the hearing it was agreed that if the decision was  set  aside,  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  full  re-
    hearing.  I agree with this submission and accordingly the appeal  will
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The anonymity  order  made  by
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  remains  in  force  until   further   order.



Decision

24.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.  The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reconsideration by way of a full re-hearing by a  different  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.






Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 30 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter



