
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05680/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 20 March 2014 and 15 April 2014              |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                hakeem baloch
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, instructed by Asylum Aid
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Hakeem Baloch, was born on 16 December  1990  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  The  appellant  had  been  admitted  to  the
    United Kingdom as a student in  2011  and,  in  May  2012,  he  claimed
    asylum.  A decision was taken on 11 June 2012 to refuse  to  grant  him
    asylum and to remove him from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The appellant
    appealed against the removal decision to the First-tier Tribunal  which
    dismissed his appeal.  The appellant sought permission from  the  Upper
    Tribunal and, by a Decision on an Error of Law dated  5  October  2012,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination and directed that the decision be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal at a resumed hearing.  Following  the  making  of  a  transfer
    order, the resumed hearing came before me at Field House  on  20  March
    2014 and, following an adjournment, on 15 April 2014.  I  have  annexed
    Judge Zucker's determination to my own and have marked it "A".

 2. The burden of proof in the appeal is on the appellant and the  standard
    of  proof  is  whether  the  appellant  would   suffer,   respectively,
    persecution or treatment contrary to the ECHR (Articles 2 and 3) if  he
    were to be returned to Pakistan.   I  have  applied  that  standard  of
    approval in the present appeal.

 3. In April 2014, I  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  from  his
    witness,  Mr  Haider.   Both  witnesses  spoke  in  Baluchi  with   the
    assistance of an interpreter (it had  been  necessary  to  adjourn  the
    hearing in March 2014 because the Baluchi  interpreter  had  failed  to
    attend.  At the March 2014 hearing,  I  had  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant's expert witness, Professor Yunas Samad, Professor  of  South
    Asian Studies in the School of Social and International Studies at  the
    University of Bradford.  Professor Samad has  prepared  three  detailed
    reports.  The first report of June 2012 seeks in part  to  examine  the
    credibility of the appellant by placing his  written  account  of  past
    events in the Balochi  area  in  the  context  of  background  material
    relating to that area  of  Pakistan.   I  have  to  say  that  I  found
    Professor Samad's evidence, both written and oral, to be very  helpful.
    He was able to comment on the appellant's activities on behalf  of  the
    Balochi Separatist Movement in Pakistan but also on the appellant's sur
    place activities within the United Kingdom.  In his oral  evidence,  he
    gave  persuasive  testimony  regarding  the  activities  of   diplomats
    operating out of  the  Pakistan  Embassy  in  London  who,  he  claims,
    regularly  monitor  demonstrations  and   rallies   held   by   Balochi
    separatists  in  this  country.   Professor  Samad  did  not  seek   to
    exaggerate the appellant's role either  as  a  sur  place  activist  or
    within Pakistan; the appellant is still only 24 years of  age  and  has
    been living in the United Kingdom since 2011 so his role in  separatist
    politics in Pakistan has had little time to  develop.   However,  I  am
    satisfied, having heard Professor Samad,  that  low  and  medium  level
    Balochi separatists are closely monitored both in Pakistan and  in  the
    United Kingdom and that, within Pakistan, there  exists  a  significant
    level of risk to such individuals from the Pakistani authorities.

 4. I was assisted also by the approach of the appeal taken by Senior  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Ms Alice Holmes.  Ms Holmes did not  concede
    the appeal but equally she did not seek to cross-examine the  appellant
    nor did she make any submissions either as regards his  credibility  or
    that of the other witnesses or as regards the level of risk  which  the
    appellant claims he  faces  in  Pakistan.   As  a  consequence  of  the
    approach which she adopted, Mr Jorro, for the appellant, likewise  made
    only brief submissions in addition to the  detailed  skeleton  argument
    which he has produced.

 5. In the light of all the evidence, I am satisfied that the appellant  is
    genuinely committed to the Balochi separatist cause and I find that his
    account of past events  in  Pakistan  and  in  the  United  Kingdom  is
    generally accurate.  I am satisfied  that  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities in the United Kingdom are reasonably likely to have come  to
    the attention of the Pakistan Embassy through the monitoring activities
    of  the  diplomats  working  there  and  that  some  account  of  those
    activities  would  have  been  relayed  to  the  security  services  in
    Pakistan.  In light of the approach adopted by  Ms  Holmes,  I  do  not
    propose  to  address  in  detail  the  appellant's  account   but,   in
    determining the credibility of the appellant, I have had regard to  all
    the evidence both written and oral.  As I have indicated above,  I  was
    particularly impressed by the  evidence  of  Professor  Samad  which  I
    accept in its entirety.

 6. I find that the appellant is a genuine Balochi separatist and  that  he
    and his family have suffered harassment and discrimination  on  account
    of their Baloch ethnicity.  I accept that he is a member of the  Baloch
    Student Organisation and also the Baloch National  Movement  (BNM).   I
    accept that the appellant's uncle  (Mehboob  Ali  Wadhela  Baloch)  was
    murdered in Pakistan on account of his separatist activities.  I accept
    that the appellant's family  home  was  raided  by  Pakistani  security
    forces in April 2011.  I accept the appellant's description of his  sur
    place activities.

 7. The question, therefore, arises as to whether an appellant  having  the
    profile which I find he possesses to be of real risk of persecution  or
    ill-treatment upon return to  Pakistan.   I  accept  Professor  Samad's
    evidence and that of the other  witness,  who  is  the  United  Kingdom
    foreign spokesman for the  BNM,  that  the  Pakistan  authorities  will
    carefully scrutinise the profiles of young males returning from  abroad
    to homes in Balochistan.  I find that it is reasonably likely that  the
    appellant's profile (both as a member of a Pakistan Balochi  separatist
    family and as an activist for Balochi separatism whilst in  the  United
    Kingdom) will be known to the  security  services  who  are  reasonably
    likely to interview  him  upon  return.   I  find  that  the  Pakistani
    authorities are prepared to use extreme methods (including torture  and
    murder) against those individuals whom they perceive as a threat to the
    unity and security of Pakistan.  I find that this appellant's political
    profile, although that of a young and relatively inexperienced man,  is
    sufficient to bring him to the attention of  the  Pakistan  authorities
    and I find that there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that  he
    would be at real risk of ill-treatment  either  at  the  point  of  his
    arrival in Pakistan or subsequently whilst living in  Balochistan,  his
    home area.

 8. The appellant further seeks to  rely  upon  SA  (political  activist  -
    internal relocation) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 30 (IAC).  In that  decision,
    the Upper Tribunal reaffirmed the principle that  a  genuine  political
    activist cannot be expected to avail himself of the option of  internal
    flight should he be at risk (as I find this appellant is) in  his  home
    area of his country of nationality.  Further, Ms Holmes did not seek to
    persuade me that the  appellant  should  be  required  to  conceal  his
    genuine political views in  order  to  protect  himself  from  possible
    persecution.

 9. It follows from what I have said that the appellant is  a  refugee  and
    that his asylum and Articles 2/3 ECHR appeal  should  be  allowed.   In
    those circumstances, he is not entitled  to  a  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection.



DECISION

10. This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

11. This appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Articles 2/3 ECHR).






Signed                              Date 2 May 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


























                                   Annex A


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

12. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is  recorded
    as 16 December 1990.  On  28  March  2011  he  applied  for  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student visa which was issued to him on  6  April  2011,  and
    valid until 25 December 2012.  On 11 June 2011 he  entered  the  United
    Kingdom.  On 28 May 2012 he claimed asylum as a refugee.   On  11  June
    2012 a  decision  was  made  to  refuse  the  application  pursuant  to
    paragraph 336 of HC 395 (as amended), and on that same date a  decision
    was made to remove him from the United Kingdom  by  way  of  directions
    pursuant to Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   By
    Notice dated 13 June 2012 he appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and on
    23 June 2012 his  appeal  was  heard  at  Harmondsworth  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chana.

13. The Appellant's case was that he was at risk of persecution because  of
    his activities in Pakistan with the Baluchi National Movement  ("BNM").
    Judge Chana noted that there was  no  issue  with  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was a member of the BNM  but  noted  also  that  it  was  the
    Respondent's case that as a low level member he would not have  been  a
    person at risk and would not have come to the adverse attention of  the
    authorities. Judge Chana  made  various  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the Appellant and dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

14. By Notice dated  27  June  2012  the  Appellant  made  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Three grounds were  taken.



15. The first was that no reference was made whatsoever by the judge to the
    expert evidence of Professor Yunas  Samad,  Professor  of  South  Asian
    Studies in the School  of  Social  and  International  Studies  at  the
    University  of  Bradford  whose  report  was   contained   within   the
    Appellant's bundle.  Reference was also made to the case of Mibanga -v-
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367 in which
    Wilson J said at paragraph 24:

        "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact-finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto".

    Specific aspects of  the  expert's  report  were  set  out  within  the
    particulars of the first ground which went, it was  submitted,  to  the
    issue of the Appellant's credibility and the extent to which he was  an
    activist in the BNM.

16. The second ground was an attack  on  the  manner  in  which  the  judge
    assessed the evidence  generally.  The  third  ground  related  to  the
    judge's assessment of internal relocation said in the  Grounds  to  be,
    "woefully inadequate".

17. On 27th June 2012 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  granted  permission
    stating:

        "I believe that the Appellant's application does  disclose  matters
         which are properly arguable.  Not  only  does  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Chana appear to fail to examine the expert evidence to  which
         she was referred in the written submissions she accepted, but  also
         fails to demonstrate that she has considered any of the  background
         evidence before making her findings of fact.

         Permission to appeal is granted on all three challenges".

18. Thus the matter comes before me. Mr Tufan, for the Respondent  takes  a
    realistic view and accepts that there is an error of law on  the  basis
    of an absence of reference to the expert  report  as  well  as  to  the
    documents referred to in the skeleton argument.   Both  parties  agreed
    that a rehearing was necessary because of that and I agree.

19. It is not possible to remake the case immediately because unfortunately
    there is no interpreter available and Mr  Tufan,  due  to  one  of  his
    colleagues having been taken ill, only received the papers at the  last
    moment.  In the circumstances there will have to be a  resumed  hearing
    of this matter.

DECISION

The determination of Judge Chana dated 25 June 2012 contained  an  error  of
law and is set aside to be  remade  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  a  resumed
hearing yet to be fixed.


Signed                              Date


Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker
