

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: aa 05107-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   17.07.2013|
|on    17.07.2013                              |sent out:     18.07.2013     |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                           Iwinosa Lucky OMOSIGHO
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Miss Mavelyn Vidal (working under the supervision of
                    Duncan Lewis & Co, Harrow)
For the respondent: Mr Gurinderpal Jagpal

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Kamorudeen Adio), sitting at Hatton Cross on  11  June,
    to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a citizen of Nigeria, born  21
    September 1990. The appellant was arrested in this country on 12  April
    2013, and claimed asylum on the 18th. When interviewed on 14 May  2013,
    he said his parents had been  killed  in  February  2012,  following  a
    meeting with some family members who were trying to get  possession  of
    their land; on hearing about that, someone he described as Uncle Frank,
    whom he had not seen for some time, had come and taken care of him, and
    arranged to get his finger-prints taken for a  visa  to  come  to  this
    country. He arrived in May 2012; but then had been held by Uncle  Frank
    till he managed to escape him in August, and forced to  have  sex  with
    numerous women, no doubt for his uncle's benefit,

 2. This account may seem improbable in itself; but  it  is  not  suggested
    that the judge was not entitled to believe it, providing he gave proper
    reasons for doing so, and dealt with all significant points against it.
    The difficulty on this score was that Home Office  records  showed  the
    appellant's visa had been applied for on 19 December 2011,  and  issued
    on 11 January 2012: this of course meant that the  application  process
    could not have been carried out as the appellant had said, after  Uncle
    Frank took charge of  him,  following  the  death  of  his  parents  in
    February.

 3. That was a point taken in the refusal letter, as  the  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 12: so far as he dealt with it, he did so at paragraphs 76  -
    80. The judge's main  finding,  at  paragraph  76,  is  that  "...  the
    Appellant's uncle had planned for the Appellant to leave Nigeria before
    any possible issue arose concerning the meeting to be attended  by  his
    father". This was  of  course  not  what  the  appellant  had  said  at
    interview; but neither was it something he had claimed in oral evidence
    before the judge. From the judge's paragraphs 45 it is quite clear that
    the appellant was still saying he hadn't seen Uncle Frank for 'a while'
    before his parents died; and there is nothing to suggest  that  he  was
    resiling from his account of the visa having  been  obtained  by  Uncle
    Frank, as a result of what happened to his parents.

 4. That finding by the judge was pure speculation, as were the conclusions
    he drew from the simple statement on the visa application form that the
    application had  been  received  through  an  (accredited)  agent.  The
    judge's finding that the false details in the form were the work of  an
    (unscrupulous) agent was also pure speculation, because the appellant's
    evidence was that the application  process  had  been  managed  by  his
    uncle, and he knew little or nothing about it, beyond the fact that his
    finger-prints had been taken. However, that is not central to the  real
    credibility point made against the appellant on the form, because  that
    depends on its date, not its contents.

 5. There was no evidence before the judge,  and  certainly  none  that  he
    referred to, which was capable of supporting the  explanation  he  gave
    for the discrepancy between the date of the visa, and  the  appellant's
    own account of events, and it  follows  that  this  point  on  its  own
    involved an error of law on the part of the judge which will require  a
    re-hearing.

 6. There is another credibility point  which  would  also  have  had  that
    result. At the appellant's interview on 14 May 2013,  he  said  he  had
    been playing football for a club called 'Mandela FC' in Liverpool since
    about August 2012; but the undated  letter  he  handed  in  then,  from
    someone who described himself as the chairman of the club said  he  had
    been with them for "over  a  year".  While  this  was  only  marginally
    inconsistent with the appellant's claimed arrival date of May 2012,  it
    was completely inconsistent with the appellant's own account  of  being
    held captive by Uncle Frank from then until August that year.

 7. This point was not taken at the interview, so far as the parties  could
    tell me; but it was taken in the refusal letter, sent on 23  May  2013.
    There were before the judge two further undated letters from  the  club
    chairman, but bearing fax transmission details, from an unknown number,
    of 20 and 22 May. They were not received by the Home  Office  till  the
    hearing; but the suggestion is that they represent  an  correction,  to
    match the appellant's account, on the part of the chairman,  unprompted
    because it came before the point was taken in the refusal letter. There
    is no further evidence to support the date shown on these letters.

 8. As Miss Vidal frankly acknowledged, though the judge noted  this  point
    against the appellant, he did not deal with it himself at  all,  either
    by accepting that the further letters from the football  club  chairman
    represented a genuine unprompted correction of what he had said in  the
    first one, or in any other way. This failure too was an error of law on
    the part of the judge, which will require a re-hearing. The  re-hearing
    can most conveniently take place, given the time limits  in  the  fast-
    track procedure, by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. When I announced this decision, Miss Vidal asked for the re-hearing  to
    be  put  off  till  after  6  September,  when  the  appellant  has  an
    appointment, given on 18 June, for an initial assessment with the Helen
    Bamber Centre. That application will have  to  be  made,  following  my
    decision, to the First-tier Tribunal, where it will no  doubt  be  duly
    considered.

Home Office appeal
Fresh hearing before First-tier Tribunal, not Judge Adio

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



