
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05285/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd September  2015               |On 16th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                               MR HAROON FAIZI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Brown of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 13th December 1982 is a citizen  of  Afghanistan.
    The Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Brown  of  Counsel.
    The Respondent  was  represented  by  Miss Johnstone,  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for asylum and that application  had
    been refused by the Respondent on 16th June 2014.   The  Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Birrell sitting at Manchester on 30th October  2014.   The  judge
    had dismissed his appeal on all grounds.  The  Appellant  had  appealed
    that decision by application dated 25th November 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal had been granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cheales  on  10th
    December 2014 on the grounds that an arguable error  of  law  had  been
    made in that the judge had not considered the effect of the Appellant's
    additional profile when looking at risk on return from the Taliban.

 3. Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal firstly to decide whether
    or not an error of law had been made by the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Brown submitted in line with the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  he  had
    prepared accompanying the application.  It was submitted that the judge
    had erred in assessing the risk to the Appellant as merely being a  low
    level collaborator in that the judge  had  failed  to  also  take  into
    account in the assessment the finding that the Appellant had  acted  as
    an informant against the Taliban.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Miss Johnstone submitted that the findings at  paragraph  44  that  the
    Appellant was a low level collaborator were views that she was entitled
    to reach and there was no error of law.

 6. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    submissions raised.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge in this case had provided a detailed decision  in  which  she
    had set out the facts of the case and submissions raised.  She had also
    set out at paragraph 29 the case of H and B v the United Kingdom  ECTHR
    which related to low level collaborators.  She had also  at  paragraphs
    30 and 31 considered a report dated September 2011 and the  Operational
    Guidance Note dated June 2013.

 8. In terms of the Appellant's account the judge had gone through that  in
    some detail at paragraphs 33  to  48  of  the  decision.   It  is  also
    noteworthy that the Appellant's brother had separately made a claim for
    asylum based on very  similar  background  and  personal  matters  that
    related to this Appellant.  The judge had noted  that  the  Appellant's
    brother's claim for asylum had been dismissed on appeal, that  decision
    had not been appealed and the brother had been  removed.   However  the
    judge properly found it was necessary for her  separately  to  consider
    this Appellant's case for reasons  provided  at  paragraph  38  of  the
    decision.  That was both a fair and legally correct  approach  for  the
    judge to have taken.

 9. She found that the Appellant's account was  essentially  credible.   In
    summary she accepted that the Appellant worked as a interpreter at  the
    British Embassy in Kabul.  She further accepted that the Appellant  and
    his family  were  instrumental  in  the  arrests  and  imprisonment  of
    neighbours who were involved in a rocket attack by  the  Taliban.   She
    accepted that as a result of the Appellant  and  his  family  providing
    that information the  Appellant  had  received  two  letters  from  the
    Taliban dated 29th August 2008  and  2nd  April  2011  indicating  the
    Taliban were aware the Appellant had reported those individuals to  the
    authorities.   She  did  not  accept  that  there  had  been  a  number
    threatening phone calls between those letters and regarded that part of
    the claim as an embellishment (paragraph 43).  In summary therefore the
    judge found the Appellant had had no direct or  indirect  contact  from
    the Taliban between the dates of the two letters namely 2008  and  2011
    although he continued to work at the British Embassy and did not change
    his home address.  She further noted that he continued to work  at  the
    embassy and live at the same address in Kabul following the threatening
    letter of April 2011 until he left Afghanistan in July  2011.   It  was
    also a finding made that members of the Appellant's family who remained
    in Afghanistan have had no problems from the Taliban.

10. It is perhaps a little regrettable that  there  is  no  recent  country
    guidance case regarding interpreters or other such groups or  even  any
    policy or guidance note particularly in the light of the involvement of
    British Forces in Afghanistan and their relatively recent  removal  and
    the changing circumstances within Afghanistan.  Reliance on a case from
    Europe such as H and B  that  is  somewhat  dated  and  an  Operational
    Guidance Note of June 2013 is not necessarily the best  assistance  for
    the judge.

11. The position of interpreters in Afghanistan  has  been  in  the  public
    domain of late.  However the reports appear to relate  to  interpreters
    who were  acting  for  and  embedded  with  the  British  Forces.   The
    Appellant is in a  different  position.   The  Appellant  acted  as  an
    interpreter at the British Embassy in Kabul.  One imagines  that  there
    are a number of Afghani nationals acting as interpreters in  a  variety
    of embassies in Kabul.  It would be a reasonable presumption to suggest
    that there have been Afghanis acting as interpreters  within  embassies
    in the capital for  many  years  and  no  doubt  the  same  applies  in
    embassies throughout  the  world  and  is  part  of  the  international
    diplomatic picture.

12. It may be the case that the Taliban would be less  favourably  disposed
    to an interpreter working at the British or American Embassy as opposed
    to an interpreter working at the embassy  of  another  Muslim  country.
    The judge had noted in the case law and  background  material  provided
    that such interpreters could be regarded as low level collaborators but
    the material does not seem to focus on the diplomatic world.  The  case
    of H and B referred in large part to the Landinfo report.  That  report
    made reference to the Taliban for bidding  any  kind  of  collaboration
    with the government and particularly with foreign troops  including  of
    an economic nature.  There was reference to western aid agencies.   The
    Operational Guidance Note of June 2013 referred to Afghans working  for
    international organisations, companies and  NGOs.   Specifically  there
    was a reference to the United Nations.  Accordingly whilst interpreters
    working within the  diplomatic  community  within  embassies  does  not
    appear to have specifically been the focus of those reports  the  judge
    was nevertheless correct and entitled to regard  his  work  within  the
    British Embassy as meaning the Taliban would regard him as a low  level
    collaborator.  In that respect the case  law  and  background  material
    that was before the judge indicated that those regarded as such  within
    Kabul would be at low risk firstly because the Taliban appear to devote
    their limited aspects  in  the  cities  to  high  profile  targets  and
    secondly did not appear to have the motivation or the ability to pursue
    low level collaborators in Kabul particularly those who  had  given  up
    such work.

13. The question is whether the judge made a material error of law  in  not
    raising the risk threshold of the Appellant sufficiently high to  bring
    him within the terms of the Geneva Convention or the  ECHR  because  of
    his accepted role on one occasion as an informant.

14. The judge was plainly aware of this aspect of the Appellant's case  and
    indeed it had been instrumental in  the  findings  that  she  had  made
    between paragraphs 33 and 45.  In terms of those findings  however  the
    judge had noted at paragraph 34 that it was not just  himself  but  his
    family  who  were  instrumental  in  the  arrest  and  imprisonment  of
    neighbours who  were  involved  in  a  rocket  attack  by  the  Taliban
    (paragraph 34).  The judge had further noted that  the  initial  letter
    received by the Appellant from the Taliban  in  August  2008  indicated
    they were aware of his role as the informant.  However  she  had  noted
    that the Appellant had continued to work at the embassy and live at his
    home address in Kabul for a period of over three years from the date of
    that initial letter until he left Afghanistan.  She further noted  that
    he had family who remained in Afghanistan who had not been troubled  by
    the Taliban despite the fact that it appeared the information given  to
    the authorities was done not just by the Appellant but other members of
    his family.  In this respect the Appellant's brother's  claim  was  his
    involvement in such activity and that  claim  had  been  dismissed  and
    indeed he appears to have been returned to Afghanistan.   It  is  clear
    therefore that in assessing risk on return the judge had firmly in  her
    mind the two aspects of the Appellant's case  namely  his  work  as  an
    interpreter and secondly the role he and his family played in providing
    information against the Taliban.  In respect of the  first  matter  the
    judge was largely guided by the case law and country material and  made
    a finding not inconsistent with that material that the Appellant  would
    be potentially regarded as a low level collaborator.  However  in  line
    with the material it was found that that did not present  a  reasonable
    likelihood of risk firstly because such individuals did not  appear  to
    be the focus of targeting and secondly because the Appellant  had  left
    that job.  In terms of the  second  matter  which  is  of  course  more
    personal to the Appellant's own circumstances the judge was entitled to
    look at the  reasonably  lengthy  period  of  time  the  Appellant  had
    remained in Afghanistan both at the same work and home address  without
    incident.  She was entitled to look at the situation of his family  who
    had also been involved  in  the  provision  of  information.   She  was
    entitled to conclude as she did at paragraphs 44 and 45 in  respect  of
    the two separate matters that although the Appellant may have a profile
    it was not at such a level that demonstrated  any  reasonable  risk  on
    return perhaps  best  exemplified  by  the  fact  that  despite  a  not
    inconsiderable time and opportunity nothing untoward  had  occurred  to
    the Appellant or indeed his family.

15. That was a conclusion the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  and  was  a
    reasonable conclusion based on the evidence and material before her and
    discloses no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

16. I do not find a material error of law was made by  the  judge  in  this
    case and I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
