
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05501/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th October 2015                 |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     T K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Jennifer Tear
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. It has previously been found appropriate, given  this  appeal  involves
    asylum issues, that the Appellant be granted anonymity unless and until
    the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise.   As  such,  no  report   of   these
    proceedings shall directly, or indirectly, identify  the  Appellant  or
    any members her family.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    lead to a contempt of court.

 2. The Appellant in this case appeals with permission a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Murray promulgated on 12th November 2014  in  which
    the judge dismissed the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his claim for international protection.

 3. The  Grounds  of  Appeal  before  me  are  predicated  on  the  judge's
    conclusion that the Appellant had not established that he had  used  an
    alias in his dealings with the Respondent and others.

 4. The grounds refer to parts of the evidence  before  the  judge  and  in
    particular to the document at page  64  of  the  Respondent's  92  page
    bundle  provided  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   headed   "restricted
    reasonable grounds consideration".  In that document it is minuted that
    the Appellant was apprehended by Immigration Officers on 30th May  2012
    during an enforcement visit to an address  in  Milton  Keynes  when  he
    initially gave false details using the name F M and a date of birth 2nd
    December 1968.  The minute continues that further checks  revealed  his
    true identity as T K and this resulted in  him  being  served  with  an
    IS151A as an overstayer on the same date and detained.

 5. I am satisfied that  in  light  of  that  evidence,  which  is  in  the
    Respondent's bundle, the judge's conclusion that the Appellant did  not
    use such an alias is unsustainable. Evidence was  before  me  that  the
    HOPO on the day argued that the alias had not been  used.  The  reasons
    for refusal do not specifically take issue  with  the  contention,  but
    rather argue that it is  the  continuity  of  residence  which  is  not
    established. It is a matter of regret that the document to which I have
    referred does not appear to have been specifically drawn to the judge's
    attention in the context of the resolution of the dispute of using  the
    alias at all.

 6. In those circumstances I am satisfied that the judge's decision  cannot
    be maintained being flawed by material error of  fact   and  I  set  it
    aside, and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing, de
    novo with no findings of fact preserved.


Signed   E Davidge     Date 02 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
