
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05354/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3 December 2015                   |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr MANSALI SUSSO
                         (anonymity order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     no appearance
For the respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the respondent is a citizen of Gambia born on 14  August
    1976.  However, for convenience, I refer below to Mr Susso  so  as  the
    appellant and to the Secretary of State as the  respondent,  which  are
    the designations they had in  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Abebrese
    promulgated on 7 October 2015, allowing the appellant's appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent made on  8  March  2015,  in  which  she
    refused the appellant's claim for asylum,  humanitarian  protection  in
    the United Kingdom.

 3. Permission was granted  by  Designated  First  Tribunal  Judge  McClure
    stating that it is arguable that when the Judge at paragraph 11  states
    that he finds that the appellant's account is credible  both  from  the
    subjective point of view and an objective  point  of  view  he  did  so
    without supporting that by reference to the evidence.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's  appeal  and  made  the
    following findings. The Tribunal finds that the claims of the appellant
    in relation to his fear of being persecuted on the  basis  of  being  a
    member of a particular social group, in that  he  is  gay  to  also  be
    credible. The Tribunal finds it credible that the appellant states that
    he had never prior to him arriving  in  this  country  been  in  a  gay
    relationship in the Gambia. Since coming to the United Kingdom he  gave
    evidence that he has found himself more attracted to  men  than  women.
    The Tribunal finds it credible that the evidence that he  gave  in  his
    witness statement which was reiterated in his evidence at  the  hearing
    that he did have two relationships with  women  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom and that as a  result  one  of  those  relationships  being  an
    abusive one, he no longer became attracted to women.

 5. The evidence that he  has  been  into  serious  relationships  in  this
    country with two men namely  Kevin  and  Chris  is  also  found  to  be
    credible. The credibility of the appellant's claim is supported by  the
    impact of the revelation that was made in Norwich in the newspapers  on
    Wednesday, 26 December 2012. In this article his sexual orientation was
    revealed  and  this  has  now  become  widespread  within  the  Gambian
    community in Norwich and beyond. The appellant fears  that  because  of
    hostility which has been  shown  by  the  Gambian  authorities  towards
    homosexuals that he fears he would be  persecuted  if  he  were  to  be
    returned to Gambia. The Tribunal finds it credible that  the  objective
    evidence from the Gambia criminal record which has been approved by the
    government in October 2014 states that those found  to  be  homosexuals
    would be arrested and detained in custody and tortured and killed.

 6. The Tribunal as indicated above has been a finding that  the  appellant
    on the evidence that he has provided  subjectively  shows  that  he  is
    indeed gay. Furthermore, the Tribunal  does  find  that  the  objective
    material which has been provided  indicates  that  if  he  were  to  be
    returned to Gambia that he would indeed be persecuted on the  basis  of
    his sexual orientation.

 7. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the  following  which  I
    summarise. The Judge failed to give reasons  or  adequate  reasons  for
    findings on material matters. The appellant claimed to be at  risk  due
    to an imputed  political  opinion  and  because  of  his  claim  sexual
    orientation in that he claimed to be gay. Neither claim was accepted by
    the Secretary  of  State.  In  the  case  of  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) the Tribunal stated at paragraph  14
    that "it is, however necessary for the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    identify and resolve the key conflicts in the evidence and  explain  in
    clear in brief terms there reasons for preferring one case to the other
    so that the parties can understand why they have won or lost".

 8. The Judge's determination is devoid of any analysis of the evidence and
    provides no explanation for why he  found  the  appellant  credible  in
    respect of either of his claims. At paragraph 12 and  13  are  no  more
    than list of a series of  positive  credibility  findings  without  any
    explanation as to how the findings were reached.

 9. At the hearing neither the  appellant  nor  his  legal  representatives
    attended.   I   satisfied   myself   that   the   appellant   and   his
    representatives, Stewart & co Solicitors were properly served with  the
    hearing notice on 16 November 2015. As no explanation was on record for
    why the appellant or his representatives did not attend the hearing,  I
    heard brief submissions from the Secretary of State and proceeded  with
    the appeal.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

10. The Secretary of State in her refusal  letter  sets  out  many  adverse
    credibility findings for the appellant and his evidence. The  Judge  in
    the determination did not take into account the  respondent's  case  at
    all and did not resolve the conflict between the appellant's  case  and
    the respondent's case which he was duty-bound to do.

11. The Judge fell into material error because it is evident that  he  only
    took into account the appellant's case and found him to be credible  on
    both limbs of his claim without analysis of  the  evidence.  The  Judge
    took at face value the appellant appellant's  claim  that  he  had  two
    relationships with women whilst in the United Kingdom  and  that  as  a
    result one of those relationships being an abusive one,  he  no  longer
    became attracted to women. The Judge did not properly evaluate  whether
    an  abusive  relationship  with  a  woman  leads  a  man  to  become  a
    homosexual.

12. The Judge also took at face  value  and  stated  that  the  appellant's
    evidence was credible that he had relationship with  two  men  in  this
    country. He and did not set out the evidence  for  why  he  found  this
    evidence credible and whether the two men had attended the  hearing  to
    support the appellant's appeal.

13. I am ultimately satisfied  that  there  is  a  material  error  in  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge in that  he  has  failed  to
    give reasons for why he found the appellant credible in  light  of  the
    respondent's refusal letter pointing out many aspects of  the  evidence
    which went to the lack of the appellant's credibility.

  14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve  the
      making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision in  its
      entirety. In the circumstances, I am  of  the  view  that  the  proper
      course of action to take in this appeal in accordance with section  7.
      2 (b) (i) the Senior President's Practice Statement  of  25  September
      2012 is remit the  appeal  to  the  first-tier  Tribunal.  The  appeal
      requires judicial fact-finding and should  to  be  considered  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.

15. The decision in this appeal will be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    by any Judge other than by First-tier Tribunal Abebrese on a date to be
    fixed.

    Decision

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana Date 16th day of December 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge

