
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05740/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 October 2015                   |On 21 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     M T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopolou, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Turkey.  He  has  appealed  with  the
       permission of the Upper Tribunal against a decision of Judge  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal Cary, promulgated on 28 January 2015,  dismissing
       his appeal against a decision of the  respondent  to  remove  him  to
       Turkey, having refused his asylum application.

    2. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction  but  I
       make one in order to protect the identity of the appellant.

    3. The appellant arrived in the UK clandestinely on 7 January  2013  and
       he claimed asylum on 16 January 2013. His claim  was  refused  on  24
       July 2014. In the reasons for refusal letter, the respondent accepted
       much of the appellant's account. It was accepted he was a Kurd and it
       was accepted he had been arrested and detained on two occasions.

    4. The core of the appellant's  asylum  claim  was  that  he  came  from
       Gaziantep and his father supported a pro-Kurdish party. The appellant
       became interested in politics in 2012. While working as a shepherd he
       assisted members of the PKK by bringing them food  and  other  things
       they wanted. On 12 September 2012 the appellant's home was raided  by
       jandarma, who  searched  for  illegal  material  and  questioned  the
       appellant and his mother about the whereabouts  of  his  father.  The
       appellant was  taken  to  Sakargozu  police  station,  where  he  was
       questioned about his contact with the PKK. He was ill-treated  during
       the interrogation. After six hours he was released.  On  15  December
       2012 the appellant was stopped by jandarma while returning  from  the
       mountains. They said they knew he had had contact with the PKK and he
       was ordered to take them to where they were hiding.  That  night  the
       appellant was taken back to Sakargozu police station for  questioning
       about his father and brother and accused  of  helping  the  PKK.  The
       appellant was beaten for 30 minutes. The next  day  he  was  released
       through the intervention of the mukhtar. The appellant  was  told  to
       report every two weeks to give information about  the  PKK.  However,
       his family arranged for his escape from Turkey.

    5. Judge Cary heard the appeal on 23 January  2015  by  which  time  the
       appellant had turned 18. He heard evidence  from  the  appellant  and
       oral submissions from the representatives. In a detailed and thorough
       determination he set out the evidence and submissions made to him. At
       paragraph 33 he noted the respondent accepted the appellant had  been
       arrested and detained on two occasions and that he had  attended  one
       BDP meeting. He then reminded himself of the risk categories set  out
       in the case of  A  (Turkey)  CG  [2003]  UKIAT  00034,  approved  and
       developed in IK (Returnees - Records - IFA) Turkey  CG  [2004]  UKIAT
       00312. At paragraph 35 the judge directed  himself  to  first  decide
       whether the appellant was at a real risk of persecution in  his  home
       area in consequence of his material history. He went on to note  that
       the respondent accepted the appellant was detained on  two  occasions
       and ill-treated. Indeed, the respondent had identified these  matters
       as a potential risk factor together with his  Kurdish  ethnicity  and
       lack  of  a  Turkish  passport.  The  judge   also   accepted   that,
       notwithstanding the ceasefire between the Turkish authorities and the
       PKK which had come into  effect  at  the  beginning  of  2013,  there
       continued to be ongoing problems between the  PKK  and  the  security
       forces and, in  particular,  there  was  evidence  of  armed  clashes
       despite the ceasefire.  The  judge  found  that,  as  a  result,  the
       authorities  might  still  have  every  reason  to  investigate   and
       interrogate those who were suspected of involvement with or assisting
       the PKK. Even if the police who detained the appellant in  2012  were
       "rogue officers", as claimed by the respondent, there was nothing  to
       suggest the appellant might not be at risk  from  those  officers  or
       similar officers were he to return to his home area. The evidence did
       not suggest it was reasonably likely the Turkish state  was  able  to
       exercise effective control over all the security forces operating  in
       the appellant's home area.

    6. At paragraph 37, the judge concluded that he could not  discount  the
       possibility that the appellant may be at risk on return to  his  home
       area of Turkey. However, the judge went on to find that the appellant
       could safely exercise an internal flight  alternative  within  Turkey
       and he was not therefore entitled to asylum, humanitarian  protection
       or leave on the basis  that  removing  him  would  breach  his  human
       rights.

    7. At paragraph 38 the judge accepted that, not having  a  passport,  it
       was likely the appellant would be detained for interrogation  at  the
       point of entry while enquiries were carried out by  the  authorities.
       However, that did not mean he was reasonably likely to  face  torture
       or  degrading  treatment  as  the  questioning  would  be  aimed   at
       establishing personal particulars, any criminal record  and  possible
       contact with illegal organisation. Absent grounds  for  suspicion,  a
       person would be released after 6 to 9 hours. Beginning  at  paragraph
       40, the judge considered the evidence of the GBTS  system  and  found
       there was nothing to suggest there would be any  significant  adverse
       information relating to the appellant on the  system.  The  appellant
       had never been prosecuted and, on both  occasions  on  which  he  was
       detained, he  was  released  without  charge.  The  system  contained
       records  of  arrests,   which   involved   court   intervention,   as
       distinguished from the detentions  by  security  forces  followed  by
       release without charge. The appellant had never received any official
       paperwork and it was not reasonably likely that anything adverse have
       been  recorded,  particularly  if  he  were  the  victim  of   "rogue
       officers".

    8. At paragraph 43, the judge concluded there was nothing to suggest the
       appellant's passage through Istanbul Airport would not be  relatively
       straightforward. He went on to say  that,  even  if  some  additional
       enquiries were made to the authorities in his local  area,  he  could
       not see it was  reasonably  likely  that  any  information  would  be
       forthcoming,  particularly  given  the  Turkish   government's   zero
       tolerance  policy  towards  torture.  He  found  it  would   not   be
       unreasonable, let alone unduly harsh,  to  expect  the  appellant  to
       relocate to Istanbul. He was a fit young man. Whilst he would need to
       register with the local mukhtar, there was  nothing  to  suggest  any
       enquiries made by the authorities in Istanbul were likely to  produce
       any information which would put the appellant at risk of persecution.
       The judge reminded himself of paragraph 133(13) of IK and  found  the
       appellant had produced no evidence to suggest there were any  written
       records of his detention. Even if such information were available  it
       was likely the authorities would be prepared to accept the  appellant
       had not after all joined the PKK and  he  had  travelled  to  the  UK
       shortly after his last detention. The  authorities  might  well  take
       into  account  the  implementation  of  the   ceasefire   since   the
       appellant's departure, even though he  acknowledged  there  had  been
       problems with this.

    9. I heard submissions on whether the judge made  a  material  error  of
       law.

   10. Ms Panagiotopolou, who had represented the appellant at  the  hearing
       in the First-tier  Tribunal,  argued  that  the  judge's  finding  in
       paragraph 44 that  the  appellant  could  relocate  to  Istanbul  was
       unsustainable given the judge's positive finding that  the  appellant
       had perceived links to the PKK. She relied on paragraph  120  of  IK,
       which states as follows:

           "... we have full regard ... to the current guidance  of  UNHCR,
           which, so far as we have been informed, does not appear to  have
           changed since the  publication  of  its  last  official  general
           report in May 2001. Nothing we have said is in our view  in  any
           material contradiction to this guidance. It states

                "Kurds and members of Christian  minorities  from  southeast
                Turkey do have an internal flight  alternative  outside  the
                region ..... unless the case in question is of  a  prominent
                nature or is perceived by the authorities to  have  real  or
                alleged links with the PKK or other  main  Kurdish  parties.
                UNHCR considers that the group most likely to be exposed  to
                harassment/prosecution/persecution are  Kurds  suspected  of
                being connected with or sympathisers of the PKK...

                In the context of internal flight "it is essential  to  find
                out if Turkish asylum seekers if returned would be suspected
                of connection to or sympathy with the PKK. In this case they
                should not be  considered  as  having  been  able  to  avail
                themselves of an internal flight  alternative"  ...  in  the
                UNHCR's perspective,  if  persecution  emanates  from  state
                authorities then there is no internal flight alternative  or
                relocation. The situation may look different with regard  to
                village guards or people persecuted by non-state agents."

   11. Ms Panagiotopolou submitted that  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
       appellant could  exercise  an  internal  flight  notwithstanding  his
       positive  finding  was  perverse  in  the  light  of  the  background
       information. She submitted there  was  also  error  in  paragraph  44
       regarding speculation on the  part  of  the  judge  as  to  what  the
       authorities would think. There  was  further  speculation  about  the
       ceasefire.

   12. Mr Tarlow relied on the rule 24 response. He argued that, in essence,
       the issue was  whether  the  appellant  would  be  perceived  by  the
       authorities of having links to the PKK. He argued  that  the  finding
       made by the judge in paragraph 44 was open to  him  to  make  in  the
       light of the finding that the appellant was released  without  charge
       or judicial enquiry and there would therefore be no  records  on  the
       GBTS system. He argued the judge had directed himself  in  accordance
       with the guidance given in IK and was right  to  find  that  internal
       relocation to Istanbul was  safe  and  viable.  He  argued  that  the
       decision  was  sound  and  the  grounds  were  nothing  more  than  a
       disagreement with the decision.

   13. Ms Panagiotopolou clarified that  she  accepted  there  would  be  no
       records of the appellant on the  GBTS  system.  However,  on  further
       investigation, the airport authorities would discover from the  local
       area that the appellant had been suspected of having links  with  the
       PKK. He was fingerprinted and  photographed.  He  had  been  detained
       twice and he had  a  family  history  of  connection  to  pro-Kurdish
       parties. This would trigger the risk.

   14. I reserved my decision on the question of whether the  judge  made  a
       material error of law.

  Error of law

   15. Plainly the judge was familiar with the country guidance given in IK.
       However, having carefully considered the submissions made  to  me,  I
       find that he did not properly apply it in this case and therefore his
       decision contains a material error of  law.  At  paragraph  118,  the
       Tribunal in IK stated as follows:

           "In general terms however we consider that one  should  proceed,
           when assessing the viability  of  internal  relocation,  on  the
           basis that an individual's material history will in broad  terms
           become known to the authorities at the airport and  in  his  new
           area when he settles, either through registration with the local
           Mukhtar or if he comes to the attention for any  reason  of  the
           police  there.  The  issue  is  whether  that  record  would  be
           reasonably likely to lead to persecution outside his home area."

   16. In this case, the judge accepted  the  appellant's  account  of  past
       persecution in his home area and reasoned that it was not  reasonably
       likely that material records were kept so as to place  the  appellant
       at a real risk on return. He was correct to find there  would  be  no
       record on the GBTS system.  However,  the  issue  was  whether  local
       records would be kept which would trigger risk  once  enquiries  were
       made there. Of course, paragraph 118 of IK is only general  guidance.
       However, the starting position must be that the  appellant's  history
       would in broad terms become known to the authorities at  the  airport
       or  in  his  new  home  area,  in  this  case  notionally   Istanbul.
       Furthermore, paragraph 120 shows that the Tribunal found  that  Kurds
       with perceived links with the PKK  would  not  be  able  to  exercise
       internal flight. The Tribunal made it clear in  that  paragraph  that
       the country guidance it was providing was consistent with  the  views
       of the UNHCR as set out in the extract.

   17. As said, the judge relied on paragraph 133(13) of IK, in its  summary
       of generic conclusions, which reads as follows:

           "The risk to a specified individual in most  circumstances  will
           be at its highest in his home area for a variety of reasons, and
           particularly if it is located in the areas of  conflict  in  the
           south and east of Turkey. Conversely the differential nature  of
           the risk outside the area may be sufficient  to  mean  that  the
           individual would not be a real risk of persecution by the  state
           or its agencies elsewhere in Turkey,  even  if  they  were  made
           aware of the thrust of the information maintained  in  his  home
           area by telephone or fax enquiry from the airport police station
           or elsewhere, or  for  a  transfer  of  at  least  some  of  the
           information to a new home area on registration  with  the  local
           Mukhtar there. Internal relocation may well therefore be viable,
           notwithstanding the need for registration in the new  area.  The
           issue is whether any  individual's  material  history  would  be
           reasonably likely to lead to persecution outside his home area."

   18. I agree with Ms Panagiotopolou that this paragraph must be read  with
       the earlier paragraphs set out above and the  position  of  a  person
       known or perceived in his local area to have links to the  PKK  would
       be at risk throughout Turkey. The judge assessed whether there  would
       be records in existence in the home area which would be passed on  to
       anyone making enquiries but his conclusion that there would  not  did
       not take full account of the country guidance.  He  appears  to  have
       overlooked the fact the appellant was fingerprinted and photographed.
       It is unclear why the fact the officers who beat him up  were  acting
       outside their authority and in defiance  of  Turkey's  zero-tolerance
       policy would mean it was less likely that records were kept.  In  the
       eyes of the  authorities  the  appellant's  detention  was  justified
       because of his perceived links to the PKK.  Nor  does  the  fact  the
       appellant was only detained for relatively short periods and released
       without charge mean there is necessarily less likelihood  of  records
       being kept. The judge did not make an adverse finding  regarding  the
       appellant's account of the police visiting his family home  after  he
       left Turkey and the fact he had not kept his promise to report  after
       his release.

   19. In my judgment, the judge  compounded  those  errors  by  speculating
       about what attitude the authorities would take  given  the  appellant
       had not joined the PKK and had fled  abroad.  Given  the  appellant's
       family background, there is good reason to  believe  the  authorities
       would continue to regard him with  suspicion.  Finally,  the  judge's
       reliance on the ceasefire as an indicator of  the  authorities  being
       less likely to maintain  an adverse interest in  the  appellant  sits
       uneasily with his reliance  on  the  breaches  of  the  ceasefire  in
       concluding the appellant would be at a real risk  in  his  home  area
       (see paragraph 36).

   20. I do not therefore agree with Mr Tarlow that this  is  a  sustainable
       decision and the appellant's challenges are nothing  more  than  mere
       disagreement. The errors are  serious  and  it  is  plain  that  they
       affected the outcome.

   Re-making the decision

   21. The representatives  were  in  agreement  that  a  finding  that  the
       decision of Judge Cary should be set aside would make it  appropriate
       for me to go on to substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal's finding that the appellant is  at  risk  in
       his home area is not the subject of challenge.  It  follows  from  my
       disagreement with Judge Cary's reasoning on  the  issue  of  internal
       flight and applying IK that the appellant does not have  a  safe  and
       viable  option  of  relocating  anywhere  in   Turkey   because   the
       authorities are reasonably likely to learn of his perceived links  to
       the PKK as a result of enquiries being made with the  authorities  in
       his  home  area,  where  he   has   already   been   persecuted.   Ms
       Panagiotopolou handed me a bundle of recent reports on the escalation
       of tension and outbreaks of serious  violence  in  southeast  Turkey.
       This lends  further  support  to  the  notion  that  the  appellant's
       perceived links would be likely to lead to a  real  risk  of  further
       persecution.

   23. The appellant is a refugee and removing him  would  breach  both  the
       1951 and 1950 Conventions. He cannot also  qualify  for  humanitarian
       protection.



NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    his decision dismissing the appeal is set aside. The following decision
    is substituted:

    The appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds (article 3).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                               Signed   Date 15 October 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
