
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA054252015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th January 2016                         |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                             MR. FRANCIS KABUYE
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. A Walker:       Counsel instructed by
Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. H Kotas:     Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.  This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated on 28th September 2015 in which she
       dismissed an appeal against a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of
       State on 6th March 2015 to refuse the appellant's claim  for  asylum
       and to give directions for the removal of the appellant from the UK.




    2. The appellant is a national of Uganda.  The appellant's  immigration
       history is set out at paragraph [2] of the decision  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal:


             "2.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  5  November
             2007 with a six month visitor visa which expired on 10  August
             2007. The appellant did not leave the country but  lived  here
             unlawfully. On 5 March 2014, the appellant claimed asylum  and
             was served with notice IS1 51A on 5  March  2014  as  an  over
             stayer.  He  was  granted  temporary  admission   and   placed
             on?reporting orders. The  appellant's  asylum  interview  took
             place on 10 February 2015 and his application was refused on 6
             March 2015."


    3.  The background to the appellant's claim is set  out  at  paragraphs
       [15] to [21] of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I do not
       repeat that background here.  The evidence received by the Judge  is
       set out at paragraphs [23] to [53] of the decision.  The Judge heard
       evidence from the appellant and a number of witnesses called by  the
       appellant.  The appellant's evidence  is  summarised  at  paragraphs
       [23] to [38] of the decision.  The evidence of Mr. Dan  Ssekandi  is
       summarised at paragraphs [40] to [43] of the decision.  The evidence
       of Ms Katrina Woodrow is summarised at paragraphs [44]  to  [46]  of
       the decision.  The evidence of Ms Margaret Ferguson is summarised at
       paragraphs [47] to [50] of the decision and finally, the evidence of
       Mr. Herbert Bulindi is summarised at paragraphs [51] to [53] of  the
       decision.


    4. The Judge's findings of fact are to be found at paragraphs  [55]  to
       [89] of his decision.  It is perhaps useful at this stage to set out
       the approach that the Judge adopted as set out at paragraphs [56] to
       [58] of his decision:


             "56. The core of  the  appellant's  claim  is  that  he  is  a
             homosexual and fears that he will be subjected to persecution,
             if he is returned to Uganda.


             57.  I have attempted to decide whether the  evidence  in  the
             appeal is consistent and coherent and whether  it  establishes
             that the appellants' claim is genuine to the low  standard  of
             proof required in asylum cases. I  have  also  considered  the
             case of HT (Iran) v SSHD and HT(Cameroon) v SSHD  [2010]  UKSC
             31 that sets out guidance for judges to follow in a case  such
             as this. It states at  paragraph  35:  'The  first  stage,  of
             course, is to consider  whether  the  applicant  is  indeed  a
             homosexual. Unless  he  can  establish  that  he  is  of  that
             orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as member of
             the particular social group.


             58.   The  respondent  accepts  that  if  the  appellant   can
             demonstrate that  he  is  indeed  a  homosexual,  he  will  be
             persecuted in Uganda. I therefore find  that  the  only  issue
             that I  have  to  consider  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the
             appellant is  indeed  a  homosexual,  because  unless  he  can
             establish that he will not be entitled  to  be  treated  as  a
             member of that particular social group. Therefore I  need  not
             proceed to consider the next step of the test as laid down  in
             HJ."


    5. At paragraphs [59] to [84] of her decision, the Judge addresses  the
       various facets to the appellant's claim and the  evidence  given  by
       the witnesses.  I do not repeat the findings made by  the  Judge  in
       this decision but it is  fair  to  say  that  the  Judge  found  the
       appellant not be a credible  witness.   At  paragraph  [81]  of  the
       decision, the Judge sets out her reasons for finding  that  she  can
       place no reliance upon the evidence of Mr Bulindi that the appellant
       is a homosexual.  At paragraph [82] of the decision, the Judge  sets
       out her reasons for finding that she can place no reliance upon  the
       evidence of Mr Ssekandi that the  appellant  is  a  homosexual.   At
       paragraph [82] of the decision, the Judge sets out her  reasons  for
       finding that both Ms Woodrow and Ms Ferguson are not in  a  position
       to know whether the appellant is a homosexual.


    6. At paragraph [85], the Judge states:


             "85. Taking all the evidence in the round, I do not accept the
             appellant is a homosexual or his evidence that he  was  caught
             having an intimate moment with Robert  which  was  the  moment
             that he realised he cannot live in Uganda anymore.  I  do  not
             accept that he had a relationship with Robert in Uganda or Dan
             in the United Kingdom. I have found that the appellant is  not
             credible and that  the  entirety  of  his  evidence  has  been
             fabricated. I find that the appellant is not gay  and  I  find
             that this evidence that he is a homosexual  relationship  with
             Dan has been fabricated and is his last desperate  attempt  to
             remain in this country."


    7. The  Judge  went  on  to  consider  the  impact  of  s8  Asylum  and
       Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants  Etc)  Act  2004  and  having
       reminded herself at paragraph [88] of the need to undertake a global
       assessment of the appellant's credibility,  concluded  at  paragraph
       that even on the lower burden of proof that applies in asylum cases,
       she was not satisfied that the appellant is homosexual now  or  that
       he has ever been homosexual in the past, that he  fears  persecution
       or mistreatment or has been threatened by anyone by reason of  being
       homosexual or of being suspected of being one. The Judge found  that
       the appellant lived here unlawfully and wants to continue to  remain
       here for economic reasons.


The grounds of appeal


    8. The appellant advances eleven grounds of  appeal,  each  seeking  to
       challenge the Judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  given  by  the
       appellant  and  his  witnesses,   and   the   Judge's   conclusions.
       Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ford
       on 7th December 2015.  The  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
       whether the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside
       for legal error and, if so, whether the decision in the  appeal  can
       be re-made without having to hear oral evidence.


    9. At the hearing before me, Miss Walker handed up a  typed  transcript
       of the note taken by counsel for  the  appellant,  of  the  evidence
       given to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Kotas was unable to agree  the
       note of the evidence, but he did not object to the note being relied
       upon by the appellant. He was confident that he could deal with  the
       extracts that were going to be relied upon by the appellant.


   10. In addition, Miss Walker sought to introduce  a  further  ground  of
       appeal.  She submitted that in addition to the matters considered by
       the Judge in reaching her decision, the Judge should have undertaken
       an additional assessment as to how the appellant would be  perceived
       by the Ugandan authorities in light of his activities in the  United
       Kingdom.   Miss Walker accepted that that was not a matter that  has
       previously been raised in the  lengthy  grounds  of  appeal  already
       filed, and she had not in fact formulated that ground or  its  scope
       in writing.  Mr Kotas objected to the introduction  of  yet  another
       ground of appeal that he has  had  no  opportunity  to  consider.  I
       refused permission to amend the grounds of appeal  to  include  this
       further ground, that has not properly been formulated  in  a  manner
       that Mr Kotas could properly be expected to respond to on the day of
       the hearing before me.


   11. I first heard submissions from Miss Walker who  confirmed  that  she
       relied upon the matters that are set  out  in  the  application  for
       permission to appeal.  As I have said, eleven grounds of appeal  are
       set out.  I then heard submissions from Mr Kotas. The respondent has
       filed a response under  rule  24  dated  15th  December  2015.   The
       respondent opposes the appeal and Mr Kotas submitted that  there  is
       no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


   12. Before I turn to each of the matters raised by Miss Walker,  I  note
       the observations  made  by  Mr.  Justice  Hadon-Cave  in  Budhathoki
       (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


           It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier
           Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a
           case. This leads to judgments becoming overly long and  confused
           and is not a proportionate approach to deciding  cases.  It  is,
           however, necessary  for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
           conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms
           their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they  have
           won or lost.


   13. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chana spans some 22  pages
       and 93 paragraphs.  Of that, some 38 paragraphs  over  9  pages  are
       dedicated to the Judge's findings of  fact  and  conclusions.   Miss
       Walker  makes  a  number  of  criticisms  as  to  the  findings  and
       conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and I examine each  in
       turn.


   14. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge  was  entitled
       to conclude that the appellant is not a homosexual now, that  he  has
       never been a homosexual in the  past,  and  that  he  does  not  fear
       persecution or mistreatment and that he has not  been  threatened  by
       anyone by reason of being homosexual or of being suspected  of  being
       one.


   15. In that respect I follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  R  &
       ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that
       a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds  of
       perversity if it was irrational or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A finding
       that  is  "perverse"  embraces  findings  that  are   irrational   or
       unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact  that  are
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
       should not overturn a judgment at first instance,  unless  it  really
       could not understand the original judge's thought process when he was
       making material findings. I apply that guidance to  my  consideration
       of the decision in this appeal.


   16. I have also had regard to the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
       Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  IAC
       where it was stated in the head note that:


           "Although there is a legal duty to give a  brief  explanation  of
           the conclusions on the central  issue  on  which  the  appeal  is
           determined, those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision
           as a whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by
           the judge."


   17. I now turn to the appellant's grounds of appeal.  As  to  the  first
       ground of appeal, Miss Walker submits that during the hearing before
       the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  was  asked  a  number  of
       questions  about  the  sexual  relationship  between  him  and   Dan
       Ssekandi.  She submits that the line of questioning adopted  by  the
       Presenting Officer at the hearing was contrary to the  guidance  set
       out in the respondent's Asylum Policy Instruction: "Sexual  Identity
       Issues in the Asylum claim" which set out the approach to  be  taken
       to asylum claims relating to sexuality.  She submits that  not  only
       is the guidance relevant  to  an  assessment  of  sexuality  by  the
       respondent but it is also relevant to the  assessment  of  sexuality
       undertaken by a Judge. She accepts  that  the  line  of  questioning
       adopted was not objected to  during  the  hearing  itself,  but  she
       submits that it was wholly unfair of the Judge to attach significant
       weight to matters such as the number of times that the appellant and
       Dan had engaged in sexual activity, in reaching a decision as to the
       appellant's sexuality. She submits that the Judge erroneously  found
       that the Appellant was using the excuse of finances for his  failure
       to explain why he and Dan have not had sex more often.  Miss  Walker
       submits that the sexual behaviour of an individual is not materially
       relevant to the assessment  of  sexuality.   She  submits  that  the
       finding made by the judge was one that was not properly open to her.
         Miss Walker submits that the Judge does not  reject  the  evidence
       that the appellant and Dan  have  had  sex  once,  and  if  that  is
       accepted, the assessment by the Judge  of  whether  they  are  in  a
       relationship, is erroneous, because the Judge assessed whether  they
       are in a relationship simply by reference to the fact that they have
       not had sex more often.


   18. In reply, Mr Kotas submits that counsel for the  appellant  did  not
       take issue with the cross-examination of the  appellant  during  the
       hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and cannot now complain  that
       the  questions  asked,  were  inappropriate.  He  submits  that  the
       respondent's Asylum Policy  Instruction  is  nothing  more  than  an
       instruction that explains to caseworkers, how  they  should  conduct
       asylum interviews in claims made on the basis  of  sexual  identity.
       He submits that the Asylum Policy  Instruction  is  neither  binding
       upon a Judge, nor indeed a Presenting Officer, who at the hearing of
       an  appeal  is  seeking  to  test  the  evidence  of  appellant   in
       circumstances where the  respondent  has  already  made  an  adverse
       decision. He submits that the  appeals  procedure  is  one  that  is
       adversarial and that in any event, it is clear that the  questioning
       by the Presenting Officer in this appeal  was  not  of  an  explicit
       nature but went to the issue that was at the heart  of  the  appeal.
       That is, whether the appellant is a homosexual.   Mr  Kotas  submits
       that the findings made by the Judge were, on any view, properly open
       to Judge who has carefully considered all of the evidence.


   19. There is in my judgement, no basis whatsoever upon which a Judge  of
       the First-tier Tribunal can be said to be bound by the Asylum Policy
       Instruction that is issued by the respondent to her caseworkers,  as
       to how they should consider a particular issue.  In this appeal, how
       a caseworker should conduct asylum interviews in claims made on  the
       basis of sexual  identity.   To  do  so,  would  be  to  fetter  the
       independence of the judiciary and undermine the role of the Judge to
       independently  determine  an  appeal  on  the  evidence  before  the
       Tribunal.  Sections 1,  3  and  5  of  the  instruction  relates  to
       casework decisions, and the way in which interviews  are  conducted.
       A Presenting Officer at the hearing of an appeal is not involved  in
       an interview or casework decision.  He or  she  appears  before  the
       Tribunal to defend the  adverse  decision  made  by  the  respondent
       often, as here, on the grounds that the appellant's account  is  not
       credible.  The hearing takes place in an adversarial setting, and it
       would be extraordinary to say that the Presenting Officer should not
       be permitted to test an account given by  an  appellant  before  the
       Tribunal.  The burden remains upon the appellant, albeit to a  lower
       standard, to prove his claim.


   20. In my Judgement, the finding made by the Judge at paragraph [79]  of
       the decision that the appellant and Dan  are  not  in  a  homosexual
       relationship is one that was open to the Judge and cannot be said to
       be perverse, irrational or unreasonable,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.  The Judge had the benefit  of  hearing
       from the appellant and Dan and  of  having  their  evidence  tested.
       The appellant's first ground amounts, in my  judgement,  to  nothing
       more than a disagreement with a finding that was  properly  open  to
       the Judge.


   21. The second ground of appeal arises from what is said by the Judge at
       paragraphs [61] and [67] of the decision.  Miss Walker submits  that
       the Judge failed to  consider  whether  the  appellant  could  be  a
       homosexual notwithstanding the  fact  that  his  first  relationship
       might have been with a woman and not a man.  She  submits  that  the
       finding made by the Judge  at  paragraph  [67]  is  speculative  and
       irrational because the Judge appears to assume that in order  to  be
       genuinely a homosexual, the  appellant  could  not  have  a  healthy
       relationship with his wife, Gloria.   She  submits  that  the  Judge
       failed to recognise that it is quite possible for the  appellant  to
       have a  normal  relationship  with  his  wife,  but  also  to  be  a
       homosexual.  Miss Walker submits that it does not necessarily follow
       that just because the appellant and his wife  are  having  a  sexual
       relationship that undermines the appellant's claim to be homosexual.


   22. In reply, Mr Kotas submits that this is an appeal that  turned  upon
       the credibility of the appellant's account that he is a  homosexual.
       In considering that issue, Mr Kotas submits that the Judge was bound
       to take account of the fact that the appellant was married to Gloria
       in 2004, and the impact that the appellant's sexuality had upon  his
       relationship with his wife.  He submits that  the  finding  was  one
       that was again properly open to the Judge.


   23. The appellant's account of his marriage to Gloria and  the  findings
       reached by the Judge must be read as a whole.  The  appellant's  own
       evidence was that he did not enter into  a  homosexual  relationship
       with Robert before 2005.   The Judge notes at  paragraph  [61]  that
       the evidence shows that the appellant married Gloria  in  2004  even
       before he had had an  intimate  relationship  with  Robert  or  even
       before Robert knew that the appellant was purportedly in  love  with
       him. The Judge notes that this evidence demonstrates that the  first
       sexual encounter that the appellant had, was with a  woman  and  not
       with a man.  That is plainly in accordance with the  evidence.   The
       Judge found at paragraph [64] that she did not find it in the  least
       credible or plausible that the appellant would marry Gloria  because
       his uncle put  pressure  on  him  to  marry.   The  Judge  found  at
       paragraph [65] that the appellant is using the  family  pressure  to
       marry, as an excuse in order to explain why he married  Gloria  when
       he is supposed to be a homosexual.  The Judge sets out  her  reasons
       for those findings, and in my judgement they were findings that were
       open to the Judge  who  had  had  the  opportunity  of  hearing  the
       appellant and having the evidence of the appellant tested  in  cross
       examination.


   24. At paragraph [67] of the decision,  the  Judge  noted  that  on  the
       evidence, the appellant  had  a  healthy  sexual  relationship  with
       Gloria who did not even suspect that the appellant was a homosexual.
        Miss Walker's submissions disregard the comment made by  the  Judge
       at paragraph [67] that she takes  into  account  that  there  is  no
       evidence before her to suggest that  a  man  cannot  have  a  sexual
       relationship with a woman.  The Judge found that the evidence before
       her demonstrates that the  appellant  was  having  a  normal  sexual
       relationship with his wife, even before  he  had  had  a  homosexual
       encounter with a man because  his  first  homosexual  act  was  with
       Robert in 2005.   In my judgment, the findings  made  at  paragraphs
       [61] and [67] of the decision and her conclusion that those findings
       go to the credibility of the appellant's  claim  are  findings  that
       were open to the Judge and cannot be said to be perverse, irrational
       or unreasonable, or findings that were  wholly  unsupported  by  the
       evidence.  The  appellant's  second  ground  amounts,  again  in  my
       judgement, to nothing more than a disagreement  with  findings  that
       were properly open to the Judge.


   25. The third ground of appeal challenges the finding at paragraph  [59]
       of the decision that the appellant  is  attempting  to  establish  a
       homosexual relationship in Uganda  since  1999  when  there  was  no
       relationship at all.  Miss Walker submits that the Judge appears  to
       have reached that conclusion because the  appellant  was  unable  to
       give a coherent answer when asked about  when  it  was  that  Robert
       reciprocated his feelings.  However, she submits that the Judge  has
       failed to consider the evidence set out at paragraphs 8 to 11 of the
       appellant's witness statement in which the  appellant  set  out  his
       account of when he first became aware of his homosexuality  and  how
       he dealt with  that.   Furthermore,  Miss  Walker  relies  upon  the
       appellant's counsel's note of the hearing  in  which  the  following
       exchange is recorded:

             J:    there was a chap called Robert who lived in  Uganda  and
                  you fancied him? Is that right?
             A:   Yes sometimes he would show me he was also  attracted  to
         me.
             J.   So it wasn't - you didn't get together - you  just  liked
                  him and you weren't sure what his feelings were?
             A:   Yes
             J:    So then you leave in 2001, and not until  2005  that  he
         starts liking you back?
             A:   I was a bit confused, but when we had sex, then  that  is
         when it was confirmed that       he was interested in me.
             J:   So in 2005 both now know interested  in  each  other.  So
                  what was Robert doing in 2005?
             A:   A telephone technician.
             ....

   26. In reply, Mr Kotas submit that this ground again amounts to  nothing
       more than a disagreement as to the findings  reached  by  the  Judge
       that were properly  open  to  her.  He  submits  that  the  evidence
       established that the appellant was unable  to  properly  explain  if
       Robert reciprocated  his  feelings  towards  Robert,  and  there  is
       nothing unreasonable about the Judge's approach to the evidence.  It
       is plain from what is set out at paragraph [59] of the decision  and
       in counsel's notes of the hearing that the appellant was asked about
       whether the  feelings  that  the  appellant  had  for  Robert,  were
       reciprocated  by  Robert.   In  counsel's  notes,  at  page  5,  the
       following exchange is  recorded  during  cross  examination  of  the
       appellant:

             HOPO:    When did you first start staying at Robert?
             A:       I didn't stay at Robert's I would just go there. When
                      his brother was there wouldn't stay the night.
             HOPO:    So when did you  first  go  and  stay  the  night  at
             Roberts?
             A:       Around 2005.
             HOPO:    Was it only after you started your relationship  with
             him?
             A:       I had stayed there before. There was  a  relationship
             but not intimate.
             J:       have a relationship but not intimate  -  need  to  be
                      quite clear  -  when  would  you  say  your  intimate
                      relationship started?
             A:       I first slept with him on a  Saturday  I  will  never
             forget it, in 2005.
             HOPO:    Can you recall which month?
             A:       I can't recall. All I remember is a Saturday I  can't
             recall the month.
             HOPO:    Before you started your  intimate  relationship  with
             Robert did you ever stay
                      there for the night?
             A:       Yes I did
             HOPO:     Was his brother Kenny ever at home?
             A:       No, I was scared of him. He told me  that  he  worked
                      for the intelligence - Robert told me he  worked  for
                      the intelligence. Because I was attracted to Robert I
                      thought we might be found out
             .....

   27. The Judge notes at paragraph [59] of his decision that the appellant
       stated in his witness statement, that he was scared to  tell  Robert
       his feelings for him, due to fear of how Robert would react and also
       due to fear of his own safety in case he would tell  someone.   That
       is a fair summary of the appellant's evidence.  The  Judge  had  the
       opportunity of hearing the appellant given evidence and of observing
       the appellant's evidence being tested in cross examination.   In  my
       judgment, it was plainly open to the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant was not able to give a coherent answer.  In  my  judgment,
       the finding made at paragraph [59] of the decision was open  to  the
       Judge and cannot be said to be perverse, irrational or unreasonable,
       or a finding that  is  wholly  unsupported  by  the  evidence.   The
       appellant's third ground amounts, again in my judgement, to  nothing
       more than a disagreement with findings that were  properly  open  to
       the Judge.


   28. The fourth ground of  appeal  relates  to  the  Judge's  finding  at
       paragraph [60] that no  explanation  has  been  given  for  why  the
       appellant and Robert did not enter into  a  homosexual  relationship
       earlier, and waited until 2005.   Miss  Walker   submits  that   the
       judge failed to have regard to the explanation that is  set  out  at
       paragraphs 11 and 12 of  the  appellants  witness  statement.    The
       explanation is twofold. First, the appellant was  scared  about  how
       Robert may react, and second, the appellant suppressed his  feelings
       because of the social pressures and the environment within which  he
       was living.


   29. I pause to observe at this point that the approach adopted  by  Miss
       Walker, in seeking to mount a challenge to the determination on  the
       grounds that the Judge  failed to set out all of the matters set out
       in the appellant's witness statement, is wholly misguided.  That  is
       an approach that is positively discouraged.  As Mr.  Justice  Hadon-
       Cave observed in Budhathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT
       00341 (IAC) it is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier
       Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or  issue  raised  in  a
       case.


   30. In fact, the Judge refers at paragraph [59] to the evidence  of  the
       appellant as set out in  the  appellant's  witness  statement.   The
       appellant's claim that he was scared to tell Robert of his  feelings
       for him, due to fear of how Robert would react and also due to  fear
       of his own safety in case Robert would tell  someone,  does  not  in
       fact explain why the appellant and  Robert  did  not  enter  into  a
       homosexual relationship earlier.  That is particularly so, when  the
       appellant's evidence was that he had travelled from Rwanda to Uganda
       regularly, and that he had stayed with Robert before 2005 and whilst
       there was a relationship between them, it was not an  intimate  one.
       In my judgment, the conclusion reached by  the  Judge  at  paragraph
       [60] that the lack of an explanation goes to the credibility of  the
       appellant's claim is a conclusion that was open to  the  Judge  when
       she reached her final decision.


   31. The fifth ground of  appeal  relates  to  the  Judge's  findings  at
       paragraph [62] and in particular the  Judge's  conclusion  that  the
       appellant did not have a credible answer to the question of what the
       secret was, given that there was no sexual relationship between  the
       appellant and Robert anyway.  Miss Walker  submits  that  the  Judge
       fails to engage with the appellant's evidence of the risks that  the
       appellant would be exposed to, if he had made his feelings known  at
       the time. She submits that in reaching his findings, the Judge  does
       not consider the environment within which the appellant was living.


   32. The Judge found at paragraph [62] that she did not find it  credible
       that the appellant would be attracted to Robert and  not  have  been
       able to perceive whether Robert was attracted  to  him  or  to  tell
       Robert he was attracted to him for six years. The Judge also  found,
       on the evidence, that the appellant did not have a relationship with
       Robert before he married.  The Judge had acknowledged, at  paragraph
       [59], the appellant's evidence.  The decision  must  be  read  as  a
       whole and when properly read, in my judgement, the findings made  at
       paragraph [62] of the decision were open to the Judge and cannot  be
       said to be perverse, irrational or unreasonable,  or  findings  that
       were wholly unsupported by  the  evidence.   The  appellant's  fifth
       ground amounts, again in  my  judgement,  to  nothing  more  than  a
       disagreement with findings that were properly open to the Judge.


   33. The sixth ground of appeal relates to  the  Judge's  conclusions  at
       paragraphs  [63]  and  [64]  of  the  decision,  relating   to   the
       appellant's marriage.  Miss Walker submits that the Judge  fails  to
       engage with the evidence set out at paragraph 15 of  the  appellants
       witness statement. That is, the appellant chose to marry  Gloria  to
       hide his sexuality and also because she was living in Rwanda and  it
       was convenient for him  to  continue  seeing  Robert  who  lived  in
       Uganda.  Miss Walker submits that  the  conclusion  reached  by  the
       Judge at paragraph [64] is unreasonable and it appears to have  been
       reached on the basis that there is a lack of objective  evidence  to
       corroborate the account given by the  appellant.  She  submits  that
       corroborative evidence was not necessary in the circumstances.


   34. In reply, Mr Kotas submits that the Judge  has  properly  considered
       the evidence and it was open to the  Judge  to  reject  the  account
       advanced by the appellant, for  the  reasons  are  set  out  in  the
       decision.


   35. I have carefully read the paragraphs that  the  appellant  seeks  to
       criticise and the decision as a whole.  There  is  no  hint  of  any
       suggestion within  the  findings  of  the  Judge  that  the  adverse
       credibility findings made at paragraphs [64] arise from a failure to
       consider the appellant's account or a lack of objective evidence  to
       corroborate that account.  The appellant's account, as noted by  the
       Judge, was that the appellant had  married  Gloria  because  of  the
       pressure put upon him by his family to marry.  It is uncontroversial
       that the appellant did marry Gloria.  It adds nothing to simply  say
       that he did so, to cover his sexuality in  circumstances  where,  as
       the Judge  noted,  the  appellant  had  not  commenced  an  intimate
       relationship with Robert at the point in time that he married.   The
       appellant's sixth ground amounts, again in my judgement, to  nothing
       more than a disagreement with findings that were  properly  open  to
       the Judge.


   36. The seventh ground of appeal relates to  the  finding  at  paragraph
       [71] of the decision that it is incredible that the appellant  would
       not have thought that Kenny would look for him at the airport  given
       his evidence that he always travelled to  Rwanda  by  plane.    Miss
       Walker submits that the  Judge  proceeds  upon  a  mistake  of  fact
       because the evidence  is  that  the  appellant  routinely  travelled
       between Rwanda and Uganda by bus and not plane.


   37. In reply, Mr Kotas submits that the evidence as to how the appellant
       travelled between Rwanda and Uganda is far from clear  but  even  if
       one were to proceed upon the  basis  that  the  applicant  routinely
       travelled by bus and not plane,  the finding made by  the  Judge  is
       immaterial. He submits that even if  one  were  to  put  aside  that
       finding, that would not undermine the decision of the Judge upon the
       material issue as to whether or not the appellant is a homosexual.


   38. I have  carefully  considered  the  evidence  that  is  set  out  at
       paragraphs [31] to [34] of the decision and I accept that it is  far
       from clear whether the appellant travelled between Rwanda and Uganda
       by bus or plane.  For reasons that will become obvious, I accept the
       submission of Mr Kotas that even if one were to find that the  Judge
       proceeds upon a  mistake  as  to  fact  at  paragraph  [71]  of  the
       decision, that cannot undermine the overall  conclusion  reached  by
       the Judge as to the credibility of the appellant and his claim to be
       a homosexual.  In my judgement, on its own this error of fact is not
       one that in itself amounts to an error  of  law  that  affected  the
       outcome of the appeal.


   39. The eighth ground of appeal relied upon by the appellant  criticises
       paragraph [74] of the decision.  It is said that the Judge does  not
       give any or any adequate reasons for her conclusion that it  is  not
       credible that the appellant would ask anyone about gay clubs  if  he
       was still in  hiding,  as  he  claims.  I  reject  that  submission.
       Paragraph [74] of the decision must be read as part of  the  Judge's
       findings as a whole that are set out at paragraphs [57] to  [87]  of
       the decision.  There is a legal duty to give a brief explanation  of
       the conclusions  on  the  central  issue  on  which  the  appeal  is
       determined.  It is plain that  the  Judge  does  so  in  a  detailed
       decision in which she has considered various different facts of  the
       appellant's claim.   The  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
       decision as a whole makes  sense,  having  regard  to  the  material
       accepted or rejected by the Judge.


   40. Miss Walker took grounds nine and ten together.   She  submits  that
       the Judge erred in her findings in relation to the evidence given by
       Mr. Burundi, Ms. Woodrow and Ms. Ferguson.   She  submits  that  the
       Judge's assessment of the evidence of the witnesses was infected  by
       the findings  that  she  had  already  made  about  the  appellant's
       sexuality.  Miss Walker submitted  that  the  reasoning  behind  the
       failure to attach any weight to the evidence  of  the  witnesses  is
       inadequate, and the Judge simply failed to engage with the  evidence
       given by the witnesses.


   41. In reply, Mr. Kotas submits that the Judge  has  carefully  recorded
       the evidence given by the witnesses  and  properly  considered  that
       evidence before making perfectly valid  observations  at  paragraphs
       [83] and [84] of her decision.   He submits that it was open to  the
       Judge to attach no weight to the evidence of the witnesses  for  the
       reasons that are set out in the decision.


   42. I reject the submission by Miss Walker that the Judge does  not  give
       an adequate explanation for placing  no  reliance  on  Mr.  Bulindi's
       evidence that the appellant is a  homosexual.   The  Judge  carefully
       refers to the evidence given by Mr. Bulindi  at  paragraphs  [51]  to
       [53] of her decision.  At paragraph [81] of the decision,  the  Judge
       considered the credibility of the evidence given by Mr.  Bulindi  and
       in my judgment it was open to the Judge to conclude  that  she  could
       place no reliance on his evidence that the appellant is a homosexual.




   43. Similarly, I reject the submission by Miss Walker that the Judge  has
       failed to adequately consider the evidence of  Ms.  Woodrow  and  Ms.
       Ferguson as to why they genuinely  believe  the  appellant  to  be  a
       homosexual, and that the Judge has failed to consider the totality of
       their evidence.  As I have said before, it is  generally  unnecessary
       and unhelpful for First-tier Tribunal  judgments  to  rehearse  every
       detail of evidence or issue raised in a case.   The  evidence  of  Ms
       Katrina Woodrow is summarised at  paragraphs  [44]  to  [46]  of  the
       decision.  The evidence of Ms  Margaret  Ferguson  is  summarised  at
       paragraphs [47] to [50] of the decision.  The  finding  at  paragraph
       [83] that neither Ms. Woodrow nor Ms. Ferguson are in a  position  to
       know whether the appellant is a homosexual, for the reasons that  are
       set out is one that was properly open to the Judge.  Further  reasons
       for attaching  little  weight  to  their  evidence  are  set  out  at
       paragraph [84] of the decision.  In my judgment, the findings made at
       paragraphs [81], to [84] of the decision were open to the  Judge  and
       cannot be  said  to  be  perverse,  irrational  or  unreasonable,  or
       findings  that  are  wholly  unsupported  by   the   evidence.    The
       appellant's ninth and tenth ground amount  to  nothing  more  than  a
       disagreement with findings that were properly open to the Judge.


   44. The eleventh ground relied upon by the appellant contends that  there
       are numerous typographical errors and misrecordings of the  evidence,
       within the Judge's summary of the appellant's case and  the  hearing.
       Miss Walker conceded that taken alone, these matters are not  capable
       of establishing a material error of law, but they do  raise  concerns
       as to  whether  the  Judge  gave  the  appeal  the  anxious  scrutiny
       required.


   45. I do not burden this decision with all of  the  typographical  errors
       and slips that the appellant has identified at paragraph  51  of  the
       grounds of appeal, but in my judgement there is no conceivable  basis
       upon which it can be said that those typographical  errors  or  slips
       amount to an error of law, and even less so, ones that  affected  the
       outcome of the appeal


   46. This is an appeal which, as the Judge  correctly  noted,  essentially
       came down to  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the  appellant  is
       homosexual.  It was common ground that if the appellant was found  to
       be  a  homosexual,  then  his  appeal  must  be  allowed,  given  the
       voluminous background evidence on  ill-treatment  of  gay  people  in
       Uganda. There were no issues as to background evidence,  and  so  the
       simple matter was a lack of credibility.


   47. In my judgment, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  a
       lengthy and well-structured decision that  correctly  identified  the
       issue and  addressed  the  evidence.  The  reasons  for  the  Judge's
       decision that the appellant's evidence is not credible and that he is
       not a homosexual is multifaceted. There are a whole range of  adverse
       credibility findings  made  against  him,  including  of  course  the
       adverse credibility finding regarding his delay in  claiming  asylum.
       On any reading of the evidence and the decision,  it  is  clear  that
       there were a number of inconsistencies in the evidence that the judge
       was entitled to take into account. There is no hint in  the  decision
       that the judge had already made up her mind  and  did  not  carefully
       consider all of the evidence before her. She  looks  at  the  various
       aspects of the claim and the evidence given  by  the  witnesses.  The
       Judge carefully considered that evidence and concluded  at  paragraph
       [89]


             "89.     Considering all of the evidence  in  the  case  as  a
             whole, in the round, I find the appellant's  evidence  is  not
             credible in view of the matters to which I  have  referred.  I
             find that his claim that he is a homosexual is an invention by
             the appellant and a ploy to remain in this country. I  do  not
             accept his account of his homosexual experience with Robert in
             Uganda or his claim to be in a  homosexual  relationship  with
             Dan in this country.   I am not satisfied, even on  the  lower
             burden of  proof  that  applies  in  asylum  cases,  that  the
             appellant is homosexual  now  or  that  he  has  ever  been  a
             homosexual in the  past,  or  that  he  fears  persecution  or
             mistreatment or been threatened by anyone by reason  of  being
             homosexual or of being suspected of being one. I find that the
             appellant lived here  unlawfully  and  wants  to  continue  to
             remain here for economic reasons.


   48. Having very carefully considered  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge and the grounds rigorously advanced on behalf of  the
       appellant by Miss Walker, it is clear to me that the appeal had been
       fully  ventilated  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  at  the
       hearing.   The  Judge  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of   his
       sexuality.  The Judge was not bound  to  embark  on  a  sentence-by-
       sentence review of the appellant's evidence.


   49. The grounds relied upon by the appellant are numerous  and  lengthy,
       but they amount to a disagreement with findings that  were  properly
       open to the Judge on the evidence and do not disclose  an  error  of
       law affecting the outcome of the decision.


 NOTICE OF DECISION


   50. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error of law affecting the outcome  of  the
       decision.


   51. The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008


   52. No application for an anonymity  direction  was  made,  and  no  such
       direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 20th June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 20th June 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

