

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/05867/2015

                                                 AA/05876/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         |  Determination issued            |
|on 26 May 2016                           |  On 2 June 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                   S L A C
                                    S T C
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate; Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction.

 1. The appellants are husband and wife, Sinhalese citizens of  Sri  Lanka.
    An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal.  The matter
    was not addressed in the Upper  Tribunal,  so  that  order  remains  in
    force.

 2. There has been confusion about whether there are one or two appeals  in
    process.  The matter was clarified before us.  The second appellant was
    not subject to a decision which entitled her to a right of appeal  from
    within the UK.  Nevertheless, the solicitors then acting for  her  (not
    the present representatives) lodged a purported notice of appeal, which
    was accepted in error by the First-tier Tribunal.  At a case management
    review it was acknowledged that she  should  not  be  a  party  to  the
    appeal, and the FtT issued notification accordingly.  However,  in  his
    decision promulgated on 4  December  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Farrelly fell under the misapprehension that  there  were  two  appeals
    before him (although his decision is inconsistently worded,  and  reads
    in most parts as if only the husband were an appellant).

The claim.

 3. There is only one  appellant.   He  said  that  he  had  worked  for  a
    prominent politician who also engaged in serious crime.  The  appellant
    overheard this person admitting responsibility for murder,  and  ceased
    working for him, but later told him what he had heard.  The  politician
    arranged for the appellant to be detained on a fabricated suspicion  of
    involvement with the LTTE.  He was ill-treated but  later  appeared  in
    court and was released on bail.   He  did  not  comply  with  reporting
    conditions and then arranged to come to the UK as a student, travelling
    with his wife as his dependant.

 4. Although he arrived in August  2011  he  did  not  claim  asylum  until
    September 2013, after refusal of further leave as a student.

The respondent's rejection of the claim.

 5. The refusal letter is dated 19 March 2015.  It was  not  accepted  that
    the appellant had worked for the politician  (paragraphs  38-44).   The
    appellant said that he had been accused of helping the LTTE because  of
    photographs the authorities had of him associating  with  Tamils.   The
    respondent relied upon GJ and others v SSHD (post civil war: returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  Mere association with Tamils would not
    render the appellant of any adverse interest to  the  authorities.   If
    his powerful enemy had any interest in exacting revenge, the  appellant
    would not  have  been  released  from  prison.   Although  he  produced
    evidence of injuries, those were not  accepted  to  be  the  result  of
    torture by the Sri  Lankan  Army  (paragraphs  45-51).   The  delay  in
    claiming was adverse to credibility (paragraphs 52-53).  In any  event,
    the appellant had not provided evidence that he would be at risk in any
    category set out in GJ (paragraphs 54-57) or as a failed asylum  seeker
    (paragraphs 58-59).

The decision of the FtT Judge.

 6. Judge Farrelly  found  at  paragraph  37  as  follows.   The  appellant
    fabricated his claim of risk from a corrupt  politician,  based  it  on
    information gleaned from public  sources;  there  was  no  evidence  to
    confirm the claimed employment, and no reason why  that  would  not  be
    available; it was unbelievable that murder would be  discussed  in  the
    politician's office with  the  appellant  present;  it  was  even  more
    incredible that he would tell the politician what he had overheard;  it
    was inconsistent that at the height  of  his  claimed  difficulties  he
    would find time to get married, and  that  several  months  passed  and
    visas were obtained before he left the country, a degree  of  time  and
    organisation not indicative of  someone  in  fear  of  his  life.   "In
    conclusion, therefore, I do not accept the truth of this claim."

 7. At paragraphs 38-40 the judge accepted these contentions: the appellant
    had been abused by security personnel due to suspected involvement with
    the LTTE, notwithstanding that court documentation was  provided  at  a
    late stage and its provenance  was  unknown;  in  light  of  a  medical
    report, it was improbable that injuries had  been  inflicted  with  his
    agreement; in mid-2011 the appellant was detained  for  suspected  LTTE
    activities, was granted bail and then absconded.

 8. The judge turned to GJ and found that the appellant would not fall into
    a risk category.

The appellant's grounds of appeal and submissions in the Upper Tribunal.

 9. The  appellant  claims  that  there  are  inconsistencies  between  the
    findings at paragraph 37 and those at paragraphs 38, 39  and  40.   The
    conclusion that the appellant does not fall within the risk  categories
    of GJ is not consistent with the finding that he has breached bail  and
    was detained due to links  to  the  LTTE.   The  inconsistency  of  the
    findings is a failure to provide adequate  and  comprehensible  reasons
    why the account was found to have been fabricated.

10.  Mr  Winter  submitted  in  particular  that  it  was  crucial  to  the
    materiality of the error that on the findings reached in favour of  the
    appellant, he did fall within the categories of protection.   The  fact
    that he  is  not  Tamil  made  no  difference.   The  guidance  is  not
    restricted to Tamils or to Tamil activists.  There was  nothing  in  it
    which excluded Sinhalese.  Mr Winter, however, acknowledged that he was
    unable to identify any instance  from  the  case  report  or  from  the
    background evidence of any Sinhalese had been detained  or  ill-treated
    for  suspected  links  to  the  LTTE  in  the  post-civil  war  period.
    Nevertheless, he said that on the findings that the appellant was  ill-
    treated and that  there  were  court  orders  against  him,  he  needed
    protection and so was entitled to status.

Submissions for respondent.

11.  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted  that  the  appellant's  arguments  failed  to
    acknowledge the conclusions reached at paragraph 37, for sound  reasons
    in which no error had been alleged.  The crucial aspect of  the  claim,
    namely  the  connection  to  a  prominent  politician  who  caused  the
    appellant to be targeted, was fabricated. The decision had to  be  read
    as a whole.  It was  perhaps  surprising  that  the  judge  made  other
    findings in favour of the appellant, although these stood  for  present
    purposes.  The judge was entitled to find that once the  major  element
    of embellishment was excluded, and however the appellant had come to be
    suspected in 2011, there was nothing to raise his profile  so  that  he
    would be at risk on return.  The judge found that even if the appellant
    has defaulted on an obligation to appear, he has the  ability  and  the
    resources to vindicate his position lawfully on return.  The release of
    the principal arrest warrant was inconsistent with any ongoing  threat.
    There was nothing to suggest that he would appear on a stop list or  be
    listed as a terrorist.

The country guidance.

12. The essential findings of GJ, set out in its heading, are as follows:

      (1) This determination replaces all existing country guidance  on  Sri
      Lanka.

      (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed since
      the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri Lanka  itself  is  a
      spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents since  the  end
      of the civil war.

      (3) The government's present objective is to identify Tamil  activists
      in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and   to
      destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment  6(1)
      to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983, which prohibits the 'violation
      of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus  is  on  preventing
      both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any  similar  Tamil  separatist
      organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

      (4) If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services  there
      remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm  requiring  international
      protection.

      (5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a person
      at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the government now
      controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to a
      named address after passing through the airport.

      (6) There are no detention facilities  at  the  airport.   Only  those
      whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from the airport.
       Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities are  or  become
      interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in their  home
      area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
      a few days.

       (7) The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution  or
      serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
      otherwise, are:

           (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the
           integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they  are,  or
           are perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to  post-
           conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal
           of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


           (b) Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or  human
           rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised  the  Sri
           Lankan government, in particular its human rights record, or who
           are associated with publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
           government.


           (c) Individuals who have given evidence to the  Lessons  Learned
           and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the   Sri   Lankan
           security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan  authorities  in
           alleged war crimes.  Among those  who  may  have  witnessed  war
           crimes during the conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in
           May 2009, only those who have already identified  themselves  by
           giving  such  evidence  would  be  known  to  the   Sri   Lankan
           authorities and therefore only they are at real risk of  adverse
           attention or persecution on return as potential  or  actual  war
           crimes witnesses.


           (d) A person whose name appears on a  computerised  "stop"  list
           accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of  those  against
           whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest   warrant.
           Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be  stopped
           at the airport and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
           authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

      (8) The Sri Lankan authorities' approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
      intelligence, both as to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
      diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that many Sri Lankan Tamils
      travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that  everyone  in  the
      Northern Province had some level of involvement with the  LTTE  during
      the civil war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's  past
      history will be relevant only to the extent that it  is  perceived  by
      the Sri Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
      Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

      (9) The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led  "watch"
      list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is not  reasonably
      likely to be detained at the airport but  will  be  monitored  by  the
      security services after his or her return. If that monitoring does not
      indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise
      the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the  internal  armed  conflict,
      the individual in question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be
      detained by the security forces.  That will be a question of  fact  in
      each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by such an
      individual.

      (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of an
      individual's activities and responsibilities during the civil war, the
      exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of  the  Refugee  Convention
      and Article 12(2) of the Qualification Directive).  Regard  should  be
      had to the categories  for  exclusion  set  out  in  the  "Eligibility
      Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-
      Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR on 21 December 2012.

13. There has been no submission that the guidance has been  superseded  by
    any further evidence relevant to this appeal.

Discussion and conclusions.

14. Mr Winter sought to focus attention on 7(d), arguing that as there  has
    been found to be an arrest warrant for  non-appearance  extant  against
    the appellant, he will be on a stop list.   However,  we  think  it  is
    important to read  the  guidance  in  context  and  as  a  whole.   The
    government's focus is on Tamil activists in the diaspora,  working  for
    separatism and against the unitary state.  The appellant is not  within
    that scope, and is Sinhalese.  The sophisticated intelligence  agencies
    of the government will have no interest in him.

15. The guidance is not intended to suggest that anyone subject  to  extant
    court orders or arrest warrants, issued  in  any  context  or  for  any
    purpose, will be suspected as a  potential  terrorist.   Further,  such
    persons are not likely to have been released on bail.

16. Mr Winter referred us also to paragraphs 345 to 347  in  GJ,  regarding
    the interest of the Sri Lankan authorities  in  those  returning  on  a
    travel document; but there is no reason for the appellant to return  on
    a travel document flagging him up as a returnee.  He may return on  his
    own validly issued national passport.  He used one to travel here  (and
    it presumably is presently held by the respondent in  the  usual  way).
    He cannot  bring  himself  within  the  refugee  definition  simply  by
    unwillingness to return.  The question of forcible return on  a  travel
    document does not arise.

17. We do not find any error in the judge's conclusion that notwithstanding
    those findings which were favourable to the appellant, he did not  fall
    within a risk category.

18. That is sufficient to dispose of the appeal.

19.  The  findings  of  the  judge  are  at  first  sight  somewhat   self-
    contradictory, but not on close reading.  The central part of the claim
    was not accepted, for sensible reasons given at paragraph 37  in  which
    no error has been shown.  It is perhaps surprising that the judge  went
    on to accept that for some reason (not to be gleaned from anything said
    by the appellant, and otherwise inexplicable) he had nevertheless  been
    detained and ill-treated for alleged links to the  LTTE;  but  standing
    those findings, the  judge  did  not  go  wrong  by  finding  that  the
    appellant's suspected links were minor,  historic  and  of  no  ongoing
    interest.  They did not disclose any risk in terms of country  guidance
    and background evidence.  The judge was also entitled to find  that  if
    there were any extant proceedings,  the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    vindicate himself in the legal process.

20. When attention focused in course of submissions on the original  arrest
    warrant produced by the appellant, it  became  clear  that  it  is  not
    mentioned as an enclosure with the letter from the solicitor who  acted
    for him in Sri Lanka, and that he has offered no  explanation  for  the
    oddity of such a document passing into his own  hands.   This  must  be
    what the judge meant by his comment that there was  no  provenance  for
    the court documentation.  This appears to us to be an  indication  that
    there is  no  ongoing  intention  of  taking  any  action  against  the
    appellant.  Besides which, we note that despite what was said to  be  a
    terrorist charge, the appellant was released from custody  on  generous
    reporting conditions (once a fortnight) and when he failed to meet them
    no action was taken for six months.  Whatever might be  read  into  the
    guidance in general cases, the appellant's own history contradicts  his
    claim that the authorities maintain a real interest in him.

21. If there were any self-contradiction in the findings which  had  to  be
    resolved, there appear to be rather better  reasons  for  the  findings
    against him than for those in his favour; but  we  have  been  able  to
    reach our conclusions without revisiting those points.

22. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal, dismissing the appeal  of
    the first appellant, shall stand.

23. So far as any purported appeal by the second "appellant" remains before
    us, it is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.   This  decision  may  be
    taken as a notice of no valid appeal in that respect.


            [pic]


            1 June 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




