
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05075/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     E H
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paxton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. I refer to the Appellant in this appeal as the Secretary of State and
       the Respondent as  the  Claimant.  The  Claimant  is  a  national  of
       Afghanistan. On 6 August 2012 he  made  an  application  for  further
       leave to remain in the UK. The Secretary of State concluded  that  he
       was not a refugee and that his removal from the United Kingdom  would
       not breach  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under  the  European
       Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). A decision was made on 3 July 2014
       to refuse to vary his leave to  remain  and  remove  him  by  way  of
       directions  under  section  47  of  the   Immigration,   Asylum   and
       Nationality Act 2006.

    2. The Claimant appealed against that decision and the appeal was  heard
       on 13 July 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp. The  First-
       tier Tribunal dismissed the Claimant's asylum appeal but allowed  the
       appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       concluded that had she to determine the matter, she would  allow  the
       appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

    3. The Secretary of State sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Foudy.
       He found that it was not clear from  the  determination  whether  the
       First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal under Articles 3, 8  or  both.
       If the First-tier Tribunal allowed it under Article 3  there  was  an
       arguable error of law in that the Judge failed to  apply  established
       case law on health  cases  under  that  Article.  If  the  First-tier
       Tribunal allowed the appeal under Article 8, it was  not  clear  what
       factor's weighed in the Judge's mind when he decided that there  were
       exceptional features of the Appellant's case that justified  allowing
       the appeal. The lack of reasoning was an arguable error of law.

  The Grounds

    4. The Secretary of State argues that the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
       material error of law in allowing the appeals under Articles 3 and  8
       due to the impact on the Appellant's mental health  condition  whilst
       rejecting the claimed factual basis  for  the  PTSD.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal was not  satisfied  by  the  Claimant's  evidence  including
       whether his parents were deceased and whether  he  left  the  village
       under the claimed circumstances or that his brother died as  claimed.
       The Judge also found  that  his  pre-arranged  trip  to  the  UK  was
       probably paid for by his family.

    5.  The  Judge  had  accepted  that  the  Claimant  was  suffering  from
       significant mental health problems which appeared to be  linked  more
       to his immigration status than to his previous  family  history.  The
       Judge concluded  that  whatever  the  nature  of  his  mental  health
       condition,  the  inability  of  the  Claimant  to   access   adequate
       psychiatric care in Afghanistan would mean  that  his  removal  would
       breach Article 3. The Judge is said not to have  given  consideration
       to the fact that based on the Claimant's lack  of  credibility  there
       was no reason to accept that his family would not be able  to  assist
       him on return in accessing  the  modest  facilities  referred  to  at
       paragraph 86 of the determination.

    6. Furthermore, the threshold in mental health cases as set  out  in  KH
       (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 was a particularly high one
       and the Judge had failed to identify why the Claimant's case  was  so
       exceptional as to breach the UK's obligations under Article  3  ECHR.
       Further, the Claimant was found to have no family life in the UK  and
       it was not open to the Judge to find that the  limited  private  life
       enjoyed by the Claimant in the UK was sufficient to find a  right  of
       residence under Article 8 where Article 3 was not breached.

  The Hearing

    7. Mr Richards submitted that the Judge allowed the appeals  under  both
       Article 3 and Article 8. The Judge noted the Claimant's mental health
       issues but failed to explain adequately why  those  issues  caused  a
       breach of Article 3 in relation to mental health factors. The grounds
       of appeal rightly drew attention to KH (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2009]
       EWCA Civ 1354. This was a Claimant who had been found not credible as
       to the account that he had given but significantly  in  paragraph  57
       the Judge found that his transit was likely to have  been  rearranged
       and probably paid for by his family.  What  the  Judge  unfortunately
       seemed to have done was compartmentalise matters and  fail  to  carry
       over  adverse  findings  in  relation  to  the  asylum   issue   into
       consideration of human rights issues. The fact that the Claimant  had
       not told the truth about what had  happened  before  leaving  and  in
       particular what family he had there was a significant error. Once the
       Judge made the finding that his family had paid for his travel to the
       UK with the consequent result that he had family in Afghanistan  that
       completely changed the situation from the scenario envisaged  by  the
       Judge. That was relevant to his private life generally.  Clearly  his
       mental health issues would be different if he was being sent back  to
       Afghanistan with no support available than if he was returned to  the
       bosom of his family. In relation to his private  life  generally,  he
       had a private life here and had established  relationships  with  his
       foster carer and others and he  had  clearly  progressed  in  school.
       Nonetheless the appropriate  balancing  act  could  not  be  properly
       undertaken unless one factored in the  existence  of  his  family  in
       Afghanistan. The error by the Judge in coming to that strong  adverse
       credibility finding and dealing with human right  matters  discretely
       was wrong. The judge should have kept in mind that factual matrix and
       her failure to do so was a material error of law  without  which  she
       should have gone on to dismiss this appeal  generally.  The  decision
       should be set aside and re-determined.

    8. Mr Paxton submitted that there was no clue in the  grounds  that  the
       private life findings entirely were being challenged. The  notice  of
       appeal related to First-tier Tribunal's mental  health  findings.  It
       was unfair to say that the Article 8 decision  was  now  entirely  at
       large. It was not in the original grounds and it  was  an  ambush  to
       make those submissions now. Dealing with the errors of  law  and  the
       ones that were set out in the grounds, he conceded that there was  no
       transition from the findings made about the fact  that  parents  were
       not deceased but  the  Judge  did,  at  paragraph  16,  consider  the
       evidence that was before  her  in  the  determination  and  did  hear
       compelling evidence. Regardless whether the PTSD had come into  being
       because of the journey there was a professional diagnosis of PTSD and
       that was contained in documents at pages 106 to  113  of  the  bundle
       before the First-tier Tribunal. The Tribunal also heard oral evidence
       from a number of witnesses that he  was  suffering  a  mental  health
       issue. The Judge said the transit was probably paid for and  arranged
       for in advance. That was not a concrete finding in his submission  as
       the Secretary of  State  tried  to  characterise  it.  There  was  no
       reference to authorities on Article 3 but the  failure  to  list  the
       authorities, particularly N v UK (Application ECHR 26565/05), was not
       fatal as long as the Judge showed she was satisfied there was a  high
       threshold.  Paragraph 18 of the skeleton argument set out the reasons
       and factors she was party to when she heard to evidence not least the
       numerous suicide attempts and lack of  proper  facilities.  The  fact
       that the Claimant would be going back to the bosom of his family  did
       not deal with his PTSD. What had made a material  difference  to  the
       Claimant was help from psychiatrists. That ensured  that  his  mental
       health was catered for.  The facilities were described as  modest  in
       the First-tier Tribunal's decision. Kabul was characterised as having
       60 places for mental health patients. It had 30 million inhabitants.

    9. The author of notice of appeal suggested that  where  the  Judge  had
       only found private  life,  arguments  that  the  absence  of  medical
       treatment in a country of return could not be made whereas they could
       be if family life were engaged. That was not how the  court  intended
       GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA (Ghana)  and  KK
       (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 to be interpreted.  It  was  not  the
       ratio of the case.  In  appropriate  cases  the  absence  of  medical
       treatment may be an additional fact that could bolster an  Article  8
       case. It could not be the case that  Article  8  applied  only  where
       family life existed. I was asked to preserve the findings in relation
       to Articles 3 and 8 even if the Judge had erred in  relation  to  the
       mental health aspect. I was invited to  find  that  the  stand  alone
       private life element dealt with everything  comprehensively  and  was
       not affected by any part of the decision.

   10. Mr Richards submitted that the  Judge  dealt  with  private  life  in
       paragraphs 92 to 94. Paragraph 93 dealt with Article 8 and the  Judge
       had that in mind. The challenge was to the findings under  Article  3
       and under Article 8.

   11. Mr Paxton submitted that the consideration of Article 8 was brief and
       if I were to find an error of law it may be  prudent  for  matter  to
       reheard but restricted to those topics. The Judge did not go in great
       detail into the oral evidence.

   12. Mr Richards  said  that  he  was  content  with  either  remittal  or
       rehearing in the Upper Tribunal depending on the findings.

  Discussion and Findings

   13. In coming to my conclusions I have taken account of all the  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal, the grounds for permission to appeal,
       the submissions of both representatives and the  Claimant's  skeleton
       argument.

   14. The First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph 88 of  the  determination
       that there were substantial grounds for believing that requiring  the
       Claimant to return to Afghanistan would mean that  he  would  face  a
       risk of serious harm by way of inhumane or degrading treatment by way
       of  his  inability  to  access  appropriate  medical  treatment.   At
       paragraph 89 the Judge states  that  consequently  the  Claimant  has
       proved to the low standard that he should  be  afforded  humanitarian
       protection based on his mental  health  condition  and  the  lack  of
       appropriate  care  available  to  him  if  he  were  to   return   to
       Afghanistan.

   15. Paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules states:
       "A person will be granted humanitarian protection in the United
       Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
           (i)   he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of
           entry in the United Kingdom;
           (ii)  he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation
           2 of The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
           (Qualification) Regulations 2006;
           (iii) substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the
           person concerned, if returned to the country of return, would
           face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or,
           owing to such risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection
           of that country; and
           (iv)  he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian
           protection.
       Serious harm consists of:
           (i)   the death penalty or execution;
           (ii)  unlawful killing;
           (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of
           a person in the country of return; or
           (iv)  serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or
           person by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of
           international or internal armed conflict."

   16. At paragraph 90 the First-tier Tribunal  also  finds,  based  on  the
       reasoning in paragraphs 88 and 89, that "his  article  3  rights  are
       engaged due to the impact of his mental condition  and  the  lack  of
       appropriate available care in Afghanistan, as is reasoned in  respect
       of the issue of humanitarian protection".

   17. It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal's  conclusions  cited  above
       that the she concluded that the Appellant satisfied the  requirements
       of  paragraph 339 (c) (iii) of the Immigration Rules which transposes
       Article 15 (b) of  the  Qualification  Directive  (Council  Directive
       2004/83/EC) and that the threshold of ill-treatment  was  reached  to
       engage Article 3 ECHR. In coming to these conclusions the  First-tier
       Tribunal made no reference to the applicable case law in relation  to
       health and failed to direct herself appropriately.

   18. In N v UK (Application ECHR 26565/05) the Grand  Chamber  upheld  the
       decision of the House of Lords and held that in medical cases Article
       3 only applied in very exceptional circumstances particularly as  the
       suffering was not the result of an intentional act or omission  of  a
       State  or  non-State  body.  Further,  the  fact  that  the  person's
       circumstances,  including  his  or  her  life  expectancy,  would  be
       significantly reduced was not sufficient in itself to give rise to  a
       breach of Article 3. The same principles applied in relation  to  the
       expulsion  of  any  person  afflicted  with  any  serious,  naturally
       occurring physical or mental illness which might cause suffering pain
       or reduced life expectancy and required specialist medical  treatment
       that might not be readily available or which might only be  available
       at considerable cost.

   19. At paragraph 86, the First-tier Tribunal directs herself  that  "what
       needs to be considered is  whether  or  not  the  appellant's  mental
       health condition can be appropriately  managed  upon  his  return  to
       Afghanistan". She then considers the availability of  treatment.  The
       First-tier Tribunal found, at paragraph 87, that the  provisions  for
       mental health treatment were very poor in Afghanistan  and  he  would
       not be able to access appropriate medical facilities and care for his
       condition if he were to return there. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       does not direct herself  that  very  exceptional  circumstances  must
       exist. The absence of such a direction and the  absence  of  a  clear
       finding in this regard which  shows  that  she  was  mindful  of  the
       threshold required amount to a material error of law as it cannot  be
       said that she would have come to the same conclusion had she directed
       herself properly.

   20. The Secretary of State also impugns the First-tier Tribunals findings
       in relation to Article 8 ECHR.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found,  at
       paragraph 93, that the Claimant had developed a private life  in  the
       UK and that she satisfied the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE  (1)
       (vi) because, due to "his well-documented mental health condition and
       the  lack  of  appropriate  care  in  Afghanistan"  he   would   face
       significant obstacles if he were to return. At paragraphs 95  and  96
       she states that if she were to address the questions required  to  be
       answered in an assessment outside the  Immigration  Rules  she  would
       find that his removal would breach Article 8 ECHR.

   21. It  is  clear  that  she  treats  the  Claimant's  health  issues  as
       determinative of his claim under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration
       Rules.  The  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  cite   the   First-tier
       Tribunal's failure to consider her  prior  credibility  findings  and
       argue that there is no reason to accept that the  Appellant's  family
       would not be able to assist him on return in accessing the facilities
       available in Afghanistan.

   22. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Claimant's  asylum  appeal  and
       there is  no  cross-appeal.     The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
       Claimant's account not to be credible and did  not  accept  that  his
       father was killed by unknown assailants (paragraph  43).  The  First-
       tier Tribunal further  found  that  the  Claimant  and  not  provided
       sufficient evidence to show  that  both  his  parents  were  deceased
       (paragraph 45). At paragraph 55,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       accept that the Claimant left his village due to a fire at  his  home
       or that his brother died. At paragraph  57  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       found that the Claimant's transit to the UK was paid for in  advance,
       probably by his family.

   23. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  import  these  clear  credibility
       findings in relation to the Claimant's family into her  consideration
       of Article 8 under the Rules but treated the medical health issues as
       determinative of "significant obstacles". I  find  that  this  was  a
       material error of law as the continued existence  of  his  family  in
       Afghanistan was clearly a relevant consideration under the Rules. The
       absence of any reference to this consideration meant  the  First-tier
       Tribunal provided inadequate reasons for allowing  the  appeal  under
       paragraph 276 ADE.

   24. The First-tier Tribunal did not allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds
       outside the Rules but expressed a conclusion that were  she  to  have
       gone on to make such  an  assessment,  she  would  have  allowed  the
       appeal. It is clear from the decision that the relevant case  law  in
       relation to medical cases under Article 8 has not been considered. In
       GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA (Ghana)  and  KK
       (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 the Court of Appeal held that if  the
       Article 3 claim failed, Article 8  could  not  prosper  without  some
       separate or additional factual element which brought the case  within
       the Article 8 paradigm: the core value protected being the quality of
       life, not its continuance. The rigour  of  the  D  v  United  Kingdom
       [1997] 24 EHRR 423 exception for the purpose of  Article  3  in  such
       cases as these applied with no less force  when  the  claim  was  put
       under Article 8.  Although the UK courts had declined to  state  that
       Article 8 could never  be  engaged  by  the  health  consequences  of
       removal from the  UK,  the  circumstances  would  have  to  be  truly
       exceptional before such a breach could be established (paras 45, 85 -
       87 and 106 - 111).

   25. In so far as the First-tier Tribunal can be said to have allowed  the
       appeal under Article 8, the decision amounted to a material error  of
       law as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  direct  herself
       appropriately or make any findings that would be sustainable  against
       the backdrop of the relevant case law.

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material errors  of
       law in relation to the assessment  of  the  Claimant's  human  rights
       under Articles 3 and 8 ECHR and I set it aside. There was  no  cross-
       appeal in relation to the asylum appeal and the First-tier Tribunal's
       decision stands. In view  of  the  extent  of  judicial  fact-finding
       required in relation to the assessment of Article  3  and  Article  8
       both within and outside the Rules the appeal is remitted to the First-
       tier Tribunal. The Judge's findings in relation to the asylum  appeal
       stand and will be relevant to the First-tier Tribunal's assessment of
       the Claimant's human rights claim.

  Notice of Decision

   27. For the above reasons, the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
       allow the Claimant's appeal involved the making of an error  of  law.
       That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

   28. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  rehearing
       before a judge other than Judge Boylan-Kemp.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
