
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05433/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th January 2016                 |On 9th February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               md rasel sikder
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Habtemariam of Anglia Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge A W Khan of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 15th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of Bangladesh born  10th  October  1992
    who  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  that  he  feared  persecution  in
    Bangladesh because he had converted from Islam to Christianity.

 3. The application was refused  on  12th  March  2015  and  the  Appellant
    appealed to  the  FtT  pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 4. The FtT heard the appeal on  1st  July  2015  and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk if returned to Bangladesh, and therefore
    the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    It was contended that the FtT had erred by failing to assess  the  risk
    to Apostates in Bangladesh because the  Appellant  had  converted  from
    Islam to Christianity, and the FtT had only considered the risk of harm
    to Christians who had not converted.

 6. It was also contended  that  the  FtT  had  erred  in  considering  the
    evidence that related to an  attack  upon  the  Appellant's  mother  in
    Bangladesh,  which  the  Appellant  contended  was  a  result  of   her
    conversion to Christianity.  The FtT had stated that a translation of a
    newspaper article could not be relied upon, and it was  submitted  that
    the FtT should have considered the original newspaper article which was
    in possession of the Respondent's representative, and in addition there
    was a Tribunal interpreter present  at  the  hearing,  who  could  have
    assisted with the translation.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nightingale of the FtT in the
    following terms;

         "2.  The grounds argue that the Judge erred in considering the risk
             to the Appellant as a Christian rather than as  a  convert  to
             that faith.  The Judge also erred in failing  to  request  the
             original of a document from the Respondent that he  could  not
             read or to avail himself of the assistance of the  interpreter
             with any concern about translation.

         3.   The Judge made a factual finding  at  paragraph  16  that  the
             Appellant had been  a  Muslim.   He  also  accepted  that  the
             Appellant had converted to Christianity.  It is arguable  that
             he fell into error by failing to consider the risk  to  Muslim
             converts to Christianity and limiting his consideration to the
             risk to Christians generally.

         4.   It is also arguable (from paragraph 18) that the Judge  should
             have   requested   the   original   newspaper   article,   and
             translation, from  the  Respondent's  file  at  court  if  the
             Tribunal's copy was "blurred".  It is arguable that the  Judge
             should have addressed any concerns with the translation by use
             of the interpreter present at court.  It is arguable that  the
             Judge should also have requested the  Respondent  produce  the
             hospital certificate referred to in the refusal letter  if  it
             had not been included in the Respondent's bundle.

         5.   The grounds disclose arguable errors of law and permission  is
             granted on all grounds pleaded."

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 contending that the FtT decision disclosed no error of  law.   The
    Respondent noted that the FtT had found at paragraph 25 that Christians
    are not, in general, at risk of persecution, and had found at paragraph
    26 that  a  sufficiency  of  protection  existed  in  Bangladesh.   The
    Respondent contended that the grounds were a disagreement with findings
    made by the FtT.

 9. It was argued that it was for the Appellant to establish his claim, and
    the FtT was not obliged to seek to clarify  the  quality  of  documents
    placed before it.  The Respondent noted that  the  Appellant  had  been
    legally represented.

10. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

11. At the hearing  before  me  Mr  Habtemariam  relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal and submitted
    that the FtT had  erred  by  considering  the  risk  to  Christians  in
    Bangladesh, rather than considering the  risk  to  Christians  who  had
    converted from Islam, and therefore would be regarded as Apostates.

12. Mr Habtemariam submitted that  the  FtT  had  considered  the  evidence
    unfairly and had not considered the evidence in the round, and had  not
    applied anxious scrutiny.

13. If the FtT had concerns about the translation of the newspaper article,
    then the assistance  of  the  Tribunal  interpreter  should  have  been
    requested.  The FtT should also have looked at the  original  newspaper
    article, which (according to paragraph 18  of  the  FtT  decision)  was
    confirmed to be in the Home Office file.

The Respondent's Submissions

14. Mr Kandola commented that the file that he had contained a copy of  the
    newspaper but not the original though this was not his main submission.
     Mr Kandola relied upon the rule 24 response and noted the finding made
    by the FtT at paragraph 20 that there was no credible evidence that the
    Appellant's father had threatened him and submitted  that  this  was  a
    fundamental finding.

15. It was submitted that the FtT had considered evidence about individuals
    who  had  converted  to  Christianity,  and  Mr  Kandola  referred   to
    paragraphs 23 and 24 of the decision.

16. I was asked to note  that  the  FtT  had  considered  the  Respondent's
    Operational Guidance Note on Bangladesh, and the Bangladesh Country  of
    Information Report, and Christian converts were not regarded  as  being
    in a particular risk category in those documents.  Mr  Kandola  pointed
    out that the FtT had noted the absence  of  independent  evidence  from
    human rights organisations.

17. Mr Kandola stated that the Respondent's position was that the Appellant
    had always been a Christian, and therefore had not converted.

18. In relation to the newspaper article, it was submitted that the FtT was
    entitled to comment upon the quality of translation, and  that  it  was
    not the role of the Tribunal interpreter, to translate  documents.   Mr
    Kandola submitted that there  appeared  to  be  no  evidence  that  the
    Appellant's representative at  the  hearing  had  requested  either  an
    adjournment to obtain a further translation, nor  had  a  request  been
    made to use the Tribunal interpreter to translate the document.  I  was
    asked to conclude that the decision of the FtT should stand as no error
    of law was disclosed.

The Appellant's Response

19. Mr Habtemariam pointed out that the FtT had confirmed that the original
    newspaper article was in the Home Office file, and this  was  confirmed
    in paragraph 18 of the FtT decision.   It  was  disputed  that  it  had
    always been the Respondent's position that the  Appellant  had  been  a
    Christian rather than a convert to Christianity, as this had  not  been
    stated in the Respondent's reasons for refusal dated 12th March 2015.

20. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

21. Dealing with the first ground of appeal, I do not  find  that  the  FtT
    materially erred by failing to consider the risk to Christian converts,
    and limiting consideration of risk to Christians who were not converts.

22. The FtT was aware of  the  basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
    converted from Islam to Christianity.  This is  apparent  from  reading
    the decision  as  a  whole,  and  the  FtT  specifically  recorded  the
    following as the last sentence of paragraph 2;

         "The Appellant feared that if he  were  removed  to  Bangladesh  he
         would be killed because of his conversion."

23. In my view the FtT considered all the material submitted on  behalf  of
    the Appellant, and those documents are referred to at paragraph 5.  The
    FtT considers background evidence at paragraphs 21-25.  The absence  of
    country guidance case law on the issue of risk is noted.  It  is  clear
    that the FtT comprehensively assessed  the  Operational  Guidance  Note
    issued in September 2013, which deals with the  treatment  of  minority
    religious groups and the FtT was entitled to conclude at  paragraph  21
    that;

         "... there is no evidence that in general, religious minorities are
         at risk of persecution at the hands of the Bangladeshi  authorities
         because of their religious belief.  However, there are incidents of
         violent  attacks  against  religious  minorities   in   which   the
         government has been slow to respond and has not  provided  adequate
         protection to the affected communities."

24. At paragraph 22 the FtT went on to analyse the  Bangladesh  Country  of
    Information Report of 31st  August  2013  in  relation  to  freedom  of
    religion, and  also  specifically  considered  the  articles  contained
    within the Appellant's bundle, in which some  examples  were  given  of
    people being beaten for converting  to  Christianity.   This  makes  it
    apparent that the FtT did consider the position of converts.

25. The FtT  went  on,  at  paragraph  24,  to  note  that  there  were  no
    independent reports from Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch,  or
    a US State Department Report.  The FtT had to weigh up what  weight  to
    attach to the articles that had been produced.

26. The weight to be attached to evidence is to be decided by the  Tribunal
    considering that evidence.  I  do  not  find  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    neglecting to consider material independent  background  evidence.   Mr
    Habtemariam was unable  to  direct  me  to  any  independent  objective
    evidence in relation to the risk to Christian converts,  that  had  not
    been considered by the FtT.  The FtT found at paragraph 25  that  there
    were incidents  affecting  Christians  in  Bangladesh,  but  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show sustained and systematic persecution.  In
    my view the FtT was entitled to reach the conclusion that Christians in
    general were not at real risk of persecution.  The  FtT  had  found  at
    paragraph 20 that there was no credible evidence that  the  Appellant's
    father had threatened him, and that finding has not been challenged.

27. I turn to the second ground of appeal which relates to the treatment of
    the FtT of evidence submitted to prove that the Appellant's mother  was
    attacked as a result of conversion to Christianity.  I  find  that  the
    FtT, although not making direct reference to Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT
    00439, applied the well-known principles in that case, which  are  that
    in asylum and human rights cases it is for an  individual  claimant  to
    show that a document on which he seeks to rely can be relied upon,  and
    a decision-maker should consider whether a document  is  one  on  which
    reliance should properly be placed after looking at all the evidence in
    the round.

28. The FtT confirmed that the original newspaper was  not  inspected,  but
    this is not an error of law, as the original newspaper was not  written
    in English.  The FtT observed that the  translation  of  the  newspaper
    article at page 11 could not be relied upon, and it would  appear  that
    the translation does not comply with Practice Direction 8.2(b)  of  the
    IAC Practice Directions, which stipulate that a typed translation of  a
    document signed by the translator, and certifying that the  translation
    is accurate, must be provided, together with details  of  the  identity
    and qualifications of the translator.  I note that there appears to  be
    another translation of the newspaper article at G3 of the  Respondent's
    bundle, which is handwritten,  is  not  identical  to  the  translation
    contained within the Appellant's bundle, and which also does not comply
    with the Practice Direction.  Therefore the FtT was entitled to comment
    upon the quality of the translation, and it is not incumbent  upon  the
    FtT of its own volition to  request  the  assistance  of  the  Tribunal
    interpreter to translate documents.

29. The grant of permission refers to a hospital  certificate  and  I  find
    that the FtT erred in paragraph 18 in finding there was no evidence  to
    show that the Appellant's  mother  sustained  injuries  which  required
    hospital treatment.  There is reference  in  the  Respondent's  refusal
    decision to an "illness certificate" of the Appellant's  mother  having
    been produced and a copy of  this  document  was  in  the  Respondent's
    bundle which was before the FtT, at  D1.   It  is  a  handwritten  note
    stating that the Appellant's mother was admitted to  hospital  on  25th
    November 2014.

30. Although the FtT erred in saying there was no evidence, I do  not  find
    this to be a material error, as the conclusion of the FtT at  paragraph
    19 was not that the Appellant's mother had not suffered some  injuries,
    but that the evidence did not demonstrate that she was the victim of an
    attack because she had converted to Christianity.  That finding, in  my
    view, was open to the FtT to make.

31. In any event, the FtT went on to consider sufficiency of protection  in
    Bangladesh, and found  at  paragraph  26,  that  objective  information
    showed that the authorities do act, and that the evidence presented did
    not prove that a sufficiency of protection as a whole is not  available
    in Bangladesh.

32. In conclusion, I  consider  that  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal, and the grant of permission, evidence a disagreement  with  the
    findings made by the FtT, but for  the  reasons  given  above,  do  not
    disclose a material error of law.  Therefore the decision  of  the  FtT
    must stand.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.  I do not set aside the decision.   The  appeal  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date: 29th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date: 29th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

