
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05133/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th September 2016               |On 2nd November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                    D A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Rooney of Khirri Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of  Zimbabwe  born  on  25th  October
    1955.  She last arrived in the UK on 30th May 2010 when she  was  given
    leave to enter as a family visitor  until  25th  September  2010.   The
    Appellant overstayed, and applied for asylum  on  13th  November  2012.
    That application was refused for the reasons given in the  Respondent's
    letter of 6th March 2015.  The Appellant appealed, and her  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shergill  (the  Judge)  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 4th November 2015.  He decided to  allow  the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds for  the  reasons  given  in  his  Decision  dated  17th
    November 2015.  The Respondent sought leave to  appeal  that  Decision,
    and on 17th December 2015 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Appellant claimed to fear persecution on return to  Zimbabwe  as  a
    lesbian.  The Judge allowed the appeal because he found  the  Appellant
    to be entirely credible.  He was satisfied that  the  Appellant  had  a
    relative resident in Zimbabwe named D who was a senior  member  of  the
    police and a Justice of the Peace.  He was also related to and a member
    of the same clan as President Mugabe.  The Judge  found  that  D  would
    learn of the Appellant's return to Zimbabwe, and that the  State  would
    not protect the Appellant from him.  Further, it would not be safe  for
    the Appellant to relocate elsewhere in Zimbabwe, and in particular that
    it would not be reasonable to expect her to relocate to Bulawayo.

 4. At the hearing, Mrs Aboni argued that the Judge had  erred  in  law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  In considering whether it was safe for  the
    Appellant to return to Zimbabwe, and in particular whether she would be
    safe in any part of that country, the Judge had  failed  to  take  into
    account the decision in the Country Guidance case of  LZ  (Homosexuals)
    Zimbabwe CG [2011] UKUT 487 (IAC).  Further, the Judge  had  failed  to
    give sufficient reasons for his decision.  In particular, the Judge had
    failed to engage with the  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had  had  no
    contact with D since 2008; that she had experienced no problems in  the
    two years prior to leaving Zimbabwe; and that  she  had  been  able  to
    leave Zimbabwe unhindered.  The Judge's finding that D would be able to
    discover the Appellant's whereabouts in Zimbabwe  was  speculative  and
    unsupported by the objective evidence.  The Judge had  failed  to  take
    into account the fact that the  Appellant's  family  in  the  UK  would
    assist her financially if the Appellant were to return to Zimbabwe  and
    relocate there.

 5. Finally, Mrs Aboni argued that the Judge had  failed  to  consider  the
    issue of relocation properly.  LZ indicated that there was no  risk  to
    homosexuals throughout Zimbabwe, and that  there  were  areas  such  as
    Bulawayo where there was greater tolerance of lesbians.

 6. In response Ms Rooney submitted that there were no such errors of  law.
    The decision in LZ had been referred to at the  original  hearing,  and
    the Judge's decision was in accordance with paragraph 116 thereof.  The
    Judge had  considered  the  personal  circumstances  of  the  Appellant
    extensively between paragraphs 25 and 40 of the Decision.  He had  been
    right to take into account the position of D in Zimbabwe.

 7. I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge which  I  therefore
    do  not  set  aside.   It  is  regrettable  that  the  Judge  did   not
    specifically refer to the Country Guidance decision of LZ  particularly
    as it is so relevant to the issues before him, but the Judge did  write
    at paragraph 38 of the Decision that he had taken into account "all  of
    the case law" and therefore he may well have considered the decision in
    LZ.  In any event, his failure to refer to LZ is not a  material  error
    of law because as Ms Rooney argued, his decision is in accordance  with
    it.  It is true that in LZ it was found that in Zimbabwe lesbianism  is
    not criminalised, and  that  there  is  no  general  risk  to  gays  or
    lesbians.   However,  the  decision  goes  on  to  say  that  "Personal
    circumstances place some gays and lesbians at risk."   It  is  apparent
    from the Decision that it was on this basis that the Judge allowed  the
    appeal.  The Judge dealt with the issue of risk on return at paragraphs
    25 to 32 inclusive  of  the  Decision  and  found  that  owing  to  the
    Appellant's relationship with D, and his position in Zimbabwe,  that  D
    would learn of the Appellant's return to Zimbabwe  and  persecute  her.
    In reaching that conclusion, the Judge was aware of the evidence of the
    Appellant's history in Zimbabwe  before  coming  to  the  UK,  and  any
    financial assistance the Appellant might receive from the UK should she
    return to Zimbabwe.

 8. In my view the Judge considered the issue of relocation  adequately  at
    paragraphs 33 to 38 of the Decision.  There he  explains  his  decision
    that it would be unreasonable by way of being unduly  harsh  to  expect
    the Appellant to relocate in Zimbabwe, particularly to  Bulawayo  which
    was referred to in LZ as being more  tolerant.   The  decision  of  the
    Judge in this respect is explained to my satisfaction.

 9. I therefore find no error of law in the decision of the Judge, and as a
    consequence I do not set aside that decision.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside that decision.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
