
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05877/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2015                          |On 8th December 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   MRS S C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Capel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cockrill, promulgated on 3rd August 2015, following a hearing  at
    Taylor House on  7th  July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who subsequently  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of China.  She appeals against the  decision
    of the Respondent Secretary of State dated 28th July 2014, refusing her
    asylum under paragraph 336 of HC 395.  She left China in October  2007,
    and flew to Moscow, staying there for ten days, before  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom.  She made her asylum application some five years  later
    on 16th November 2012 and she was interviewed in the normal manner.  On
    28th April 2014, she married in the United Kingdom and has had two sons
    born on 8th January 2013 and 16th March 2014.   By  letter  dated  22nd
    December 2012, the Appellant's asylum application had been refused  two
    years earlier.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she was born in Zhe Jiang  Province,  and
    is an only child, and her parents  held  religious  meetings  in  their
    home, which were frequented by other  individuals,  and  the  Appellant
    herself read the Bible every day.  The particular church to  which  she
    belongs is the Shouwang Church in China.  The Appellant  described  how
    she accompanied her father on Sunday to pick up other  people  to  come
    and join  their  religious  gathering.   Her  father  was  involved  in
    spreading the faith by going door to door and speaking about the  Bible
    with people.

 4. In January  2007,  however,  the  police  forced  their  way  into  the
    Appellant's father's property, kicking down the door, and informing the
    people present that they were at an illegal gathering, so that a number
    were arrested and taken to  the  police  station.   The  Appellant  was
    locked up for 24 hours.  She was warned not  to  repeat  this  type  of
    behaviour.  She was not mistreated during that first detention.   There
    was  no  charge  which  followed.   She  was   released.    She   still
    participated with the house gatherings as previously, nevertheless.

 5. There was, however, a second occasion when the Appellant  was  arrested
    again in May 2007.  On this occasion she was beaten and  had  her  hair
    pulled.  She suffered physical injury.  She was detained for two  days.
    She was frightened of  being  sexually  assaulted.   However,  she  was
    released without charge, and her parents decided that it would be safer
    for her to leave the country, so arrangements  were  made  for  her  to
    eventually go to the United Kingdom.  She arrived in the UK in  October
    2007.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge summarised the Appellant's claim with the observation that,

         "The essence of the Appellant's case, ... relates to her  religious
         practice  as  a  Christian.   She  has  participated  in  Christian
         gatherings  at  what  could  be  described  as  unregistered  house
         churches, most particularly of course in her own family home whilst
         she was a teenager" (paragraph 13).

    The judge went on to recount how whilst the Appellant was in the United
    Kingdom she "has attended and associated  herself  with  the  Jehovah's
    Witnesses Church and  she  has  attended  various  church  meetings  at
    different halls in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 14).  The Appellant's
    claim, as  recounted  by  the  judge,  was  that  there  are  worsening
    conditions for those who are involved in house church worship and  that
    this has been the position since 2008.  There is a  connection  between
    the Shouwang Church and the Jehovah's Witnesses.   The  expectation  is
    that  those  who  are  associated  with  the  Shouwang   Church   would
    proselytise their faith and the Jehovah's Witnesses bear the  brunt  of
    the hostility of the Chinese government.  The Appellant's fear was that
    if she is returned to China she would be mistreated by  the  government
    again.

 7. Reliance was placed upon an expert report by Dr Sheehan  regarding  the
    deteriorating situation in relation to those who were practising  their
    Christian faith in an unofficial way (see paragraph 14).

 8. The judge gave close  attention  to  the  report  of  Dr  Sheehan  (see
    paragraph 41) and observed that, having studied this report closely, it
    does "present a more bleak and disturbing  picture  than  the  type  of
    material made available to the Tribunal  that  had  to  deal  with  the
    country guidance case of QH" (see paragraph 41).  In  the  case  of  QH
    (Christians - risk) China CG [2014] UKUT  86,  the  Tribunal  confirmed
    that the risk of persecution to  Christians  in  China  was  "extremely
    low", the level of risk was not such to enable people to claim to  have
    a well founded fear  of  persecution.   However,  despite  the  judge's
    conclusions (at paragraph 41) the decision was reached that,

         "The Appellant has not shown sufficient information to enable me to
         depart from the guidance contained in QH.  Even accepting that some
         of the observations of Jackie Sheehan indicate a  deterioration  in
         the way in which the Chinese authorities are treating those who are
         involved in unregistered churches, such as the churches  associated
         with the Appellant's parents, it seems  to  me  that  QH  did  have
         available to it material which went right up to June  2013.   I  do
         not feel that the Appellant's situation, and the type  of  evidence
         adduced by her, is such to enable me to properly  depart  from  the
         guidance in her case" (see paragraph 44).

 9. The judge then went on to have regard to the fact  that  the  Appellant
    had two children and that she had married, but if the Appellant were to
    meet with any mistreatment, "that is not of  a  level  whereby  it  can
    properly be said to be persecutory, having regard to the  jurisprudence
    in relation to the one child policy" (paragraph 46).

10. It is, of course, the case that China's one child policy has  now  been
    suspended and so the Appellant cannot properly,  in  any  event,  raise
    this as a basis for having a well-founded fear of  persecution  if  she
    were to be returned to China.

11. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

12. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    whether the authorities' conduct would force the Appellant  to  refrain
    from practising her faith.   The  judge  also  failed  to  make  proper
    findings on the expert report.  This was particularly important in that
    the judge ought to have given reasons for why the expert  evidence  did
    not displace the country guidance upon which he eventually relied.

13. On 26th August 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

14. On 29th September 2015, permission was granted on the remaining grounds
    that had been put forward before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  third
    ground was that the Tribunal had failed to give  consideration  to  the
    judgment in Y & Z [2012] EUECJ C-71/11 which required consideration  of
    whether  the  conduct  of  the  Chinese  authorities  would  force  the
    applicant to refrain from practising her faith.   Permission  was  also
    given on the fourth ground which was whether  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    make a finding on why the evidence of the expert,  Dr  Jackie  Sheehan,
    did not displace the country guidance in the circumstances of the case.



The Hearing

15. At the hearing before me on 6th November 2015, Ms Capel,  appearing  as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the decision of  the
    judge below should be set aside  for  the  following  reasons.   First,
    there was an expert report that the judge had found to be  "more  bleak
    and disturbing" than the country guidance case  of  QH  (China).   This
    expert report clearly stated that the Appellant was at risk because she
    was a member of the Shouwang Church, which was a proselytising  church,
    not very different from the Jehovah's Witnesses faith.   In  fact,  the
    Appellant had been associated with the Jehovah's Witnesses faith  since
    her arrival in the UK.

16. Second, the Appellant's past persecution was accepted by the  judge  on
    the facts presented to him.

17. Third, the judge had not given proper reasons.  When the  judge  states
    (at paragraph 44) that, though  "the  observations  of  Jackie  Sheehan
    indicate a deterioration in the way in which  the  Chinese  authorities
    are treating those who are  involved  in  unregistered  churches",  the
    conclusion that QH still has to be applied, is not a reason for why the
    judge decided not to follow the expert report, but  simply  a  decision
    without any visible foundational basis for it.

18. Fourth, the report of Dr Jackie Sheehan  had  referred  to  "individual
    risk factors", and  this  being  so  it  was  unnecessary  for  her  to
    "displace" the case of QH (China), in that the mere  reference  to  the
    "individual risk factors" would be enough to show  that  the  Appellant
    had a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.   For  example,  there  was
    evidence (see the Appellant's bundle at page 12 at paragraphs 5 and  6)
    where the Shouwang Church had been made an example of  by  the  Chinese
    authorities.  This was important because the country guidance  case  of
    QH (China) only dealt with Christian churches in general.  The specific
    consideration of the Shouwang Church, in the way that Dr Jackie Sheehan
    had undertaken, painted an altogether different picture, and  this  was
    accepted by the judge as being "more bleak and disturbing".

19. Dr Jackie Sheehan had  made  it  clear  (at  paragraph  132)  that  the
    Shouwang Church has seen more detentions than any  other.   Since  2014
    things have been getting worse for  members  of  the  Shouwang  Church.
    This is clear from the supplementary bundle at page 15,  paragraph  12,
    and at paragraphs 23 to 24.  Finally, had Dr  Jackie  Sheehan's  report
    been  properly  considered  it  was  clear  that  the  Appellant  could
    demonstrate that there was a well-founded fear of  persecution  to  her
    (see the supplementary bundle at 11/14; 17/14; and 23/27).

20. For his part, Mr Kandola submitted that the expert report  was  not  as
    good as the country guidance  case  of  QH  (China).   The  latter  was
    decisive.  The former was not.  The Shouwang Church was a house church.
     The country guidance case of QH (China) did make  reference  to  house
    churches.  Therefore, it is inaccurate to say that the country guidance
    case was not comprehensive enough to take account  of  a  house  church
    such as the Shouwang Church.  The fact  was  that  the  judge  had  (at
    paragraph 36) perfectly adequately dealt with the factual basis of  the
    claim,  and  there  was  nothing  in  the  determination   therein   to
    demonstrate that the judge was not fully familiar with  the  background
    facts, so as to upset his ultimate findings.

21. In reply, Ms Capel submitted that it was well established that  country
    guidance cases could be departed from.  They could be departed from  on
    the basis of the fresh evidence.  The  President's  Guidance  Note  (at
    paragraph 11) makes it clear where this is appropriate.  The case of SI
    (Ethiopia) demonstrates that if there is fresh evidence available which
    makes it possible to take a different view then that different view  is
    perfectly acceptable to take.  She asked me to allow the appeal.

Error of Law

22. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, whereas it  is  the  case
    that SI (reported cases as evidence) Ethiopia [2007] UKAIT 00012  makes
    it clear that country guidance cases  continue  to  give  authoritative
    guidance on the country guidance issues identified for so long as  they
    remain on the AIT website as CG cases, the AIT Practice Directions make
    it clear that a country guidance  case  may  be  departed  from  by  an
    Immigration Judge, in the strictly limited  circumstances  relating  to
    fresh evidence.  This was a case where the judge  had  evidence  before
    him  that  the  expert  report  painted  a  picture  "more  bleak   and
    disturbing" than what was in the country guidance case of QH.  In these
    circumstances it behoved the judge to give reasons for why  the  expert
    report was not now being followed, given that this was later  evidence,
    going beyond that taken into account by QH up to June 2013.

23. Second, the judge himself made it clear that the "observation of Jackie
    Sheehan indicated  deterioration  in  the  way  in  which  the  Chinese
    authorities  are  treating  those  who  are  involved  in  unregistered
    churches" (paragraph 44).  Proper reasons had to be given for  why,  in
    the light of this conclusion, the expert report was to be distinguished
    from the country guidance case.

24. Thirdly,  there  is  evidence,  which  the  judge  has  not  adequately
    confronted, showing that, since her arrival in the  UK,  the  Appellant
    "has been associating herself with the Jehovah's Witnesses Church  (and
    she has attended various church meetings  at  different  Halls  in  the
    United Kingdom" (see paragraph 14).  As with the Shouwang  Church,  the
    Jehovah's Witnesses Church is also  a  proselytising  church,  and  one
    which would have given the Chinese authorities some concern, given  the
    evidence that was before the judge.  What the extent  of  that  concern
    was however is a matter that the judge needed to probe.

Remaking the Decision

25. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard  by  a  judge  other  than
    Judge Cockrill because under Practice Statement 7.2(b)  the  nature  or
    extent of any judicial fact-finding which is necessary in order for the
    decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having regard to  the
    overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 Notice of Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by a  judge  other
    than Judge Cockrill at the earliest opportunity.

27. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd December 2015
