
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05818/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 January 2016                            |On 9 March 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mohamed Mahmoud Al Bakri
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent





                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer in this decision to the respondent as the  appellant  and
    to the appellant as  the  respondent  (as  they  appeared  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant, Mr Mohamed Mahmoud  Al
    Bakri was born on 4 April 1994 and is a male citizen  of  Somalia.   He
    appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Fenoughty)  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 20 March 2015 to refuse to  grant  him
    asylum and to remove him from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions
    under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 28 July 2015,  allowed  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.  The Secretary of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There is one Ground of Appeal.  The appellant claimed that he had  been
    held prisoner by the Islamist terror group Al Shabaab from January 2011
    until he escaped from a compound in Shalanbood (a suburb of the town of
    Marka) in January 2013.  The Secretary of State submits that the  judge
    erred by finding that the appellant's own account of that  imprisonment
    and escape was consistent with the background evidence concerning power
    and influence of Al Shabaab within Somalia.

 3. The judge found that the appellant's  account  was  broadly  consistent
    with the background material. It is clear that the judge  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence that he had been  held  against  his  will  by  Al
    Shabaab until he was able to  escape.   The  judge  also  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence  that  the  appellant's  cousin  had  been  killed
    approximately a month after the escape along with the cousin's  mother.
    Further, after Al Shabaab discovered that the  appellant's  grandmother
    had been harbouring him, she was also killed.  The Secretary  of  State
    relies upon the COI Report of 2014 which noted that between August 2012
    and  October  2013  Al  Shabaab  was  restricted  to  "underground  and
    guerrilla/terrorist operations."   A  report  entitled  Somalia:  Lower
    Shabelle of October 2013 recorded that "on 27 August [2012]  [AMISOM -
    African Union of Somalia] took the town of Marka".   The  Secretary  of
    State argues that, following ousting of Al Shabaab  from  Marka  on  27
    August 2012, the appellant's account of being held a prisoner in  Marka
    until January 2013 was implausible.

 4. The judge has produced a careful detailed decision.  There is no  doubt
    that she has engaged with all the evidence,  including  the  background
    material.  I am, however, not satisfied the judge  has  considered  the
    unequivocal evidence which I have cited above (that, on 27 August 2012,
    AMISOM took the town of Marka from Al Shabaab) in making  her  analysis
    of the credibility of the appellant's own evidence.  At [44] the  judge
    stated that she did not agree the appellant's  evidence  was  "at  odds
    with  the  background  information."   The  judge  considered  it   was
    "unclear" exactly how and over what period Al Shabaab was  ousted  from
    Marka but "the account given by the appellant  broadly  coincides  with
    the evidence that the  Government  forces  clashed  with  [Al  Shabaab]
    towards the end of 2012 as part of a gradual advance."  The COI  Report
    [page 104, paragraph 3.4] does indeed  report  that  "the  advance  [of
    Government forces]  took  place  gradually  and  irregular  intervals."
    However, the same paragraph of the  report  unequivocally  states  that
    Marka was taken on 27 August 2012.  In the light of that evidence,  it
    is not clear why the judge found that Government forces "clashed  with"
    Al Shabaab towards the end of 2012 "as  part  of  a  gradual  advance";
    whilst the advance of the Government forces  on  Marka  may  have  been
    gradual, the town had fallen to Government forces by the end of  August
    2012.  The judge's circumspection appears unwarranted in the  light  of
    this unequivocal evidence.  In  the  next  paragraph  [45],  the  judge
    observed that, "Al Shabaab's power and  influence  in  the  appellant's
    home region had reduced by the time he left."  Indeed, the judge  noted
    that Al  Shabaab  had  been  "ejected"  from  Marka  but  that  it  had
    "retain[ed] an underground presence."   That  represents  a  reasonably
    accurate reading of the background material but I am unable to identify
    any  part  of  the  judge's  analysis  which  addresses  directly   the
    appellant's claim to have  remained  in  detention  in  an  Al  Shabaab
    compound in Marka between  27 August  2012  (when  the  town  fell  to
    Government forces) and his claimed escape in January 2013.   I  do  not
    say that the  appellant  cannot  resolve  that  apparent  inconsistency
    between his evidence and the background material but I do say that  the
    judge has failed to address  properly  this  part  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.  In the circumstances, I set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and will remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
    Judge Fenoughty) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.  I find that
    there is no alternative but to set aside  the  Tribunal's  findings  of
    fact given that the error of law is, as the Secretary of State submits,
    central to the judge's analysis of the appellant's credibility.

Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  28
    July 2015 is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Fenoughty) for
    that Tribunal to remake the decision.

 6. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 29 February 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

