
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05864/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd September  2015               |On 11th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                           MR Thomas Olalekan COLE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pratt
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 21st June 1997 is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by Mr Pratt.  The  Respondent
    was represented by Miss Johnstone, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had claimed to enter  the  United  Kingdom  in  2006  and
    claimed asylum many years later on 25th February 2014.  The  Respondent
    had refused that  application  for  asylum  on  31st  July  2014.   The
    Appellant had appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Simpson sitting at  Manchester  on  15th  September
    2014.  She had refused the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was submitted on  the  basis  that
    the judge had given inadequate consideration to Article 8 in this case.
     Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb  on
    5th March 2015 on the basis that such assertion was arguable.

 4. Directions have been issued directing the  Upper  Tribunal  to  firstly
    decide whether an error of law had been made in this case or not.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 5. Mr Pratt confirmed his submissions related to Article 8 only.  He  said
    that the judge's considerations of such at paragraphs 36  and  37  were
    inadequate particularly since the Appellant had been in  the  UK  since
    2006 and had developed a private life.  It was submitted that the judge
    had found at least plausible  the  Appellant's  account  to  have  been
    trafficked to the UK as a minor to act as an unpaid  child  minder  and
    that should have been taken into account.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 6. It was submitted that the judge's consideration was  entirely  adequate
    and reasonable in the circumstances of this case.

 7. Having considered the submissions I reserved my  decision  to  consider
    those submissions and the documents.  I now provide that decision  with
    my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The challenge to the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  is  on  Article  8
    grounds only.  The Appellant had come to the United  Kingdom  in  2006.
    At that time he was 13 years of age.  His case was  that  he  had  been
    trafficked to the UK from Nigeria to work as an unpaid child minder for
    his uncle Toby and he had worked in that capacity for  some  two  years
    until he had been able to escape from his clutches in 2008  at  a  time
    when he  was  about  15.   Although  the  judge  had  not  specifically
    indicated whether she found the Appellant's account credible or not  at
    paragraph 25 of the decision she referred to his account as  being  not
    implausible and further made such references in respect of plausibility
    concerning his account at paragraph  32.   Given  that  the  judge  was
    obliged to consider the lower standard of  proof  in  terms  of  asylum
    cases it is a proper inference that  her  use  of  the  term  plausible
    indicates that applying the lower  standard  of  proof  she  had  found
    sufficient credibility attaching to the Appellant's account.   She  had
    refused international protection properly on the basis that  there  was
    no risk on return to Nigeria now.

 9. As indicated above there is no challenge to  her  findings  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection or protected ECHR matters.

10. In terms of Article 8 of the ECHR the judge confined that consideration
    to paragraphs 36 to 38 of the decision.  Whilst on the face of it  that
    may appear  a  somewhat  brief  consideration  in  reality  that  brief
    consideration did not amount to an error of law let  alone  a  material
    error of law.

11. The fact of this case is that the Appellant had come to the UK in  2006
    when he  was  13.   Remaining  faithful  to  the  judge's  findings  on
    plausibility the Appellant had no independent control  of  his  actions
    until he was 15 when he left the home where he was being held by  uncle
    Toby.  At the age of 15 the Appellant made no efforts to  claim  asylum
    and essentially remained unlawfully in the UK making no effort to claim
    asylum until 2014.  That claim for asylum only followed a conviction by
    the criminal  courts  in  respect  of  an  offence  of  fraud  and  the
    involvement of social workers from a charity.  The only evidence of the
    Appellant's private life between 2006 and 2014 is  the  conviction  for
    fraud, his account of living homeless, and his refusal  to  supply  the
    authorities with the names of any alleged friends  or  individuals  who
    may have assisted him during that period of time.  There was  no  other
    evidence of private life advanced and none so far as can be seen within
    the documentary evidence presented.  There was no family life in the UK
    discounting the presence of "uncle Toby" who it could  hardly  be  said
    constituted part of the Appellant's  family  life  even  if  he  was  a
    genuine relative.  In those circumstances it is understandable that  an
    overview of Article 8 would be brief.  The judge had made reference  to
    Section 117B of 2002 Act although it is accepted there was  no  attempt
    to analyse that particular aspect of statute.   However  it  cannot  be
    said that the judge did not have  that  statute  in  mind.   Given  the
    Appellant had no family life and given the only  evidence  relating  to
    private life was significantly negative and  essentially  formed  at  a
    time when  his  position  in  the  UK  was  unlawful/precarious  it  is
    extremely hard to conclude how any reasonable consideration could  have
    reached a conclusion different to that reached by  the  judge  in  this
    case.  She was aware of the facts and the documents before her and  the
    conclusion reached demonstrates no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

12. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
