


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05264/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UTIAC Birmingham           |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On : 15 May 2017                      |On : 22 May 2017                     |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 Elida Guri
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Obayelu, instructed by Goshen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Following a grant of permission to appeal against the decision of the First-
tier Tribunal dismissing the appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's
decision to remove her from the UK further to the refusal of her asylum  and
human rights claim, it was found, at an error of law hearing on  20  January
2017, that the First-tier Tribunal had made errors of law in  its  decision.
The decision was accordingly set aside on a limited basis.

The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 1  July  1988,  from  Shkoder.
She left Albania in February 2013 and travelled to the  UK  via  Montenegro,
Italy and Belgium. She claimed asylum on 23 December  2013.  Her  claim  was
refused on 16 March 2015 and a decision was made by  the  respondent  on  18
March 2015 to remove her from the United  Kingdom.  The  appellant  appealed
against that decision and her appeal was heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
by Judge Watson on  16  November  2015  and  was  dismissed  in  a  decision
promulgated on 30 November 2015. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
was granted on 6 January 2016. At an error of  law  hearing  on  20  January
2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Storey found that Judge Watson had made an  error
of law in her decision such that the decision had to be set  aside  and  re-
made by the Upper Tribunal, but on a limited basis.

The Appellant's claim

The basis of the appellant's claim is that she fears persecution  on  return
to Albania as a result of her relationship with her  former  partner  Aleks.
She claims that the relationship  began  in  August  2009,  but  her  family
disapproved and tried to arrange for her marriage to someone else in  Italy.
With Aleks's help  she  managed  to  escape.  In  2013  she  refused  to  be
betrothed to another man chosen by her father and  she  was  beaten  by  her
father and uncle as a result, leaving her with scars. She  tried  to  report
that to the police but the officer started touching her.  In  February  2013
Aleks helped her leave Albania and took her to Montenegro and  then  Belgium
where he put her in a lorry bound for the UK. The appellant  said  that  she
did not know Aleks's immigration status in the UK and she  thought  that  he
and his friends were drug dealers. He found her somewhere  to  live  in  the
UK. She did not know that he was  married  with  children  until  she  found
photographs of his wife and children on his  telephone  after  an  argument.
She became pregnant by him in June 2013. He tried to force her  to  miscarry
the baby, but her son Ergi was born on 15 February 2014. Aleks  was  abusive
towards her and raped her and did not accept the baby was his. She was  also
abused by his friends. She  last  saw  him  on  15  November  2013  when  he
abandoned her and she had had no contact with him since then. The  appellant
claims that she would be harmed by Aleks or by her family  if  she  were  to
return to Albania.

The  respondent,  in  refusing  the  appellant's  claim,  noted   that   the
appellant's status as a victim of  trafficking  had  been  considered  by  a
Competent Authority and it had been concluded that she was not a  victim  of
trafficking. The respondent considered  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
protection available to the appellant in Albania and that she would also  be
able to relocate to another part of the country with her  son.  It  was  not
considered that she would be at risk on return or  that  her  removal  would
breach her human rights.


The appellant appealed that decision and at the hearing gave  oral  evidence
before  the  judge.  The  judge  noted  the  medical  evidence  before  her,
consisting of letters from the appellant's GP and counsellor.  She  accepted
the appellant's account of the circumstances under which she  left  Albania,
her  relationship  with  Aleks,  his  attitude  to  her  pregnancy  and  his
abandonment of her in November 2013. However she did  not  accept  that  the
appellant was raped and abused by friends of Aleks and did  not  accept  her
account of being threatened with a knife by a person sent by Aleks in  March
2015. The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  a  victim  of
trafficking and did not accept that she was at risk of harm  from  Aleks  if
she returned to Albania. She did not accept that the appellant was  at  risk
from her family and considered that she could relocate to  another  part  of
Albania such as Tirana and  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
available to her. The judge found that the appellant would  have  access  to
healthcare in Albania and that her removal would not breach  her  Article  3
or 8 rights on the basis of her mental  health.  She  accordingly  dismissed
the appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

Permission to appeal against that decision was sought on  the  grounds  that
the judge erred by finding that  the  appellant  did  not  fall  within  the
definition of a  victim  of  trafficking;  that  no  reason  was  given  for
departing from the country guidance in AM and BM (Trafficked women)  Albania
CG [2010] UKUT 80 in relation to internal relocation; that the  judge  erred
by not accepting that an  Albanian  Muslim  unmarried  woman  with  a  child
outside wedlock could be a member of a particular  social  group;  and  that
there was no reasoning in the judge's conclusions on the best  interests  of
the child.

Permission to appeal was granted on 6 January 2016.

At the error of law hearing UTJ Storey upheld the judge's rejection  of  the
appellant's claim to have been abused by Aleks's friends,  as  well  as  her
finding that the appellant was not a victim of trafficking, her findings  on
risk on return to Albania from Aleks and her parents  and  her  findings  on
safety of relocation. However he found that the judge had erred  in  law  by
failing to make a proper  assessment  of  the  issue  of  reasonableness  of
internal relocation and that the decision lacked adequate treatment  of  the
issue of risk on return to the appellant as a single  mother  with  a  young
child out of wedlock with some  degree  of  psychological  difficulties  and
unable to return to her home area.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal then came before me on 15 May 2017. Reliance was  placed  on  the
more recent country guidance in TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016]  UKUT
92. The appellant gave oral evidence through an interpreter in the  Albanian
language and adopted her statement produced before the First-tier  Tribunal.
She said that she had no one to support her in Albania and a  woman  in  her
position would face discrimination. She feared for her child in  particular.
She could not move to Tirana because she feared they would find out she  had
returned and would find her. She would have to go to her home  town  to  get
her documents and register and they would know she was  back.  She  did  not
know where Aleks was and she did not know if he would be aware that she  had
returned to Albania and lived in Tirana, but he was  always  like  a  shadow
and she had nightmares about him.  The  appellant  confirmed  that  she  was
still taking medication and that she had been  receiving  counselling  every
week for two years. She thought she may finish by the end of the month.


Both parties made submissions. Ms Pettersen  submitted  that  there  was  no
evidence that the appellant's family had any influence outside  Shkoder  and
the only question  therefore  was  whether  it  was  unduly  harsh  for  the
appellant  to  relocate  to  another  part  of  the   country.   There   was
insufficient evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  could  not  access
shelter in Tirana or another big city in Albania.  Ms  Obayelu  relied  upon
the case of TD and AD in submitting that  the  question  of  sufficiency  of
protection,  and  access  to  shelters  and   support,   depended   on   the
individual's particular circumstances and that there was no access  to  such
support in the case of those  with  vulnerabilities  such  as  psychological
problems, as was the appellant's case. She relied on the case of AM  and  BM
in its references to Kanun law and the treatment of women with  illegitimate
children and submitted that the  appellant's  particular  circumstance  were
relevant in that her family would not take her  back  and  she  was  a  lone
woman without support. There was insufficient  healthcare  in  the  shelters
for women with psychological difficulties.  The  appellant  would  not  have
sufficient protection and would not be able to relocate as a lone woman.

Consideration and findings

The issue arising in the  re-making  of  the  decision  in  the  appellant's
appeal is the question of risk on  return  to  the  appellant  as  a  single
mother with a young child out of wedlock with some degree  of  psychological
difficulties and unable to return to her home area. In his  decision,  Judge
Storey expressed surprise that the question of the appellant being a  member
of a particular social group was so easily  rejected  by  the  judge  and  I
conclude similarly and I see no reason why  the  appellant  would  not  fall
within a particular social group as a single  mother  with  an  illegitimate
child. Indeed, given that the error of law leading to the  judge's  decision
being set aside was a failure to consider the question of reasonableness  in
relation to internal relocation, a matter that the  respondent  acknowledged
(see [8] of Judge Storey's decision), the correct approach is to proceed  on
the basis that the appellant had raised a viable Refugee  Convention  reason
and that risk on return was being considered in  that  context  rather  than
simply on Article 3 grounds.

Although it is the case, as Judge Storey made clear at [8], that AM  and  BM
did not exclusively confine its  guidance  to  victims  of  trafficking,  it
seems to me that both AM and BM and TD and AD were largely based  upon  such
a profile and that the question of  the  appellants  being  found  by  their
traffickers was a relevant concern in those cases.  The  appellant  in  this
case has been found not to be a victim  of  trafficking  and  to  be  of  no
interest to, and at no  risk,  from  Aleks  or  her  family.  The  issue  is
therefore confined to the question of her ability  to  relocate  to  another
part of Albania in terms of having access  to  support  and  being  able  to
access accommodation, healthcare and other basic facilities.


Looking at the findings at [147] to [173] of TD and AD it  is  evident  that
the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellants  would  be  provided  with
accommodation, food and basic healthcare in a shelter and that  there  would
be  access  to  childcare  and  counselling.  Furthermore  there   was   the
possibility of finding some  employment  after  leaving  the  shelter.  That
reflected the findings of the Tribunal in AM and BM at [173]. What  led  the
Upper Tribunal in those cases to conclude that internal  flight  was  not  a
reasonable option was that both appellants  suffered  from  significant  and
debilitating mental health problems and were  in  fear  of  being  found  by
their traffickers. However in the case of the  appellant,  whilst  there  is
evidence of some mental health problems it is clear that  her  condition  is
not severe. Furthermore, the appellant was not found to have been  a  victim
of trafficking and the fear of her traffickers therefore does not  arise  in
this case.


The latest report from the appellant's GP, at page 19 of the appeal  bundle,
refers to her current diagnosis as "moderate  generalised  anxiety  disorder
with mild to moderate depression". It is  clear  from  the  various  reports
that that is linked to her anxiety at the prospect of having  to  return  to
Albania. There is  nothing  in  any  of  the  reports  suggesting  that  the
appellant has severe or significant mental health problems. I note that  the
most recent report from CRASAC, the organisation  providing  counselling  to
the appellant, at page 21 of the appeal  bundle,  refers  to  the  appellant
having experienced sexual abuse in Albania as well as the UK, which was  not
in fact part of her claim. Furthermore the report refers to her having  been
trafficked for sexual exploitation and forced into prostitution,  which  was
considered by the respondent and  the  Competent  Authority,  and  has  been
found by this Tribunal, not to be the case. Clearly this reduces the  weight
to be attached to the report since it appears  to  be  based  upon  a  false
premise and misleading information. It is relevant to  note,  further,  that
the appellant's evidence was that she believed that her counselling  was  to
cease at  the  end  of  this  month.  Clearly,  therefore,  the  appellant's
circumstances are very different to TD and AD and  the  evidence  before  me
does not suggest that she would encounter particular difficulties in  a  big
city such as Tirana, with the assistance of the available shelters  and  the
counselling (albeit basic), child care and other facilities offered.

It is relevant to consider that both AM and BM and TD and AD  emphasise  the
need to consider the individual circumstances of  the  applicant  and  those
are set out at h) of the headnote to TD and AD.  I  have  already  addressed
the appellant's health. The  appellant  has  had  some  form  of  education,
albeit only up until the age of 14 in Albania. It is accepted that  she  has
an illegitimate child and that she has no family support and comes  from  an
area where Kanun law prevails and thus in her home area  in  particular  her
situation as a lone mother with an illegitimate child  would  be  difficult.
However, as discussed above, there is a support  network  available  in  the
shelters in cities such as Tirana. The appellant has  previously  worked  in
Albania - there is a reference to such at [9(c)] of the refusal  letter  and
that was a matter to which Judge Watson referred in her decision, and  there
is no reason why she could not, therefore, work again. At [173]  of  AM  and
BM,  reference  is  made  to  programmes  designed  to  assist  victims   of
trafficking to find work and also to the  availability  of  social  benefits
for those who would otherwise be destitute  and  there  is  no  evidence  to
suggest that the appellant would not be able to access such facilities.


I take  account  also  of  the  circumstances  and  best  interests  of  the
appellant's son, who is now three years of age. His best  interests  clearly
lie in remaining with his mother and there is no  reason  why  it  would  be
unreasonable to expect him to return with her to Albania. His  ties  to  the
UK will be limited, given his  young  age,  and  there  is  no  evidence  to
suggest that he would not be able to access any relevant care  and  services
he requires in Albania. I refer in particular to [167] of TD and AD in  that
regard, where consideration was given  to  the  services  available  to  the
appellant as the mother of a young child.


Taking all of these matters into consideration, it  seems  to  me  that  the
evidence does not support a conclusion that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to
expect the appellant and her son  to  internally  relocate  in  Albania,  to
Tirana or another large city. I find, therefore, that  the  appellant  would
not be at risk on return to Albania and that she does not meet the  criteria
to qualify as a refugee or qualify for humanitarian protection, and  neither
would her removal to Albania give rise to any Article 3 risk.


The grant of permission and the  decision  on  the  error  of  law  did  not
identify any errors in the judge's decision on Article  8  and  neither  was
that a basis upon which the decision to be re-made. However,  for  the  sake
of completeness I would adopt the findings of Judge Watson at [44]  to  [48]
and refer to my findings above in concluding that  the  decision  to  remove
the appellant was proportionate and was not in breach of Article 8.

DECISION

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set  aside.  I  re-make
the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
protection and human rights grounds.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order.  I see  no  reason  to
    continue that order  and  note  that  Judge  Storey  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction. I formally discharge the order of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.










Signed   [pic]                               Dated: 17 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
