

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05367/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th January 2016                          |On 18th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                    [M A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani; Counsel instructed by Dillex
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everritt; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Dean promulgated on 23rd September 2015 in which  she
       dismissed an appeal against a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of
       State on 6th March 2015 to refuse the appellant's claim for  asylum,
       and leave to remain in the UK on the basis of the appellant's family
       or private life.


    2. The appellant is a Somali national.  Borrowing from the  decision  of
       the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  I  summarise   and   augment   the
       background.  The appellant is a member  of  the  mixed  Bajuni/Barawa
       minority clan. She married her husband in Somalia in  1986  and  they
       had three children. In 1995 they left Somalia because of the war  and
       moved to a refugee camp in Kenya. In December  1995  the  appellant's
       husband and two sons left Kenya with the help of an agent and arrived
       in the United Kingdom where they claimed asylum.  The  appellant  and
       their daughter remained in Kenya. In 2007 the appellant came  to  the
       United Kingdom, with her daughter, on a spouse visa valid  until  9th
       March 2009. In November  2013,  the  appellant  claimed  asylum.  The
       appellant believes that  if  she  returns  to  Somalia  she  will  be
       persecuted because of her minority clan membership and the fact  that
       she will be returning as a lone woman.   The  claim  for  asylum  was
       made by the appellant after she was served with a Notice of Liability
       to Removal as an overstayer, following the refusal of an  application
       for indefinite leave to remain in the UK.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean


    3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out at paragraphs  [11]  and  [12],
       the background.  She records,  at  paragraph  [10],  that  she  heard
       evidence from the appellant and her husband. The Judge's findings and
       conclusions are set out at paragraphs [13] to [36] of  the  decision.
       Insofar as the appeal against the claim for asylum is  concerned  the
       Judge accepted, at paragraph [16] that if the appellant  is  returned
       to Somalia, that will be to Mogadishu.  Having considered the Country
       Guidance case of MOJ and Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]
       UKUT 00443 (IAC), the Judge found  that  the  appellant's  return  to
       Mogadishu would not be unreasonable.  She found,  at  paragraph  [18]
       that the appellant is an "ordinary citizen", and at  paragraphs  [20]
       she found that the appellant is not at risk of  persecution  or  harm
       requiring international protection as a result of her  minority  clan
       membership if she is returned to Mogadishu.


    4. The Judge went on to consider  the  appellant's  claim  that  is  she
       returned to Somalia, it will be as a lone woman.  The Judge  rejected
       that claim.  At paragraph [22] of her decision she states:


                 "22.  Accordingly, looking at this evidence in the round, I
                 find that the Appellant  would  not  be  a  lone  woman  in
                 Mogadishu and has failed to  demonstrate  to  the  required
                 standard that she is in need of  international  protection.
                 Therefore, looking at the totality of the  evidence  before
                 me, I find that the Appellant neither faces a real risk  of
                 persecution in Mogadishu nor is she at risk of harm such as
                 to  require  protection  under   Article   15(c)   of   the
                 Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR. "


    5. The Judge then turned to the appellant's Article  8  claim.   It  had
       been conceded at the hearing that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It  is  uncontroversial  that
       the appellant could not satisfy the requirements for leave to  remain
       as a  partner  or  parent  under  Appendix  FM.   In  addressing  the
       appellant's claim to a private life, the Judge states:


                 "25.   However,  the  Appellant   may   satisfy   paragraph
                 276ADE(vi) which states that a person can  be  entitled  to
                 leave to remain on grounds of private life if she  is  over
                 18 years old and lived in the United Kingdom for less  than
                 20 years and there would be very significant  obstacles  to
                 her integration into the country to which she would have to
                 go if required to leave the United Kingdom.


                 26.    The  Appellant  satisfies  the  age  and   residence
                 requirement  of  this  provision.  However,  the  issue  is
                 whether or not there are "very significant obstacle to  her
                 integration" in Somalia. The Appellant stated in her second
                 Asylum Interview (question 24) that when she was  in  Kenya
                 she cooked and sold food and I therefore find she would  be
                 able utilise this experience to provide a source of  income
                 to support herself in Somalia. Furthermore, the Appellant's
                 husband has previously provided financial support and there
                 is no evidence before me to demonstrate that he  is  unable
                 or unwilling to continue to support his  wife.  Looking  at
                 the totality of the evidence before  me  I  find  that  the
                 Appellant  has  failed  to  demonstrate  to  the   required
                 standard that there are "very significant obstacle  to  her
                 integration" in Somalia. I therefore further find that  the
                 Appellant fails  to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
                 276ADE(1) (vi).


                 27.   Accordingly, I find that the  Appellant's  claim  for
                 leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of
                 private life under paragraph 276ADE fails.


    6. At paragraphs [30] to [36] the Judge states:


                 30.   I recognise that the facts of this  case  insofar  as
                 they relate to family life are  somewhat  unusual  in  that
                 this is a situation where there is,  in  effect,  a  family
                 reunion and this is not specifically addressed by  Appendix
                 FM of the Immigration Rules.  I  therefore  find  that  the
                 Appellant's case is one where it is appropriate to consider
                 the Appellant's family life under  Article  8  outside  the
                 Rules. In so doing I have paid particular attention to  the
                 House of Lords decision in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  and  the
                 step-by-step approach of Lord Bingham.


                 31.   First it is necessary to establish whether there is a
                 family life with which removal would  interfere.  I  accept
                 that the Appellant has a husband and three  adult  children
                 in this country and that the Razgar questions (i)-(iv)  can
                 be answered in the affirmative. The issue therefore is  one
                 of proportionality, namely whether  the  interference  with
                 the Appellant's claimed family life is proportionate to the
                 legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


                 32.   The Appellant's two sons were born in 1988 and  1989.
                 They left Kenya with their father  in  December  1995  when
                 they were 7 and 6 years old. The Appellant did not come  to
                 this country until 2007 by which time her sons were  adults
                 of around 19 and 18 years old.  The  Appellant's  daughter,
                 who was born in 1994, remained in Kenya with the  Appellant
                 and they travelled together to the United Kingdom in  2007.
                 There  are  no  Witness  Statements  before  me  from   the
                 Appellant's children and all  three  are  now  adults.  The
                 Appellant's two sons have British citizenship  (Appellant's
                 bundle, pages 25-26) and  her  daughter  has  been  granted
                 leave (Appellant's bundle, pages 22-23). However, there  is
                 no  evidence  before  me  concerning  the  current   social
                 circumstances  of  the  Appellant's  three   children.   In
                 particular, where they live, whether they have families  of
                 their own and what contact, if any, they  have  with  their
                 mother. The  Appellant's  representative  stated  that  the
                 Appellant's daughter was sitting at the back of  the  court
                 and  I  note  a  letter,  dated  15  April  2014,  in   the
                 Appellant's bundle (page 22). However, without more, I find
                 that this does not  advance  the  Appellant's  claim  to  a
                 family  life  with  her  children  because   it   is   well
                 established that relationships between  parents  and  their
                 adult children do not necessarily benefit  from  protection
                 under Article 8 of the Convention unless the  existence  of
                 additional  elements  of  dependence  other   than   normal
                 emotional ties can be proven (Mokrani v  France  [2003]  40
                 EHRR 123, paragraph 33). I  find  that  there  is  no  such
                 evidence before me.


                 33.   The Appellant's husband was separated from  his  wife
                 between  1995  and  2007.  There  is  little  corroborating
                 evidence placing the Appellant and her husband at the  same
                 address. Telephone  bills  in  the  Appellant's  name  were
                 submitted, dated 10 July 2007, 12 October 2014 and 12  July
                 2015 (Appellant's bundle, pages 31-33). Although all  three
                 bills are from BT  the  name  on  the  first  bill  is  the
                 Appellant's full name whereas the name on the  second  bill
                 only uses the Appellant's initials and  the  typescript  is
                 different to the first bill. While  this  evidence  is  not
                 determinative, without more, I give  it  little  weight  as
                 corroborating the Appellant's claim to  live  at  the  same
                 address as her husband. Moreover, given that the  Appellant
                 entered the United Kingdom in March 2007 as  a  visitor,  I
                 find it implausible that four months later she would have a
                 BT telephone account in her name, whereas her  husband  had
                 been  living  here  since  1995.   I  therefore  give  this
                 evidence little weight as evidence of family  life  between
                 the Appellant and her husband.  Furthermore,  I  find  that
                 save for a letter dated 20 April 2009 from Kidbrook School,
                 and a Sixth Form progress report for 2011/2012 from Corelli
                 College, there are no corroborating  documents  which  have
                 the name of both the Appellant and her husband at the  same
                 address.


                 34.   Looking at the totality of  the  evidence  before  me
                 concerning the Appellant's claimed  family  life  with  her
                 husband and children I find that it weighs very lightly  in
                 the balance. I also find  that  the  legitimate  importance
                 attached to the interests of the Respondent in  maintaining
                 a proper  system  of  immigration  control  must  be  given
                 considerable weight, particularly in this  case  where  the
                 Appellant overstayed her visa and failed over a period of 4
                 years to attempt to regularise her status. I have also  had
                 regard to paragraph 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
                 and Asylum Act 2002 which sets out the public  interest  in
                 Article 8 cases. Accordingly, when taken in  the  round,  I
                 find that the Appellant's removal from the  United  Kingdom
                 would not  be  a  disproportionate  interference  with  her
                 family  life  when   weighed   against   the   Respondent's
                 legitimate interest in effective immigration control.


                 35.   I accept that the Appellant will have  established  a
                 private  life  while  in  this  country.  However,  section
                 117B(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
                 states that little weight should be given to a private life
                 established by a person at a time when she is in the United
                 Kingdom unlawfully. Similarly section 117B(5)  states  that
                 little weight should be given to a private life established
                 when a person's immigration status  is  precarious.  It  is
                 clear that the Appellant was  in  this  country  unlawfully
                 after  2009  and  that  although  in  2013  she   made   an
                 application   for   Indefinite   Leave   to   Remain   and,
                 subsequently,  Asylum,  her  immigration  status  was   not
                 determined and was therefore precarious. Moreover,  looking
                 at the totality of the evidence before me, I find that this
                 amounts to nothing more than ordinary day-to-day life which
                 I find could just as easily be carried out in all essential
                 respects in Somalia. Accordingly, looking at  the  evidence
                 in the round I find that the Appellant's removal  from  the
                 United Kingdom would not have consequences of such  gravity
                 as to engage Article 8 on grounds of private life.


                 36.   However, even if Article 8 is engaged on  grounds  of
                 private life, when taken in the  round,  I  find  that  the
                 Appellant's private life can be given little weight because
                 it was established at a time when she was  in  the  country
                 unlawfully and her immigration status was precarious.  Thus
                 I find that the  Appellant's  private  life  is  outweighed
                 against the Respondent's legitimate interest  in  effective
                 immigration control."


 The grounds of appeal and the hearing before me


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Deans  on
       26th October 2015.  The matter comes before me to  consider  whether
       or not the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Deans involved  the
       making of a material  error  of  law,  and  if  so,  to  remake  the
       decision.


    8. The appellant appears to challenge the findings made by the Judge in
       respect of both the asylum and human rights claims.   I  shall  deal
       with each in turn.


    9. First, insofar as  the  asylum  claim  is  concerned  the  appellant
       submits that the Judge failed to give appropriate weight to the risk
       associated with the fact  that  the  appellant  is  a  member  of  a
       minority claim and she would be returned  to  Mogadishu  as  a  lone
       woman and so would face real harm on  return  (paragraph  4  of  the
       Grounds of Appeal).  Furthermore, the appellant is not an  "ordinary
       citizen" but a member of a minority clan and  indeed  a  lone  woman
       (paragraph 27 of the Grounds  of  Appeal).    Ms  Nnamani  submitted
       before me  that  the  Judge  records  at  paragraph  [21]  that  the
       appellant stated that she had cousins in Somalia who had  previously
       provided her with assistance, but the Judge failed to  take  account
       of the  appellant's  evidence  at  paragraph  [13]  of  her  witness
       statement dated 27th August 2015 in which she states that they  have
       no communication with any relatives in Somalia,  and  that  most  of
       them died in the war going on in Somalia.  Ms Nnamani  submits  that
       although the  grounds  of  appeal  do  not  directly  challenge  the
       findings made by the Judge, it is implicit that the  Judge  has  not
       adequately dealt with the evidence before her.


   10. Second, insofar as the Article  8  claim  is  concerned,  the  Judge
       failed to acknowledge the fact that a 20 year absence  from  Somalia
       in effect constitutes a loss of ties with the country of nationality
       and that in turn would mean that removal of the appellant to Somalia
       would not be an appropriate  measure.   The  appellant  claims  that
       paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules is engaged (paragraph 6 of
       the Grounds of Appeal).


   11. The appellant claims that the Judge should  have  had  regard  to  a
       previous version of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) under which an applicant
       was required to establish that they are  18  years  or  above,  have
       lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years but have no ties
       (including its social, cultural or family) with the country to which
       they would have to go, if required to leave the UK.   The  appellant
       submits that the Judge should have considered the  "ties"  that  the
       appellant has to Somalia, by reference to the decision of the  Upper
       Tribunal in Ogundimu (Nigerial) [2013] UKUT 00060 (paragraphs  7  to
       15 of the Grounds of Appeal).


   12.   The appellant claims that in any event, even having regard to  the
       current version of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) introduced in July  2014,
       the Judge should have  found  that  there  are  a  very  significant
       obstacles to the appellants  integration  into  Somalia,  a  country
       where she would have no protection  from  the  authorities  or  clan
       members.  The appellant submits that the fact that she has  no  ties
       to  Somalia  remains  relevant  in  considering  whether  there  are
       significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  back  into
       Somalia (paragraphs 16  to  21  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal).   The
       appellant  claims   that   the   Judge's   approach   to   paragraph
       276ADE(1)(vi) also affected the Judge's assessment of the Article  8
       claim outside the rules.


   13. Ms Nnamani submitted before me that  the  issue  in  the  appeal  is
       whether the Judge applied the correct test and adequately dealt with
       the Article 8 claim.   She submits that the Judge's consideration of
       the claim  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  immigration  rules  is
       deficient, and at paragraph [26] of her decision, the Judge does not
       refer to material matters such as the fact that  the  the  Appellant
       would be returning to Mogadishu, an area  in  which  she  has  never
       previously lived, as a lone woman, and with no  family  connections.
       Ms Nnamani submits that these are all matters  that  establish  that
       there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant's
       integration into Somalia.


   14. Ms Nnamani submits that in assessing the Article 8 claim outside the
       immigration rules, the Judge was wrong to say at paragraph  [32]  of
       her decision that there was no evidence before  her  concerning  the
       current social circumstances of the appellant's three children.  The
       evidence of the appellant at paragraph [12] of her witness statement
       dated 27th August 2015 is that the family all  live  together  under
       one  roof  as  a  family  unit.   She  submits  that  although   the
       appellant's children are adults, the family remains living  together
       as  a  family  unit  and  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that   the
       relationship between the appellant and  her  adult  children  cannot
       benefit from protection under Article 8.


   15. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 2nd November  2015
       that was adopted by  Ms  Everritt.     The  respondent  opposes  the
       appeal and submits that the Judge is clearly  mindful  at  paragraph
       [18] of her decision, of the appellant's  case  that  she  has  been
       absent  from  Somalia  for  20  years.   The  Judge  considered  the
       appellant's continued connection with Somali culture and it was open
       to the Judge to find that the Bajuni  clan  has  a  presence  within
       Mogadishu on the basis of the CIG Report and that as a  consequence,
       the appellant would not  be  at  risk  on  the  basis  of  her  clan
       membership.  The Judge noted  that  the  appellant's  minority  clan
       membership was not in issue  and  properly  assessed  the  claim  in
       accordance with the country  guidance  case  of  MOJ.   Ms  Everritt
       submits that it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  appellant
       would not be a lone woman in Mogadishu for the reasons set out.


   16. Ms Everritt submits that the Judge was  entitled,  having  carefully
       considered  the  evidence,  to  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
       established that there  are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  the
       appellant's integration into Somalia.  Ms Everritt submits that  the
       grounds of appeal do not challenge the findings of fact made by  the
       Judge or proceed upon the  basis  that  the  Judge  failed  to  make
       findings in relation to material  matters.   She  submits  that  the
       judge gave cogent reasons at paragraph [26] of her  decision  having
       noted at paragraph [17] that the appellant's  knowledge  of  Somalia
       has not dimmed during the years of her absence.


 Discussion


   17. As to the asylum claim, the issue for me to decide is whether or  not
       the Judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant has  failed  to
       demonstrate to  the  required  standard,  that  she  is  in  need  of
       international protection.  In that respect I follow the  guidance  of
       the Court of Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982.
       The Court of Appeal held that a finding might only be set  aside  for
       error of law on the grounds of perversity if  it  was  irrational  or
       unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was  wholly
       unsupported by the evidence.  A finding that is  "perverse"  embraces
       findings that are irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,
       and findings of fact that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On
       appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a  judgment  at  first
       instance, unless it really could not understand the original  judge's
       thought process when she was making material findings. I  apply  that
       guidance to my consideration of the decision in this appeal.


   18. First-tier Tribunal Judge Dean found that the appellant would not  be
       a lone woman in Mogadishu  and  has  failed  to  demonstrate  to  the
       required standard that she is in need  of  international  protection.
       Having considered the totality of the evidence, she  found  that  the
       appellant neither faces a real risk of persecution in  Mogadishu  nor
       is she at risk of harm such as to require  protection  under  Article
       15(c) of the Qualification Directive or Article 3 of the  ECHR.   The
       Judge reached her decision for  the  reasons  that  are  set  out  at
       paragraphs [16] to [21] of her decision having considered the country
       guidance case of MOJ and Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG  [2014]
       UKUT 00443 (IAC).


   19. I have carefully considered the evidence that was  before  the  Judge
       and the reasons that are set out at paragraphs [16] to  [21]  of  the
       Judge's decision.  In my judgement it was open to the Judge  to  find
       that the appellant will be returned to Mogadishu and that her  return
       to  Mogadishu  would  not  prima  facie  be   unreasonable.    Having
       considered the matters set out in the country guidance case  of  MOJ,
       it was in my judgement open to the Judge to find that  the  appellant
       is an "ordinary citizen" and thus is not at risk  of  persecution  or
       harm as a result of her minority clan  membership.   It  was  equally
       open to the Judge, on the evidence, to find that the appellant  would
       not be a lone woman in Mogadishu. The Judge made findings  that  were
       adverse to the appellant.  The appellant disagrees with the findings,
       but the findings are not irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury
       sense, or findings that are wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   20. I reject the appellant's claim that that the Judge  should  have  had
       regard to a previous version of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  under  which
       an applicant was required to establish that  they  are  18  years  or
       above, have lived continuously in the UK for less than 20  years  but
       have no ties (including its social,  cultural  or  family)  with  the
       country to which they would have to go, if required to leave the  UK.
        In Odelola v SSHD [2009] UKHL 25, the House of Lords concluded  that
       the Immigration Rules and policies set out by the SSHD will apply  to
       decisions at the time they are made unless and until such time as she
       promulgates different rules, after which she will decide according to
       the new Immigration Rules or  policy  (subject  to  any  transitional
       provisions which  the  SSHD  may  decide  to  put  in  place  in  the
       circumstances of the rule or policy change).  Both at the time of the
       respondent's decision of 6th March 2015 and as at  the  date  of  the
       decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  order  to  satisfy  the
       requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the appellant  was  required
       to establish that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  the
       appellant's integration into the country to which she would  have  to
       go, if required to leave the UK.  The Judge found at  paragraph  [26]
       that the requirement was not met by the appellant.   The  requirement
       of 'very significant obstacles' sets a  demanding  standard.   In  my
       judgment when the grounds of appeal are carefully examined,  they  do
       no more than disagree with the Judge's findings and assessment.   The
       appellant  disagrees  with  the  finding,  but  the  finding  is  not
       irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, or findings  that
       are wholly unsupported by the evidence.


   21. In any event, the Judge went on to consider the appeal on  Article  8
       grounds,  outside  the  immigration  rules.   The  Judge  records  at
       paragraph [28] of her decision that  the  appellant's  representative
       conceded that the appellant did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  At paragraph [30] the Judge recognised  that  the
       facts of this case insofar as they relate to family life are somewhat
       unusual in that this is a situation where  there  is,  in  effect,  a
       family reunion and this is  not  addressed  by  Appendix  FM  of  the
       Immigration Rules.  The Judge states at paragraph [31]


                 "31.  First it is necessary to establish whether there is a
                 family life with which removal would  interfere.  I  accept
                 that the Appellant has a husband and three  adult  children
                 in this country and that the Razgar questions (i)-(iv)  can
                 be answered in the affirmative. The issue therefore is  one
                 of proportionality, namely whether  the  interference  with
                 the Appellant's claimed family life is proportionate to the
                 legitimate public end sought to be achieved."


   22. On the face of it, the Judge in that paragraph appears to accept that
       the first four of  the  Razgar  questions  can  be  answered  in  the
       affirmative.  That is, the proposed removal  of  the  appellant  will
       amount to an interference with the exercise of the appellant's  right
       to respect for her family and private life;   The  interference  will
       have consequences   of such   gravity   as potentially to engage  the
       operation of Article 8;  The interference is in accordance  with  the
       law and the interference is necessary in a democratic society in  the
       interests of national security, public  safety  or the economic well-
       being of the country, for the prevention of disorder  or  crime,  for
       the protection of health  or morals, or for the  protection   of  the
       rights  and freedoms  of others.


   23. The Judge notes at paragraph [31] that the issue therefore is one  of
       proportionality, namely whether the interference with the appellant's
       claimed family life is disproportionate to the legitimate public  end
       sought to be achieved.


   24. It is not entirely clear from the  decision  whether  the  Judge,  at
       paragraphs [32] and [33] of her decision, in  fact  makes  a  finding
       that the proposed removal of the appellant  will  not  amount  to  an
       interference with the exercise of the appellant's  right  to  respect
       for her family and private life with her husband  and  children.   If
       she does, that is at odds with what the  Judge  states  at  paragraph
       [31].


   25.  The  Judge's  assessment  of  proportionality  is  to  be  found  at
       paragraphs [34] to [36] of her decision:


                "34.   Looking at the totality of  the  evidence  before  me
                concerning the Appellant's  claimed  family  life  with  her
                husband and children I find that it weighs very  lightly  in
                the balance. I also  find  that  the  legitimate  importance
                attached to the interests of the Respondent in maintaining a
                proper  system  of  immigration  control   must   be   given
                considerable weight, particularly in  this  case  where  the
                Appellant overstayed her visa and failed over a period of  4
                years to attempt to regularise her status. I have  also  had
                regard to paragraph 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
                Asylum Act 2002  which  sets  out  the  public  interest  in
                Article 8 cases. Accordingly, when taken  in  the  round,  I
                find that the Appellant's removal from  the  United  Kingdom
                would not be a disproportionate interference with her family
                life  when  weighed  against  the  Respondent's   legitimate
                interest in effective immigration control.


                35.    I accept that the Appellant will have  established  a
                private life while in this country. However, section 117B(4)
                of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  states
                that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a  private  life
                established by a person at a time when she is in the  United
                Kingdom unlawfully. Similarly section  117B(5)  states  that
                little weight should be given to a private life  established
                when a person's immigration  status  is  precarious.  It  is
                clear that the Appellant  was  in  this  country  unlawfully
                after 2009 and that although in 2013 she made an application
                for Indefinite Leave to Remain  and,  subsequently,  Asylum,
                her immigration status was not determined and was  therefore
                precarious.  Moreover,  looking  at  the  totality  of   the
                evidence before me, I find that this amounts to nothing more
                than ordinary day-to-day life which I  find  could  just  as
                easily be carried out in all essential respects in  Somalia.
                Accordingly, looking at the evidence in  the  round  I  find
                that the Appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  would
                not have consequences of such gravity as to engage Article 8
                on grounds of private life.


                36.    However, even if Article 8 is engaged on  grounds  of
                private life, when taken in  the  round,  I  find  that  the
                Appellant's private life can be given little weight  because
                it was established at a time when she  was  in  the  country
                unlawfully and her immigration status was precarious. Thus I
                find that the Appellant's private life is outweighed against
                the   Respondent's   legitimate   interest   in    effective
                immigration control."


   26. In my judgment, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  discloses  a
       material error of law and is set aside.  Paragraphs [32] and [33]  of
       the decision appear  to  be  at  odds  with  paragraph  [31]  of  the
       decision.  In the assessment of proportionality  at  paragraph  [34],
       the Judge begins her assessment by stating that on  the  totality  of
       the evidence before her concerning  the  appellant's  claimed  family
       life with her husband and children, she finds  that  it  weighs  very
       lightly in the balance.  That appears to be based upon what  is  said
       by the Judge at paragraphs [32] and [33] of  her  decision,  but  her
       conclusions as to whether or not the appellant enjoys a  family  life
       with her adult children and her husband appear to be at odds with the
       finding at paragraph [31].  Had the judge proceeded upon the premise,
       as she appears to accept in paragraph [31], that the proposed removal
       of the appellant will amount to an interference with the exercise  of
       the appellant's right to respect for her family and private life, and
       had regard to the evidence that the appellant  and  her  family  live
       together as a family unit, she might have attached greater weight  to
       the family life in her assessment.


   27. In my judgment, the  Judge  has  given  inadequate  reasons  for  her
       conclusion that the respondent's decision does not  give  rise  to  a
       disproportionate breach of the Article 8  rights  of  the  appellant.
       This amounts to an error of law.


   28. In my judgement there is a material error of law in the  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal insofar as the  Tribunal's  consideration  of
       the Article 8 claim, outwith the Immigration Rules is concerned,  and
       the decision is set aside.


   29. The decision needs to be re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;


            '7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
           proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting  the  case
           to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
           satisfied that;


            (a)   the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or   other
                 opportunity  for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


            (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which  is
                 necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
                 made  is  such  that,  having  regard  to  the   overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to
                 the First-tier Tribunal.'


   30. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(b) apply,  in  that  the
       nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary with  regard
       to the Article  8  claim  outwith  the  Immigration  Rules,  will  be
       extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


   31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the
       extent that the appeal on Article 8 grounds outwith  the  Immigration
       Rules is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


   32. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                             Date










       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


   33. As the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal, there was  no
       fee award.  I  have  remitted  the  appeal  back  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This is to be
       considered by the First-tier Tribunal.


       Signed














       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



