
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05754/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K J Wood of Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. An anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant and shall continue.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McCall promulgated on 6 November  2014  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of asylum on all grounds .

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1982 and is a national of Pakistan.

 4. On 24 May 2012 the Appellant came to the United Kingdom under a  fianc�
    visa. He married his wife on 26 August 2012.

 5. 27 March 2013 the Appellant applied to remain in the United Kingdom  as
    a victim of domestic violence. The  application  was  refused  and  the
    Appellant appealed. The appeal was withdrawn by  the  Appellant  on  12
    February 2014 and the Appellant applied for asylum on 17 March 2014.

 6. The Appellant asserted that he and members of his family were assaulted
    and threatened both in the UK and in Pakistan. The  Appellant  asserted
    that his ex-wife's  family  were  behind  the  attacks  and  they  were
    influential in Pakistan and had political contacts there. The police in
    Pakistan have refused to register their complaints. There  was  nowhere
    he could relocate.

 7. On 1 August  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) It was not accepted that the reasons for the appellant fleeing from
         Pakistan engaged the convention.

      b) It was accepted that the Appellant was threatened by his  wife  and
         her family and was attacked by his ex-wife's brother.

      c) In relation to the claim that the  Appellant  and  his  family  had
         received threats from her ex-wife's uncle MS and that  his  brother
         was attacked: this is not accepted as the  Appellant's  account  is
         vague and inconsistent which  undermines  the  Appellant's  overall
         credibility.

      d) No weight is placed on the documents  produced  as  they  were  all
         uncertified.

      e) It is not credible that threats  were  issued  to  the  Appellant's
         family in Pakistan when he was within reach of his ex-wife's family
         in the United Kingdom..

      f) The Appellant's failure to approach  the  authorities  in  Pakistan
         means that he has not given them  the  opportunity  to  assist  and
         therefore there is no evidence they are unwilling to help.

      g) The Appellant could internally relocate in Pakistan to  Karachi  or
         Rawalpindi. There was no evidence that  the  Appellant's  ex-wife's
         family had the means or the  motive  to  pursue  him  elsewhere  in
         Pakistan.

      h) The Appellant's medical issues did not engage Article 3 or  Article
         8 as there  was  medication  available  and  a  functioning  health
         service there.

      i) The Appellant could not satisfy Appendix FM or 276ADE.

      j) There were no circumstances that warranted a grant of leave outside
         the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 8. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Mc  Call  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found:

      a) It was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant's  brother  in
         law was convicted of Affray and that the Appellant was  the  victim
         of  that  incident  for  which  the  sentence  was  a   Conditional
         Discharge.

      b) It was  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  brother  and  family  had
         attempted to intimidate  and  threaten  the  Appellant  before  the
         trial.

      c) The Judge accepted that threats had been made to him and his family
         in the United Kingdom.

      d) While accepting that the Appellant and his former wife's family had
         been in dispute the cause of that had not been established  to  the
         lower standard and therefore the Judge did not accept that it arose
         out of his claim to have been the subject of Domestic Violence.

      e) The evidential basis for the  sentence  given  to  the  Appellant's
         former brother in law for Affray had not  been  placed  before  the
         Judge. A conditional discharge was  inconsistent  with  the  claims
         made by the Appellant.

      f) The Judge accepted that during the course of the trial threats were
         made both in the United  Kingdom  and  Pakistan  by  his  ex-wife's
         family to his family.

      g) He did not accept that the account of the attack on the Appellant's
         brother in Pakistan after the trial rang true.

      h) The Appellant  had  fabricated  his  account  of  a  politician  MR
         supporting his ex-wife and family.

      i) He did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant's  ex-wife's  family  had
         influence or influential friends in Pakistan.

      j) The Appellant was not at risk of being investigated and arrested in
         respect of claims made by his wife that he raped her over two years
         ago.

      k) In respect of the  Appellant's  claim  that  his  family  tried  to
         register a FIR the Judge examined  the  letters  and  documents  in
         detail at paragraphs 34-38 and concluded that it was  not  credible
         that there would be no replies to any of the  letters  or  evidence
         that they had in fact been sent and he did not find  the  documents
         reliable.

      l) He did not find the Appellant's account of why the  marriage  broke
         down rang true.

      m) There had been no recent incidents and he did not find it  credible
         that if his ex-wife's family still bore a grudge  against  him  and
         were intent on harming him they would not do so when they  had  the
         chance.

      n) The medical evidence showed that the Appellant was recovering  from
         the depression he had suffered.

      o) He did not accept that there had been further incidents  since  the
         Appellant's brother in law received the sentence of  a  conditional
         discharge.

      p) The Appellant's mental health problems did not engage Article 3  or
         8 and the decision was proportionate  by  reference  to  Article  8
         outside the Rules.

 9. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that :

      a) The Judge failed to take into account a material matter in that  he
         made a finding  that  there  was  no  continuing  interest  in  the
         Appellant from his ex-wife and her family when he had the  evidence
         before him of the Appellant's sister Mrs SH  who  visited  Pakistan
         after the trial and was threatened by for men.

      b) The Judge failed to take into account all of  the  evidence  before
         finding that the documentary evidence was unreliable.

      c) The  Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the  acceptance  of  a
         significant portion  of  the  Appellant's  account  when  assessing
         whether the claimed problems in Pakistan were reasonably likely.

      d) The Judge misdirected himself as  to  the  definition  of  domestic
         violence having accepted that the Appellant had been the victim  of
         threats and feared for his personal safety as a result of  his  ex-
         wife and her family's actions.

      e) The Judge failed  to  take  into  account  the  abuse  and  threats
         suffered by the Appellant at the hands of his wife and  her  family
         in the assessment under Article 8.

10. On 2 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly gave  permission  to
    appeal

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Wood   on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) The  Appellant's  bundle  at  A15-16  that  was  before  the  Judge
         contained evidence of further adverse  interest  in  the  Appellant
         that post dated the trial and the Judge did not  evidence  that  he
         had taken that into account.

      b) The Judge was required to look at the documentary evidence  in  the
         round. He made a number of key positive findings at paragraphs  18-
         23 and these should have been taken into account in his  assessment
         of the documents.

      c) In finding it incredible that the Pakistani Police did not  respond
         to so  many  documents  he  should  have  taken  into  account  the
         background material as to their corruption and ineffectiveness.

      d) The Judge's definition of Domestic Violence was  flawed.  He  found
         that the Appellant feared for his personal safety and was a  victim
         of crime at the hands of his brother in law.

      e) If the Appellant was the victim  of  domestic  violence  then  this
         could have been a compelling circumstance in relation to Article 8.

12. On behalf of the Respondent  MrMcVitie submitted that :

    (a)    The Judge accepted a history of threats and prosecution  by  the
         Appellant's ex-wife's brother  for  Affray  and  that  his  ex-wife
         threatened the Appellant's sister to try  and  make  the  Appellant
         withdraw the prosecution.

    (b)    What raised the Appellant's the issue of domestic violence to  a
         claim for international protection was the claim that the Appellant
         was at risk on return to Pakistan.

    (c)    The Judge did not accept the Appellant's claim that  he  was  at
         risk because his ex-wife's family were  influential  themselves  or
         because of a politician that the  Appellant  had  never  previously
         mentioned and the witness had never heard of.

    (d)    The Appellant did not mention the name of the  politician  until
         the hearing before the Judge.

    (e)    If the Appellant's claim to be at risk on return was rejected by
         the Judge his claim for protection and his  inability  to  relocate
         all fell away.

    (f)    Even if the Judge failed to mention the continuing threats if he
         was not at risk on return the error was not material.

    (g)    In relation to the documents again  if  there  was  no  risk  on
         return the Judge was entitled to find them unreliable.

    (h)    While there was no requirement for evidence of physical violence
         for domestic violence this was irrelevant to the Appellant's  claim
         to be at risk on return to Pakistan.

    (i)    In relation to the assertion that the Appellant's claim to  have
         been a victim of domestic violence was not considered under Article
         8 how could this be relevant.  The perpetrators of  this  behaviour
         were in the United Kingdom not in Pakistan so  how  could  this  be
         relevant to the Appellant's private life in the United Kingdom.

13. In reply Mr Wood on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

      a) The Appellant had referred to the threat from his  ex-wife's  uncle
         MS in  the  interview  at  Q90.  The  politician  was  a  different
         individual so he had not changed the name - they were two  separate
         individuals.

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. I have considered the argument that the Judge both failed to take  into
    account the evidence  of  the  Appellant's  sister  that  there  was  a
    continuing interest in the Appellant in Pakistan and that this evidence
    would have made a material outcome to the decision.

16. I note that the Judge clearly recorded at paragraph 14, 21 and 26  that
    he had heard the evidence of this witness so it cannot on any  analysis
    be argued that the Judge overlooked her evidence. I am  satisfied  that
    he is not required to set that evidence out in detail where it is clear
    that it has been considered where it is relevant to the facts in issue.
     The statement of the sister included the claim that her  father  tried
    to register a FIR in  respect  of  an  incident  that  post  dated  the
    conviction of the Appellant's ex-wife's brother which is  the  evidence
    that it is suggested  the  judge  specifically  overlooked.  The  Judge
    considered in Paragraph 34 the evidence at pages  1-19  of  the  bundle
    which includes the claim of the 'post conviction'  incidents  including
    that of the sister and he did not find the documents reliable  evidence
    in relation to this evidence.  He was entitled to take to the view that
    he did not,  having  heard  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  his
    witnesses and taking into account the documentary evidence,  find  that
    the Appellant had satisfied the evidential burden of establishing  that
    there was a continuing interest in the Appellant.

17. In relation to the Judges consideration of the documentary evidence  at
    paragraphs 34-39 I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  has  firstly  self
    directed himself appropriately in paragraph 34  as  to  the  applicable
    law. It is  clear  from  the  decision  that  he  was  considering  the
    documents in the round together with all  of  the  other  evidence  and
    therefore there was  nothing  wrong  in  his  fundamental  approach  to
    documentary evidence. He gives a number of detailed,  cogent  and  well
    reasoned explanations as to why he concludes at paragraph 38  that  the
    documents are not reliable having considered the evidence at  paragraph
    33 of inefficiency and corruption in the Pakistani  police.  These  are
    conclusions that were open to him and I am satisfied that  Mr  Wood  is
    simply attempting to re argue the  weight  to  given  to  the  evidence
    before him.

18. The argument that the Judge failed to take into account the  acceptance
    of a significant portion of  the  Appellant's  account  when  assessing
    whether the claimed problems in Pakistan were reasonably likely has  no
    merit given that his findings start with  a  detailed  recital  of  all
    those  facts  that  the  Respondent  accepted   at   paragraph   18-23.
    Nevertheless the assessment of credibility must be read as a whole so I
    also note that in determining the issue of the Appellant's  credibility
    that while there were matters that were accepted the  Judge  also  took
    into account  factors  that  reflected  adversely  on  the  Appellant's
    credibility: that there was a significant difference between  what  the
    Appellant claimed had happened, that he was the victim of an  attempted
    murder which he had claimed to nurses  and  doctors  resulted   in  his
    former brother in law being sent to prison and what  actually  happened
    which was that his brother in law received a conditional discharge  for
    Affray. The Judge noted that in the light of the Sentencing  Guidelines
    (and in the absence of any evidence as to the evidence before the Judge
    at the Crown Court) this sentence was inconsistent with the Appellant's
    version of events.

19. It was argued that the  Judge  erred  in  his  definition  of  domestic
    violence. I do not  accept  that  the  Judge  purported  to  provide  a
    definition of domestic violence. He noted that this was a claim made by
    the Appellant. He noted at paragraph 24 that there was no  evidence  in
    respect of the claim from any source other than himself in the form  of
    injuries , doctors notes or observations by another witness:  no  where
    does he state that these are requirements he is simply clarifying  what
    evidence there is what evidence there is not. The fact that there was a
    dispute between the Appellant and his former brother in  law  in  which
    his wife appears to have become embroiled was not determinative of  the
    Appellant being the victim of domestic violence as the Judge found that
    the cause of that dispute had not been established before him.

20. The Judge made his findings in relation to whether the Appellant was  a
    victim of domestic violence in the context of his findings in  relation
    to credibility generally and having heard all the evidence he  did  not
    find the claims made by the Appellant were  credible.  In  relation  to
    issues of credibility I remind myself that the Judge had the  advantage
    of hearing oral evidence from the Appellant. In Mibanga v  SSHD  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367, Buxton LJ said  this  in  relation  to  challenging  such
    findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."

21. I am also satisfied that in the context of the claim for  international
    protection the Judge consideration of the issue  of  domestic  violence
    even if wrong  cannot have made a material difference to the outcome of
    the decision. The decision must be read as  a  whole:  the  Appellant's
    claim was underpinned by his assertion that he was at  risk  on  return
    because his ex-wife's family were influential and had a  connection  to
    an influential politician. The Judge gave a detailed, cogent  and  well
    reasoned explanation at paragraph 28 as to why  he  did  not  find  the
    Appellant's  account  of  his  ex-wife's  political   connections   was
    credible: that was in essence that the MP he described in oral evidence
    (MR) as being the person he feared had never previously  been  referred
    to him in the asylum interview as someone he feared and he had in  fact
    mentioned an entirely different person and when his sisters were  asked
    in oral evidence about MR they were unaware  of  his  existence.  I  am
    satisfied that in the  light  of  the  very  late  disclosure  of  this
    person's name and the fact that neither of his sisters had heard of him
    the Judge was entitled to conclude that the  Appellant  had  fabricated
    his account of the influence of his ex-wife's  family  in  Pakistan  or
    their political connections.

22. In relation to the Judge's alleged failure to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's claim to have been the victim of domestic violence  in  his
    assessment of the proportionality of the  Article  8  assessment  I  am
    satisfied that having concluded that the  Appellant  had  not  met  the
    evidential burden of establishing that he  was  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence  the  Judge's  finding   that   there   were   no   compelling
    circumstances to justify a grant of leave outside the rules  cannot  be
    in error.

23. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

24. I find that the reasons given were adequate and the Appellant cannot be
    in any doubt about why the appeal was allowed: the Judge did  not  find
    him a credible witness as to the central feature of his case which  was
    that he was at risk in Pakistan from his ex-wife's family.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.

27. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.


Signed      Date 11.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

