
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05067/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 July 2017                               |On 26 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                   MR EGT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chakmakjian of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt whose date of birth is shown as [ ]
    1997.  The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  16  April  2014
    having left Egypt by boat, being stopped by the Italian authorities  in
    the Mediterranean and having spent some eight months in Italy.   Asylum
    was not sought in Italy.  The appellant then travelled   of  the  claim
    was that the appellant feared the family of a girl with whom he had had
    a relationship. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim  on
    5th March 2015.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In a decision promulgated  on  24  January  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cockrill dismissed the appellant's appeal.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal found that the appellant would be safe to return to Egypt
    and could internally relocate and do so safely and reasonably.

 3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision to the Upper Tribunal.  On 24 May  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne granted the appellant permission to appeal.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge, in  failing  to  grant  an
    adjournment, made a material procedural error so that the appellant did
    not have a fair hearing.  It is submitted that at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing  the  respondent  and  the  Tribunal  were  notified  that  the
    appellant had very recently been made aware that his  family  had  been
    arrested by the Egyptian authorities in events unrelated to his  asylum
    claim.  The arrest was made because the appellant's father was involved
    in the Muslim Brotherhood.  The appellant  produced  two  documents  in
    Arabic which were said to be police reports obtained  by  a  lawyer  in
    Egypt.  The appellant's solicitors  had  not  had  time  to  apply  for
    funding to obtain certified translations.  The documents had only  been
    received a few days before the hearing.  It is submitted that  although
    notice of the further claim was only given on the day of  the  hearing,
    no due weight was given by the judge to the fact that the substance  of
    the claim had only arisen very  recently.   It  is  submitted  that  by
    deciding to deal with the further claim  in  existing  proceedings  but
    refusing to adjourn the  judge  deprived  the  appellant  of  a  proper
    opportunity to fully set  out  his  claim  and  to  provide  supporting
    evidence.  Reliance is placed on  the  case  of  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), specifically at paragraph 5.  It  is
    asserted that in this case  the  judge  gave  no  consideration  as  to
    whether the case could be justly  determined.   There  was  an  obvious
    disadvantage  to  the  appellant  caused  by  curtailing  the  time  to
    investigate and prepare and translate documents.

 5. In ground 2 it is asserted that the judge erroneously gave undue weight
    to the late disclosure of  the  further  asylum  claim  and  failed  to
    consider all the evidence as a whole.  With regard to  the  appellant's
    claim that he was in danger as a result of an imputed political opinion
    following the arrest of his family  and  association  with  the  Muslim
    Brotherhood,  the  judge  made  a  negative  credibility  finding.   At
    paragraphs 38 to 39 the judge gave reasons for the negative credibility
    finding.  It is submitted that this is the totality of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's reasoning on this important factual issue.  The  judge
    erred by basing his conclusions exclusively on the failure to refer  to
    the claim in the witness statement and making the disclosure a few days
    later at the appeal hearing instead.  It is submitted that such general
    credibility findings about the timing of the claim should  not  be  the
    starting point of the credibility assessment. The timing of  the  claim
    is a relevant factor, but it must be one  that  is  considered  in  the
    balance when regarding the case as a whole.  Reliance is placed on  the
    case of JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878 where  the  court  held  that
    Section  8  factors  should  be  taken  into   account   in   assessing
    credibility,  but  it  should  not  dictate  that  relevant  damage  to
    credibility inevitably results.  It is submitted that by contrast it is
    apparent in this  case  that  the  judge  regarded  the  belated  claim
    essentially determinative of  credibility.   There  was  a  failure  to
    consider the  positive  credibility  of  the  appellant  regarding  his
    earlier asylum claim, the limited time to substantiate the claim due to
    refused adjournment, the detail the appellant gave about  his  father's
    role in the Muslim Brotherhood and the  objective  evidence  about  the
    Muslim Brotherhood being outlawed.

 6. In oral submissions Mr Chakmakjian submitted that whilst it is accepted
    that it is relevant for a judge to take into account the appeal history
    and the public interest in expediting hearings, the  key  principle  is
    fairness.  He referred to  paragraph  18  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  actual
    fairness.   There  is  no  consideration  in  that  paragraph  of   the
    disadvantage  to  the  appellant  without  being  able  to  submit  the
    documents which required translation.  The judge placed reliance on the
    fact that there was a  very  recent  witness  statement  in  which  the
    appellant had not set out the new claim.  He submitted that whilst that
    might be relevant to credibility it was  not  a  sufficient  reason  to
    prevent the appellant from properly developing the freestanding  aspect
    of this asylum claim.  There had been insufficient consideration of the
    claim and undue weight had been given to the  late  disclosure  by  the
    judge.  He referred to paragraphs 38 and 39 of the decision  which  set
    out the only consideration of the new claim.  The judge failed to  take
    into account the appellant's general credibility regarding the original
    asylum claim which was not disputed.  He submitted  that  the  starting
    point for a subsequent claim should have been the appellant's  accepted
    credibility.  He submitted that the focus of the late admission and the
    failure to consider the substance  of  that  claim  linked  in  to  the
    failure to adjourn  to  enable  the  appellant  to  produce  supporting
    evidence led to the proceedings not resulting in a fair hearing for the
    appellant.  Mr Chakmakjian confirmed that there was no  appeal  against
    the findings of the judge regarding internal relocation.

 7.  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the  judge  set  out  at  paragraph  40
    credibility findings with regard to the appellant's asylum  claim.   He
    submitted that it was not a question that the appellant's evidence  had
    been accepted in its entirety.  He referred to paragraphs 2 and 3 where
    the judge refers to the appellant's adverse  immigration  history.   He
    submitted that at paragraphs 38 and 39 these were matters for the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  It was a matter for the judge to  decide  whether
    the  lateness  of  the  claim  adversely   affected   the   appellant's
    credibility.  The judge had considered fairness when making a  decision
    not to adjourn the hearing.  The incident happened before Christmas  on
    14 December 2016.  The appellant had known about that but had  prepared
    a witness statement on 6 January 2017 and had failed to refer  to  that
    matter.  He submitted that  the  failure  to  mention  in  the  witness
    statement  was  a  matter  that  severely  affected   the   appellant's
    credibility and it was quite correct that the judge  viewed  this  late
    claim through that lens.  He submitted that there was nothing unfair in
    the judge not allowing new evidence.

 8. In reply Mr Chakmakjian submitted that the First-tier Tribunal did  not
    refuse to consider effectively  the  new  claim  and  the  respondent's
    representative did not object to the judge considering the matter.

Discussion

 9. There is no appeal directly against  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings in respect of what I shall refer to as the  'original'  asylum
    claim.  That original claim was based on the appellant's assertion that
    he was at risk from the family of a girl that he had  had  an  unlawful
    sexual relationship with.  With regard to that claim the judge found:

         "35. It is noteworthy that a lot of the appellant's  narrative  has
             been  accepted  by  the  respondent   and   that   represents,
             therefore, a very proper starting point for my  consideration.
             The appellant's nationality has been accepted and his  age  is
             not  in  any  way  in  dispute.   The  main  features  of  the
             appellant's account of the sexual relationship with the  girl,
             A, have been acknowledged  and  accepted  by  the  respondent.
             Indeed, the reaction of the girl's family has been accepted by
             the respondent as being a natural and understandable  one  and
             consistent with what is known about Egyptian society.  ...

         36.  The appellant would wish me to accept that the father  of  the
             girl, A, is of sufficient power and influence, such  that  the
             police could be manipulated to  work  against  the  appellant.
             That point has really not been made out, as I see it,  by  the
             appellant.  ...

         37.  Over and above that there are two further elements  that  have
             been added to the appellant's case.  ..."

10. The appeal essentially is brought on the basis of the  judge's  failure
    to adjourn for evidence to be translated with  regard  to  what  is  in
    effect a new element to the claim  for  asylum  and  with  the  judge's
    consideration and findings in relation to that claim (the 'new' claim).



11. At paragraph 18, when considering the application  for  an  adjournment
    the judge set out:

         "18. The situation was that Mr Chakmakjian  indicated  to  me  that
             there  was  a  new  strand  of  concern  in  this  case.   The
             appellant, with the assistance of his solicitors, had made  an
             up-to-date witness statement which  had  been  prepared  on  6
             January 2017.  This particular issue had not been referred  to
             at all in the course of that updated statement.   In  essence,
             the appellant was now saying  that  his  family  had  suffered
             arrest and detention about three weeks ago.  There  were  some
             documents produced which had not  been  translated  and  which
             purported to be relevant to  that  issue.   I  considered  the
             overriding objective and what was a  fair  course  of  action,
             looking at the circumstances as a whole.  I  concluded,  given
             the overall history of this case, and the very fact that  this
             issue had not been raised by the appellant even as late  as  6
             January 2017 in his witness statement, that the  interests  of
             fairness were to proceed with the appeal and not to accede  to
             any request for an adjournment."

12. The judge had noted at paragraph 16 the history of the case:

         "16. The case had originally been listed as long  ago  as  4  April
             2016 but had been adjourned.  Efforts had been made to try  to
             gain a report from a country expert  but  there  were  funding
             difficulties.  In any event, the Tribunal expressed  the  view
             that there was ample country evidence available.   The  appeal
             was then relisted for hearing on 15 August  2016  but,  again,
             was adjourned and it was in that way that the matter came  for
             hearing at Taylor House on 13 January 2017."

13. I do not consider that the judge's failure to adjourn necessarily  gave
    rise to any unfairness in the proceedings on the facts  of  this  case.
    There were delays in the  matter  being  called  on  for  hearing,  the
    application was made only on  the  day  of  the  hearing  (despite  the
    appellant having had the information for  over  three  weeks),  and  in
    preparation for the hearing a witness statement had been made that  did
    not make any reference to a matter which, by that point, he  had  known
    about for  three  weeks.  The  appellant  was  able  to  give  evidence
    regarding the arrest.  The judge dealt with that evidence from the  end
    of paragraph 19 through to paragraph 23.

14. With regard to the second ground of appeal which  is  essentially  that
    the judge focused entirely on the lateness of the new claim, that  this
    issue had not been set out in the  appellant's  witness  statement  and
    made adverse credibility findings purely on the basis of  the  lateness
    of the new claim.  The judge decided to deal with this new claim at the
    hearing setting out:

         "38. The other strand in the appellant's case was only brought out,
             in effect, before me at Taylor House on 13 January  2017.   Mr
             Chakmakjian  drew  attention   to   this   apparently   recent
             development in the appellant's situation whereby his immediate
             family, that is his parents and, indeed, the second  wife  and
             two children, both extremely young being aged 4 years  and  10
             months old, have  all  been  the  subject  of  arrest  by  the
             Egyptian authorities.  I accept, of course, that I refused  an
             adjournment in all  the  circumstances  and  I  am  conscious,
             therefore, of that position in assessing this  aspect  of  the
             case but I have to say that, in my overall assessment, it  has
             simply been grafted on to the appellant's case, with a view to
             trying to bolster it.  I do not think it is a credible account
             that has been provided by  the  appellant  about  this  recent
             arrest and detention.  I say that for the  following  reasons.
             The  appellant  was  given  a  perfectly  clear   and   proper
             opportunity to express this  matter  in  a  witness  statement
             which had only been prepared, it seems, on 6 January 2017.  It
             is conspicuous that there is not the  slightest  reference  at
             all to any arrest and detention of his family in that  witness
             statement.  The alleged arrest and detention took place before
             Christmas and, if  it  really  had  taken  place,  I  can  see
             absolutely no good reason why it would not have  been  brought
             up properly in the witness statement.  In  my  assessment  and
             judgment, this  is  something  that  has  been  added  by  the
             appellant to try and give some extra weight and force  to  his
             account. [Emphasis added]

         39.  The appellant's father has apparently been associated,  for  a
             long time, with the Muslim Brotherhood.  However the timing of
             this alleged arrest and  detention  just  before  this  appeal
             hearing seems far too convenient and is not  credible.   I  do
             not accept that it has taken place in that manner and that the
             reality is that the family of this appellant are still back in
             Egypt and are not under arrest." The matters set  out  by  the
             judge (as accepted by  Mr  Chakmakjian  at  the  hearing)  are
             factors that could properly be taken into  consideration  when
             assessing credibility. It was open to the  judge  to  consider
             that the timing of  the  arrest  and  detention  was  far  too
             convenient and  to  take  into  consideration  the  surprising
             failure to mention the arrest in the witness  statement.   The
             judge has however not given any other reasons for the  finding
             is that the arrest has not taken place other  than  the  focus
             purely on  the  lateness  of  the  new  claim.  I  accept  the
             submission that the judge has simply dismissed the  new  claim
             (that the appellant would be at risk  because  of  an  imputed
             political opinion because his father had been arrested) on the
             basis that the appellant had not mentioned this in his witness
             statement on 6 January and  it  had  arisen  just  before  the
             appeal hearing. Whilst this might affect credibility,  it  was
             incumbent upon  the  judge  to  take  into  consideration  the
             factors set out by the appellant in oral evidence and to  give
             reasons for rejecting that evidence.  I  therefore  find  that
             there is a material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's
             decision.



15. It was open to the judge to consider  the  timing  of  the  arrest  and
    detention was far too convenient and to  take  into  consideration  the
    surprising failure to mention his in the witness statement only raining
    this at the hearing when assessing credibility. However,  I  do  accept
    the submission that  the  judge  has  dismissed  the  claim  (that  the
    appellant would be at risk because  of  an  imputed  political  opinion
    because his father had been  arrested)  simply  on  the  basis  of  the
    lateness and that the appellant had not mentioned this in  his  witness
    statement on 6 January.  The judge has not given any other reasons  for
    the finding that the arrest has not taken place other  than  the  focus
    purely on the late claim.  Whilst this might affect credibility, it was
    incumbent upon the judge to take into consideration the factors set out
    by the appellant in the oral evidence and as set out by  the  judge  in
    the decision.  I therefore find that there is a material error  of  law
    in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

16. I find that there is a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
    decision. I set that decision aside pursuant to section 12(2)(a) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

17. I considered whether or not I could  re-make  the  decision  myself.  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be heard at
    the First-tier Tribunal  at Taylor House before any  judge  other  than
    Judge Cockrill  pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of the  TCEA.
    A new hearing will be fixed on the next available date.

19. No appeal was made against the findings of  the  judge  concerning  the
    original claim, the conscription issue or the  Article  8  findings.  I
    indicated at the hearing  before  me  that  the  findings  of  fact  in
    relation to the original claim would be preserved.  Although no  direct
    appeal was made against the findings in respect of safety on return and
    re-location clearly the safety of  return  and  reasonableness  of  re-
    location must be assessed in light of any findings on the new claim.

20. The following findings are preserved:

         "35. It is noteworthy that a lot of the appellant's  narrative  has
             been  accepted  by  the  respondent   and   that   represents,
             therefore, a very proper starting point for my  consideration.
             The appellant's nationality has been accepted and his  age  is
             not  in  any  way  in  dispute.   The  main  features  of  the
             appellant's account of the sexual relationship with the  girl,
             A, have been acknowledged  and  accepted  by  the  respondent.
             Indeed, the reaction of the girl's family has been accepted by
             the respondent as being a natural and understandable  one  and
             consistent with what is known about Egyptian society.  ...

         36.  The appellant would wish me to accept that the father  of  the
             girl, A, is of sufficient power and influence, such  that  the
             police could be manipulated to  work  against  the  appellant.
             That point has really not been made out, as I see it,  by  the
             appellant.  I have heard absolutely no evidence  which  really
             would underpin any finding that this particular father of A is
             someone sufficiently powerful to influence the  police.   That
             has basically not been made out, albeit to the lower standard,
             by the appellant.  It has not been made out that any influence
             that that particular  gentleman  may  have  would  extend  the
             immediate locality of Alexandria where the appellant had  been
             living...

         37.  Over and above that there are two further elements  that  have
             been added to the appellant's case.  The first is  that,  with
             the passage of time, the appellant  is  now  over  18  and  of
             course, therefore, liable for military service.  He  had  left
             Egypt, unofficially, and he might be treated, it is  said,  as
             someone who is avoiding military service upon his  return  and
             he will be detained by the  authorities.   The  situation,  in
             that regard, is that the appellant has not  made  out,  in  my
             judgment, that simply by being returned now as  a  teenage  to
             Egypt that  he  would  be  seen  as  someone  who  has  evaded
             conscription and he has not adduced evidence to show  that  he
             would be a victim of sufficiently serious  mistreatment,  such
             as to warrant international protection upon return.

         ...

         40.  I had the clear and obvious benefit, of course, of seeing  the
             appellant and heard him give oral evidence, subject to  cross-
             examination.  I conclude that the 1951 Refugee  Convention  is
             not engaged on the particular facts of this appellant's  case,
             as I find them.  His fear is of the father  of  the  girl,  A,
             with whom he had a sexual relationship and that does  not,  in
             itself, engage the 1951 Convention.  The appellant, in all the
             circumstances, has  not  had  any  adverse  contact  with  the
             Egyptian authorities in the past.  He has no  reason  to  fear
             the police.  He has not done anything wrong  in  the  criminal
             sense, as he has  described.   ...   This  is  not  really  an
             Article 8 case.  The  appellant  has  developed  some  private
             life, of course, whilst he has  been  here.   He  has  pursued
             education and that is creditworthy.  He has got  ambitions  to
             try and study at graduate  level.   These  are  all  perfectly
             understandable ambitions that the appellant has, but  they  do
             not translate into giving any justification for the  appellant
             being permitted to stay in this country."

21. With regard to the finding of the judge that the appellant  can  safely
    and reasonably settle in a different area  of  Egypt  I  am  unable  to
    preserve those findings in relation to the original claim because it is
    not clear that the judge reached those conclusions entirely  separately
    from the finding that the appellant has family support available to him
    upon return to Egypt.  It is of course open to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to consider the safety and reasonableness  of  the  appellant's  return
    quite apart from whether or not he has any family support.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
Taylor House before any judge other than judge Cockrill for a fresh  hearing
on the new claim issue with the findings as set out above preserved.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 25 July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw














