


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05308/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 1 November 2013                          |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                arlind rexhaj
                            (NO ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This case  comes  before  me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to  the
appellant  to  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal
dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision to remove  him  from
the United Kingdom.

The appellant is a national of Albania, born on 1 December 1995. He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 29 August 2012, concealed in the back of  a  lorry,
having left Albania on 11  June  2012  and  travelled  to  Greece,  Germany,
Belgium, Kosovo, back to Belgium and then  on  to  the  United  Kingdom.  He
claimed asylum the same day. Following an interview on 30  April  2013,  his
claim was refused on 16 May 2013 and a decision was made on 17 May  2013  to
remove him from the United Kingdom.   He appealed against that decision  and
his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Meadows on  3  July  2013.
The appeal was dismissed. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
granted to the appellant on 2 August 2013.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant's claim, in summary, is  that  he  fears  persecution  on  the
basis of a blood feud declared against his family  by  a  neighbour,  Sahit,
arising out of a land dispute. His father was a farmer and owned  land  near
their home. In April 2012 their neighbour Sahit  told  his  father  that  he
would be taking some of the land, as the land documents were wrong. In  June
2012 he entered the land and began building a fence on it. There followed  a
confrontation between his father and Sahit. Sahit  hit  his  father  in  the
face and a fight broke out between his father, his  brother  and  Sahit  and
his two sons, after which Sahit's family left their  land.  His  father  and
brother then decided to leave  their  home  and  went  into  hiding  in  the
mountains. The police came to the  house  and  took  the  appellant  to  the
station and interrogated him about the incident. When  he  could  not  state
where his father and  brother  had  gone,  the  police  beat  him  and  then
released him after holding him at the station  for  a  few  hours.  When  he
returned home his mother told him that Sahit had called her and  declared  a
blood feud against all the male members  of  the  family.  Attempts  by  his
mother to reach a reconciliation failed  and  she  decided  that  he  should
leave the country. He left on 11 June 2012 with the help of an agent.

The respondent, in refusing the  appellant's  claim,  did  not  accept  that
there had been a land dispute and accordingly did not accept that there  was
a blood feud. It was considered, in any event, that  the  appellant's  claim
regarding the blood feud was  inconsistent  with  a  telephone  conversation
held on 16 May 2013 between the Home  Office  and  his  brother  and  mother
confirming that they still resided at their home and was  inconsistent  with
background information about blood feuds.  It  was  not  accepted  that  the
appellant would be at risk on return to Albania.

The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Meadows  on  3
July 2013. The judge heard from the appellant and his  uncle,  his  mother's
sister, Pelumb Shugi, and recorded the appellant's evidence that his  father
and brother were still living in the mountains as  a  result  of  the  blood
feud and that his mother remained living  in  the  family  home.  The  judge
relied on the country guidance in EH (blood feuds) Albania  CG  [2012]  UKUT
348 in which he considered the key element to  be  that  there  had  been  a
"killing". He did not accept that there was a blood feud in the  appellant's
case since no  one  had  been  killed.  He  found  the  credibility  of  the
appellant's claim to be undermined by the fact that his father  and  brother
had not taken him with them when they went into hiding.  He  found,  on  the
basis of the evidence of the telephone call made by the  Home  Office,  that
the appellant's father and brother remained living in the  family  home  and
thus did not believe the appellant's account. He considered  that  if  there
had been a genuine land dispute the appellant's father could  have  referred
the dispute to a lawyer. He found that even if the account  were  true,  the
appellant would be able to relocate to anther part  of  the  country,  where
his uncle's wife's family lived and where his uncle had visited recently  to
attend a family wedding. He found  that  there  would  in  any  event  be  a
sufficiency of protection available to the appellant. He considered that  it
would be in the appellant's best interests to be with his family in  Albania
and that it was  safe  for  him  to  return  to  his  home.  He  accordingly
dismissed the appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought on behalf of the appellant on the  following
grounds: that the judge had materially misdirected himself in regard to  the
country guidance since there was no requirement for there  to  have  been  a
"killing" in order for there to be a blood feud; that he had failed to  have
regard to the appellant's explanation as to why his father and  brother  had
not taken him with them when they went into hiding; that there  was  nothing
inherently implausible about the appellant's uncle going to Albania and  not
seeing his sister and about his account of his father not having gone  to  a
lawyer; that the judge had made a mistake of fact in regard to  his  reading
of the minutes of the telephone conversation with  the  appellant's  mother;
that he had erred by making findings on internal  relocation  without  first
putting to the appellant the matter  of  going  to  live  with  his  uncle's
wife's family;  that  he  had  erred  in  his  findings  of  sufficiency  of
protection; and that he had  erred  in  his  approach  to  the  respondent's
policy on unaccompanied minors.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 2 August  2013  on
all grounds, but with particular reference to the first two grounds.

Appeal Hearing

 The appeal came before me on 1 November  2013.  I  heard  submissions  from
both parties.

Ms Loughran expanded upon the grounds of  appeal.  She  submitted  that  the
judge had misdirected  himself  in  law  by  wrongly  considering  that  the
country guidance in EH required there to have been a killing  in  order  for
there to be a blood feud, but  in  any  event  he  had  failed  to  consider
whether the appellant would be at risk as a result of the fight between  his
family and his  neighbour.  The  judge  had  also  failed  to  consider  the
appellant's explanation for his brother and father having gone  into  hiding
without him. She submitted that the judge had erred by  considering  matters
to be implausible on the basis of his own experiences when they were not  in
fact inherently implausible and he had erred in his  interpretation  of  the
minute  taken  of  the  telephone  conversation  between  the  Home  Officer
caseworker and his brother and mother. He had also erred  by  relying  on  a
matter not previously raised, in considering that the appellant could go  to
live with his uncle's wife, he had failed to  have  regard  to  the  country
guidance in relation to sufficiency of protection and he had  erred  in  his
consideration of  adequate  reception  arrangements  for  the  appellant  on
return to Albania.

Mr Tufan submitted that EH was premised  on  there  having  been  a  killing
giving rise to the blood feud, but in any event the judge had  not  believed
the appellant's account of being at risk. There was no reason for him to  be
at risk, given that his  family's  neighbours  had  got  what  they  wanted,
namely a small strip of land. The judge had made a  valid  point  about  the
appellant's father not having taken him with him.  It  was  clear  from  the
minute of the telephone conversation that the  appellant's  brother  was  in
the family house with his  mother.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
findings he did on internal  relocation  and  had  properly  considered  the
country guidance when making his findings on sufficiency of  protection.  He
made  no  error  in  regard  to  considering  the  adequacy   of   reception
arrangements for the appellant.

Ms Loughran, in response, reiterated and clarified some of  the  points  she
had made previously.

Consideration and Findings

It is asserted, in the first ground of appeal, that  the  judge  misdirected
himself in law by wrongly reading into  the  country  guidance  in  EH  that
there had to be a killing in order for a blood feud to  arise.  I  have  had
regard to the head-note to that case setting out  the  considerations  which
should be followed by the Tribunal in assessing a  blood  feud  case,  which
states as follows:

    "6. In determining whether an  active  blood  feud  exists,  the  fact-
finding Tribunal should consider:

       (i)    the history of the alleged feud, including  the  notoriety  of
      the  original  killings,  the  numbers  killed,  and  the  degree   of
      commitment by the aggressor clan toward the prosecution of the feud;

      (ii)    the length of time since the last death and  the  relationship
      of the last person killed to the appellant;

      (iii)   the ability of members of the aggressor  clan  to  locate  the
      appellant if returned to another part of Albania; and

      (iv)    the past and likely future attitude of the  police  and  other
      authorities towards the feud and the protection of the family  of  the
      person claiming to be at risk, including any  past  attempts  to  seek
      prosecution of members of the aggressor clan, or  to  seek  protection
      from the Albanian authorities.

    "7. In order to establish that there is an active blood feud  affecting
    him personally,  an  appellant  must  produce  satisfactory  individual
    evidence of its existence in  relation  to  him.   In  particular,  the
    appellant must establish:

      (ii)    his profile as a potential target of the feud  identified  and
      which family carried out the most recent killing..".

I would agree with Mr Tufan's submission that that guidance  appears  to  be
premised on the basis that a killing or killings have taken  place  and,  as
such, it seems to me that the judge was entitled to take the  approach  that
he did.

However, even if he was in error  in  that  regard,  that  was  clearly  not
material, since he did not in any event believe the appellant's  account  of
his brother and father having had to go into hiding because  of  a  dispute.
Whilst he stated at paragraph 9.3 that he accepted that  it  was  reasonable
to believe that there was a land dispute and it was possible that there  was
physical violence as a result, he plainly did not  believe  the  claim  that
that led to the problems stated by the appellant and that  his  family  were
at risk. Ms Loughran  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the
question of risk on return arising from the dispute, but plainly that was  a
matter that he did consider and, for the reasons given at paragraphs 9.3  to
9.6, that he rejected. The  grounds  assert  that  those  reasons  were  not
properly given and were not open to the judge, but  I  do  not  accept  that
submission. The judge was entitled to have concerns  about  the  appellant's
account of his father and brother going into hiding but leaving  him  behind
following a physical conflict between the families, whether or not the  case
was, as the appellant claimed, that the blood feud was only  declared  after
their departure. Although he was not involved in the fight himself, he  was,
according to his own evidence, present at the  time  the  incident  occurred
and the judge was entitled to consider that in  such  circumstances  it  was
reasonable to expect his father and brother to have  taken  him  with  them.
Likewise, I consider that the judge was also entitled  to  place  weight  on
the appellant's  uncle's  failure  to  visit  his  sister,  the  appellant's
mother, during his visit to Albania, as undermining the truthfulness of  the
account of the problems faced by the family.

With regard to the minute taken of the telephone  conversation  between  the
Home Office caseworker  and  the  appellant's  mother  and  brother,  it  is
asserted that the judge was wrong to consider that that was evidence of  his
father and brother  remaining  in  the  family  home.  The  explanation  now
offered by the appellant is that his mother had in fact  gone  to  meet  his
father and brother in their hiding place at the time of the  telephone  call
which was made to a mobile telephone and not to a land-line  at  the  family
home. However, given that the appellant's evidence at the time he  made  his
claim had been that his father and brother were in hiding in  a  mountainous
area inaccessible by car and that their whereabouts were unknown  (referring
to the SEF at page B6 of the respondent's appeal bundle and the  appellant's
statement at page B32), and considering the wording of  the  telephone  call
minute, the judge was  perfectly  entitled  to  reject  the  explanation  he
offered in his statement and to find that his mother  and  brother  were  in
fact at the family home at the time.

Taking the judge's findings as a whole, I consider that  he  gave  full  and
cogent reasons for rejecting the appellant's account of the  problems  faced
by his family as a result of a conflict with neighbours. He was entitled  to
conclude as he did and the grounds of appeal amount, in essence,  to  little
more than a disagreement with his findings. In such  circumstances,  and  on
the basis that the appellant's  account  of  his  reasons  for  having  left
Albania was rejected,  the  judge's  findings  on  internal  relocation  and
sufficiency of  protection  are  inconsequential  and  immaterial.  However,
having considered the assertions made in the  grounds  in  regard  to  those
matters, I find that the judge, when considering the case  at  its  highest,
was entitled to conclude as he did in both  respects.  He  was  entitled  to
conclude that there was another part  of  Albania  to  which  the  appellant
could safely and reasonably  relocate,  and  where  he  had  family  on  his
uncle's side. Ms Loughran submitted that the  judge  materially  misdirected
himself in making such a finding as that had not been raised previously  and
the appellant had had no opportunity to make any  comments.  However  it  is
clear, from the evidence recorded at paragraph 6.13  of  the  determination,
that the question was put to the appellant and  it  was  then  open  to  the
judge to make his own findings on the matter. His  findings  on  sufficiency
of protection were made with regard to the background information  and  were
open to him on the basis of that evidence.

The final issue raised in the grounds was that of the  judge's  findings  on
the adequacy of reception  arrangements  for  the  appellant  on  return  to
Albania. Ms Loughran's submission was that  the  judge's  findings  in  that
regard were not properly reasoned. However I do not agree.  The  judge  gave
careful consideration to the matter  at  paragraphs  9.15  to  9.17  of  his
determination. He took account of the appellant's age, maturity  and  family
contacts in Albania in the context of the respondent's policy.  He  had  the
benefit of hearing from the appellant and had  no  evidence  before  him  to
suggest that he was particularly vulnerable or immature. He was  accordingly
entitled to conclude as he did.

For all of these reasons I find that the judge did  not  make  any  material
errors of  law  in  his  determination.  His  decision  contains  adequately
reasoned and sustainable findings of  fact  on  all  relevant  and  material
issues. He was entitled to reach the conclusions that he did.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law. I do not set aside the decision.  The  decision  to
dismiss the appellant's appeal therefore stands.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. However I  find
    no reason to continue that order and  accordingly  I  lift  the  order,
    pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.








                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
