
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05980/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th February 2015                          |On 23rd February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                          YOUSEF YOUNIS ALI SHTEWI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Sellway of Christian Gottfried & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lloyd Smith promulgated following a hearing  on  5th  November
    2013.

 2. The Appellant is a male Libyan citizen  born  24th  November  1988  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a student on  5th  August  2012.   His
    leave was due to expire on 28th May 2013,  and  on  10th  May  2013  he
    claimed asylum.  The claim was based upon his political opinion  as  he
    claimed to have been a first lieutenant in  Exterior  Security  in  the
    Investigation Bureau working for the  Gadaffi  regime.   The  Appellant
    also claimed, in the alternative, that he was entitled to  humanitarian
    protection, and that to remove him from the United Kingdom would breach
    Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The Appellant's applications were refused by the Respondent on 7th June
    2013 and his subsequent appeal dismissed by Judge  Lloyd-Smith  on  all
    grounds.  Judge Lloyd Smith heard evidence from the Appellant and found
    that his account lacked credibility, and it was on credibility  grounds
    that the appeal was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    There was no challenge to the credibility findings made by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, and the only Ground of Appeal was  that  the  judge  had
    failed to consider an Article 3 risk to the Appellant in  view  of  the
    chaotic security situation as set out in an expert report  prepared  by
    Dr George, which referred to the general insecurity in Libya.

 5. It was contended that  Judge  Lloyd-Smith  had  erred  in  finding  the
    Appellant's Article 3 claim either stood  or  fell  together  with  the
    asylum and humanitarian protection claim, as that was not the case,  as
    the Article 3 claim did not depend upon  the  Appellant's  credibility,
    but was based upon the general insecurity in Libya.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted.  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Levins found it arguable that there should have been a separate Article
    3 assessment based upon the country conditions in Libya.

 7. On 16th December 2013 the Respondent lodged a response pursuant to rule
    24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  indicating
    that the Appellant's application  for  permission  to  appeal  was  not
    opposed, and suggesting  that  there  should  be  a  fresh  hearing  to
    consider Article 3.

 8. The appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce  on  1st  July
    2014.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside,  and  the
    hearing adjourned so that the decision could be re-made by Judge Bruce.
     It appears that there was no written decision following this hearing.

 9. The appeal was re-listed before Judge Bruce on 21st  October  2014  but
    could not proceed as the Presenting Officer had to  leave  the  hearing
    centre prior to the commencement  of  the  hearing,  due  to  a  family
    emergency.  The hearing was adjourned once again, and was  subsequently
    re-listed for hearing on 6th February 2015.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - 6th February 2015

Preliminary Issues

10. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.  Mr Sellway appeared  on  his
    behalf, and candidly informed me  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    attend the two previous Upper Tribunal hearings on 1st July,  and  21st
    October 2014, and  had  also  failed  to  keep  appointments  with  his
    solicitor.

11. Mr Sellway stated that  his  office  had  advised  him  that  telephone
    contact with the Appellant had been established this  morning  at  just
    after 11am, and that he had overslept and was still in Wigan.   It  was
    believed that he intended to make his way to the hearing in  Manchester
    but no indication could be given as to his proposed time of arrival.

12. At this point Mr McVeety referred to the bundle of documents  submitted
    on behalf of the Appellant by fax dated  5th  February  2015,  and  the
    Appellant's application for these documents to be admitted pursuant  to
    rule 15(2A) of the 2008 Procedure Rules, and advised that he  had  only
    received these documents this morning and wished to consider them.

13. Mr Sellway  indicated  that  he  was  content  to  proceed  by  way  of
    submissions.  I retired to allow Mr McVeety to consider the  documents.



14. When the hearing resumed Mr McVeety indicated that he would not  oppose
    the application to admit the documents but would make submissions as to
    their relevance, as the expert report prepared by Dr Cherstich appeared
    to make credibility  findings,  contrary  to  unchallenged  credibility
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.  In the circumstances, and in
    the interests  of  justice  I  decided  to  admit  the  documents  into
    evidence.

15. Mr Sellway then made a formal request for an adjournment to enable  the
    Appellant to attend.  Mr McVeety opposed this,  submitting  that  there
    was no reason why the hearing should not proceed without the Appellant,
    who had previously failed to attend, because the issue before the Upper
    Tribunal was relatively narrow, and related to the  country  conditions
    in Libya.

16. I considered the guidance  given  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  I had to decide  whether  proceeding  without
    the Appellant in attendance would deprive him of the right  to  a  fair
    hearing.  I decided it would not.   This  is  because  the  credibility
    findings made by the First-tier Tribunal had not  been  challenged  and
    were preserved.  Mr Sellway did not argue against this, accepting  that
    there had been no  challenge  in  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, to the adverse credibility  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The grant of permission  was  limited  to  consideration  of
    Article 3 and the country conditions in Libya.  On that basis I decided
    that it was appropriate to proceed without an adjournment, and to  hear
    submissions from both representatives.

17. I clarified the  issues  in  the  appeal  and  although  the  grant  of
    permission referred to Article 3 only, it was my  view  that  I  should
    consider both humanitarian protection and Article 3, in relation to the
    country conditions in Libya, and neither representative disagreed  with
    this proposal.

18. Before hearing submissions  I  ascertained  that  I  had  received  all
    documentation upon which the parties intended to rely,  and  that  each
    party had served the other with any documentation upon  which  reliance
    was to be placed.  I had the Respondent's bundle that had  been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, with Annexes A-E, and the  Appellant's  bundle
    comprising section A with 53 pages, and section B with 258  pages.   In
    addition I had a skeleton argument prepared on behalf of the  Appellant
    dated 21st October 2014, and AT and Others (Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 00318
    (IAC).  I also had the Appellant's bundle that had  been  submitted  by
    fax on 5th February 2015 which comprised 29 pages.

The Appellant's Submissions

19. Mr Sellway relied upon the skeleton argument.   He  accepted  that  the
    starting point should be consideration of  the  country  guidance  case
    law, but pointed out  that  there  was  no  consideration  within  that
    decision, regarding tribal affiliations.  Mr Sellway  relied  upon  the
    expert report prepared by Dr Cherstich contained at pages 5-16  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.  I was asked to note  the  supplementary  statement
    made by the Appellant dated 13th January 2015 in which he claimed  that
    he is a member of the Alwani Tribe from the Tarhunah Province of Libya,
    and that his tribe had supported Gadaffi, and used to obtain  guns  and
    ammunition which would be traded with other tribes loyal to Gaddafi.

20. Mr Sellway pointed out that the expert  report  found  the  Appellant's
    narrative to be credible, and that he did come from  the  Alwani  Tribe
    who dealt in weapons, and that his account was credible and believable.
     The expert also found that two militias  mentioned  by  the  Appellant
    were tracking down and persecuting individuals perceived to  have  been
    supporters of the Gadaffii regime, and concluded that his fears on this
    were well-founded and found that the Appellant's statement that he  had
    previously been arrested by the Al Zintan militia tribe  was  credible,
    and that there would be no reasonable option of relocation  to  another
    area in Libya.

21. I was asked to note that the expert found the Appellant's account to be
    highly credible, plausible and believable and that he had a genuine and
    well-founded fear of persecution based on his  links  with  the  former
    Gadaffi regime, and that if returned to Libya  he  would  be  tortured,
    detained under inhumane circumstances and killed.

22. I was  also  asked  to  accept,  notwithstanding  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had found an identification card submitted  by  the  Appellant
    not to be reliable, that  the  expert  believed  this  ID  card  to  be
    authentic.

23. Mr Sellway noted that the expert differed  from  the  country  guidance
    decision, as to the risk of  being  detained  at  a  checkpoint  within
    Libya, and I was asked to prefer the expert  report  over  the  country
    guidance case on this issue.  Mr Sellway submitted that I  should  find
    that the Appellant would be at risk if returned to Libya because of his
    tribal affiliation, in that his tribe had been  loyal  to  the  Gadaffi
    regime.

The Respondent's Submissions

24. Mr McVeety referred me to AT, and pointed out that  the  Appellant  did
    not fall within any of the risk categories set out in that decision.

25. The First-tier Tribunal had made a finding regarding the identity  card
    that had never been challenged, and that issue was therefore not before
    me.

26. The tribal affiliation issue had been raised for the first time  before
    the Upper Tribunal.  Mr McVeety submitted that the  expert  report  did
    not say that anybody who was a member of that tribe would be  at  risk,
    and submitted that background information showed that if the  Appellant
    did belong to this tribe, it was in fact the biggest  tribe  in  Libya,
    containing one-seventh of the population.

27. I was asked to find that there was no evidence that being a  member  of
    this tribe put an individual at risk, and the expert report did not  go
    that far.

28. Mr McVeety submitted that there was no objective evidence  to  indicate
    that membership of this tribe put an individual at risk, and the expert
    had based his assessment of risk upon the Appellant being a  member  of
    the  security  services  loyal  to  Gadaffi,  which  according  to  the
    unchallenged findings made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  was  not  the
    case.  I was asked to note that the expert had accepted the Appellant's
    credibility despite findings made to the  contrary  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which findings were preserved in the absence of challenge.

29. The expert had referred to the Appellant as  originating  from  Tarhuna
    which conflicted with the Appellant's own  evidence  in  his  screening
    interview that he was from Tripoli and had lived there all his life.  I
    was asked to make a finding that  it  had  not  been  proved  that  the
    Appellant was a member of the Alwani Tribe, a sub-branch of the Tarhuna
    Tribe.

30. Mr McVeety submitted that raising the issue of the  Appellant's  tribal
    affiliation at a late stage, was an attempt to re-argue the appeal on a
    different footing.  I was asked to follow the country guidance decision
    of AT and to dismiss the appeal.

The Appellant's Response

31. Mr Sellway pointed out that tribal affiliations were not considered  in
    AT.  I was asked to conclude that there should be no negative inference
    on comments made by the Appellant in his screening interview, in  which
    he had no representation and which was simply a  preliminary  interview
    before a substantive interview took place.

32. In relation to Tarhuna, there was some background information  at  page
    17 of the Appellant's latest bundle which indicated  that  this  was  a
    town 40 miles to the south east of Tripoli,  although  it  was  in  the
    Tripolitania region.

33. I was also asked to  note  that  the  expert  had  commented  upon  the
    Appellant's name as indicating that he came from the Alwani Tribe,  and
    this would lead to him being detained by militia.

34. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

35. The issues before me relate to humanitarian protection and Article 3 of
    the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

36. The Appellant would  be  eligible  for  humanitarian  protection  under
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules if he  establishes  substantial
    grounds for believing that if removed from the United Kingdom, he would
    face a real risk of suffering serious harm, and is unable or, owing  to
    such risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of the  country
    of return.

37. Article 3 of the 1950 Convention states;

         "No one shall be subjected to torture or to  inhuman  or  degrading
         treatment or punishment."

38. The First-tier Tribunal rejected the Appellant's account on credibility
    grounds.  There was no challenge to those findings which are  therefore
    preserved.  The grant of  permission  referred  to  assessment  of  the
    country conditions in Libya, and Article  3  of  the  1950  Convention.
    With the agreement of both representatives, I have found it appropriate
    to consider  humanitarian  protection  in  relation  to  those  country
    conditions.  Set out below are preserved findings of fact;

         First-tier Tribunal Preserved Findings of Fact

         "31. The appellant's account of why he returned to  Libya  when  he
             was at risk is addressed in his  witness  statement  where  he
             says 'I entered Libya clandestinely ... I feared that I  could
             come to the attention of the militia in Libya  but  I  had  no
             other choice but to return to Libya ...  I could have  escaped
             Libya without a passport but I did not want to leave Libya for
             the UK illegally' (AB para 19).

         This explanation lacks credibility.  The majority of asylum seekers
         who are in real fear of persecution leave their country by whatever
         means they can and invariably illegally.  It is not credible, as is
         supported by the expert evidence, that the  Appellant  would  place
         himself at risk by entering Libya on two occasions just  to  enable
         him to leave on his passport.

         32.  Various aspects of  the  appellant's  claim  I  find  are  not
             plausible and lack credibility.  They can be summarised:

             (a)   the  inaccurate  information  he  gave   regarding   his
                  brother's employment as identified in the expert report.

             (b)  the implausibility of the militia aiding his flight  from
                  Tripoli Airport as identified in the expert report.

             (c)  the appellant's delay in making a claim  because  he  did
                  not understand the process.  The appellant  said  that  he
                  went to stay with a man in Wigan who was himself  applying
                  for asylum.  It lacks all credibility that  he  would  not
                  have asked his advice and discussed the process  with  him
                  or enquired where to go to claim.  It  is  quite  apparent
                  that the appellant delayed the application for as long  as
                  possible and I find that it is no coincidence that  it  is
                  timed shortly before his leave to remain expires.

             (d)  his  deceit  in  his  visa  application.   The  appellant
                  accepts that he lied to obtain his visa and never intended
                  studying in this country.  Likewise he lied on entry  when
                  he told the Immigration Officer that he intended to study.
                   Whilst asylum seekers often have to use deception to seek
                  refuge, when  one  looks  at  the  implausibility  of  his
                  account about travelling to Libya to get the visa and  the
                  other areas in which his credibility  has  been  affected,
                  this is an aspect that has affected my assessment  of  his
                  credibility.

             (e)  the documents.  It is apparent from,  and  I  accept,  Dr
                  George's assessment of the documents and his finding  that
                  the arrest warrant is  counterfeit  and  the  confiscation
                  order probably is counterfeit.   In  light  of  the  other
                  credibility findings and having  considered  the  case  of
                  Tanveer Ahmed I am satisfied  that  these  documents  have
                  been fraudulently produced in an attempt  to  bolster  his
                  claim and I reject his assertion that the expert has  made
                  a mistake.  This is further supported by the fact that the
                  wrong date is on the documents and the Appellant failed to
                  provide a credible explanation for this.  As far as the ID
                  card  is  concerned,  when  one  considers   the   damaged
                  credibility in other areas, the inaccurate account of  his
                  brother  and  his  implausible  actions,  I  have   little
                  difficulty in finding that this is  not  a  document  upon
                  which I can rely, particularly given the expert's comments
                  on the features that are lacking.

             (f)   I  do  not  accept  the  Appellant's  account   of   the
                  difficulties he has experienced in this country being as a
                  result of his activities in Libya.   Whilst  the  evidence
                  has not been formally tested it is worth noting  that  the
                  crime report's summary was that 'reference was made to the
                  fact that the Aps father worked for  Colonel  Gadaffi  and
                  that his family in Libya would be targeted.'  There is  no
                  mention of the Appellant working for the  regime  in  that
                  initial account.  The notes from the  restorative  justice
                  meeting state that the accused blame  Mr  Shtewi  for  the
                  incident and  no  reference  to  problems  from  Libya  is
                  raised.  Like I say this has not been  evidence  that  has
                  been tested in court but given his damaged credibility  it
                  is a factor I have considered.

             (g)  I find it  implausible  that  the  Appellant  would  have
                  failed to mention the kidnapping of his younger brother in
                  October 2013 prior to me asking him some  questions  about
                  his family.  If  this  had  occurred  then  I  would  have
                  anticipated  that  he  would  have  raised  it  with   his
                  solicitor and it would have been adduced in  his  evidence
                  as  opposed  to  it  being  an  afterthought  during   his
                  evidence.  I note his statement is dated 23rd October 2013
                  and therefore post dates the  alleged  incident.   This  I
                  find to be a  further  area  in  which  the  Appellant  is
                  seeking to bolster his claim.

             (h)  The Appellant contends  that  his  main  concern  is  the
                  welfare of his son and wife.  If this was the case  I  see
                  even  more  reason  that  he  would  have  made  a  timely
                  application for asylum if his fear was genuine.

             (i)  I do not accept the Appellant's account  of  getting  the
                  name of someone in Wigan who would be  prepared  to  house
                  the Appellant and  let  him  stay  there.   It  is  not  a
                  plausible account.

         33.  It follows therefore given my findings as set out above that I
             do not accept the appellant's account that he was a member  of
             the Exterior Security  Services,  was  detained  by  them  and
             released after a bribe and taken to the airport.   I  likewise
             do not accept that the incident that occurred in this  country
             was in any way  linked  to  this.   Given  the  case  law  and
             comments I am satisfied that the Appellant  would  not  be  at
             risk returning as a failed asylum seeker, particularly  as  he
             had a student visa when he left."

39. The latest evidence submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  on  5th
    February 2015, is in my view an attempt to rely  upon  an  issue  never
    previously raised by the Appellant, that being that he would be at risk
    if returned to Libya because of his tribal affiliation.  This was never
    mentioned in either his screening  interview  on  18th  May  2013,  his
    substantive asylum interview which took place on 31st May 2013,  or  in
    his witness statement dated 23rd October 2013.  It was therefore  never
    considered by the Respondent in the reasons for  refusal  letter  dated
    7th June 2013, nor was it raised before the First-tier Tribunal.

40. Not only did the Appellant not mention his tribal affiliation,  he  did
    not mention that his tribe were involved in arms dealing in support  of
    the Gadaffi regime, which is  mentioned  for  the  first  time  in  his
    witness statement dated 13th January 2015.

41. I accept that Dr Cherstich, the author of  the  expert  report,  is  an
    expert in his field.  I do not however attach significant weight to his
    report.  This is because he has based his findings upon his  conclusion
    that the Appellant has provided a credible account.  Credibility should
    be determined by the Tribunal if it is in dispute, and  in  this  case,
    although I accept that it appears Dr Cherstich was not aware  of  this,
    the First-tier Tribunal had made adverse  credibility  findings,  which
    had never been challenged, and therefore were preserved.

42. The identity card referred to in Dr  Cherstich's  report,  had  already
    been found  to  be  unreliable,  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having
    considered Dr George's report.  There had been  no  challenge  to  that
    finding, and permission to appeal was not granted on  that  issue,  and
    therefore I have no jurisdiction to consider the identity card.

43. If I did have jurisdiction, taking into account the  findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal and  having  considered  the  evidence  in  the
    round, I would not find that the identity card could be relied upon.  I
    note that Dr Cherstich was only supplied with a scanned copy,  and  not
    the original and his findings in relation to  the  card  are  extremely
    brief, concluding it to  be  authentic  because  it  conformed  to  the
    standard style, regulations and format of Libyan documentation.  In  my
    view this would be insufficient to change  the  findings  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, but as indicated previously, my view is  that  the
    issue of the identity card was not before me.

44. Dr Cherstich records in paragraph 8E of his report that  the  Appellant
    is from Tarhuna.  This conflicts with the Appellant's evidence that  he
    was born in Tripoli and lived in Tripoli.  This evidence was  contained
    not only in the screening interview, but  in  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement dated 23rd January 2013 in which in the  first  paragraph  he
    records being born in Tripoli.  I am satisfied that the  Appellant  was
    born in Tripoli not Tarhuna.

45. I find that the expert does not state that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk simply because he is a member of the Alwani Tribe, the finding  of
    risk is based upon the conclusion that the  Appellant  worked  for  the
    Gadaffi regime as an officer.  This was specifically  rejected  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and was not the subject of any challenge.

46. There is a reference to the  Appellant's  surname  identifying  him  as
    coming from the Tarhuna Tribe and in paragraph 6E  of  the  report  the
    expert  states  that  the  tribal  surname  'Alawani'  which   is   the
    Appellant's tribal surname, is found both in the Tarhuna Tribe  and  in
    one other tribe.  The expert does not state  whether  this  surname  is
    found in other tribes, but in any  event  I  was  not  pointed  to  any
    evidence that indicated that the Appellant used the  surname  'Alwani.'
    I am not satisfied that the Appellant is a member of the Tarhuna Tribe,
    but even if he is, I do not find  that  he  would  be  at  risk  simply
    because of membership of that tribe.

47. The expert report in paragraph 8 does  refer  to  the  Appellant  being
    stopped at a checkpoint  by  militia  men  if  returned  to  Libya  and
    indicates that it  is  not  a  question  of  if  he  is  stopped  at  a
    checkpoint, but when he is stopped.  This  opinion  differs  from  that
    expressed in AT, which is a country guidance decision, and I intend  to
    follow AT.  In my view  I  have  not  been  provided  with  any  cogent
    evidence to indicate that it would be appropriate to  depart  from  the
    findings made in AT.

48. In not attaching weight to the expert report, I wish to make  it  clear
    that I am not questioning the expertise of the report author, but I  am
    attaching little weight, because of the credibility  findings  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal which are preserved, and it is the  role  of  a
    Tribunal to assess credibility and plausibility.

49. I do not  find  that  the  Appellant  falls  within  any  of  the  risk
    categories set out in AT.  The Appellant was not found to be  a  former
    high-ranking official within the intelligence services of  the  Gadaffi
    regime, nor did he have any association at  senior  level  within  that
    regime.  The Upper Tribunal found  in  AT  that  the  majority  of  the
    population of Libya either worked for or had some association  with  or
    had a member of the family who worked for or had  an  association  with
    the Gadaffi regime.   Such  employment  or  association  alone  is  not
    sufficient to establish  a  risk  of  persecution  or  Article  3  ill-
    treatment on return.

50. The Appellant would be returned to Libya as a failed asylum seeker, and
    paragraph 11 of the head note to AT confirms that failed asylum seekers
    are not, for that reason alone, at real risk on return.

51. With reference to checkpoints, after an individual has  passed  through
    the airport, the Tribunal found that it is possible to travel  overland
    from Tripoli Airport to other  destinations  without  a  real  risk  of
    persecution, serious harm or Article  3  ill-treatment.   The  evidence
    does not reveal such a level of arbitrary or irrational conduct on  the
    part of militias at checkpoints such as to put the ordinary  traveller,
    which is the category into which the  Appellant  would  fall,  at  real
    risk.  In any event, the Appellant having arrived at  Tripoli  Airport,
    would not need to travel a great distance to another part of Libya,  as
    he would be able to return to his home in Tripoli.

52. The Tribunal found in AT, and the finding is summarised in paragraph  2
    of the head note, that there is not such a high level of indiscriminate
    violence in Libya, within the  meaning  of  Article  15(c)  of  Council
    Directive 2004/83/EC (Qualification  Directive)  so  as  to  mean  that
    substantial grounds exist  for  believing  that  an  individual  would,
    solely by being present there, face a real risk which threatens his  or
    her life or person.

53. I therefore conclude,  that  the  Appellant  has  not  proved  that  if
    returned to Libya, he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm,
    nor would he face a real risk of being subjected to torture or  inhuman
    or  degrading  treatment  or  punishment.   The  First-tier  Tribunal's
    findings that the Appellant is not entitled to asylum, that there would
    be no risk of a breach of Article 2 of the 1950 Convention, nor Article
    8, stands.

Decision and Reasons

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  There  was  no
application for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and an anonymity  order  is
not made.



Signed        Date 9th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.



Signed        Date 9th February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

