
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA051122015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd May 2016                              |On 9th June 2016               |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                     mj
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Selwood, of Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion and to be consistent  I  shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 31st  July  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal D Wilson in which  he  allowed  the  appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds against the decision of the  respondent
    to refuse international and human rights protection to the appellant, a
    female citizen of Afghanistan born on 1st July 1984.

 3. Judge Fisher noted that the grounds of application contended  that  the
    judge had erred in law by concluding that the appellant would return to
    Afghanistan as a lone woman when she and her husband could relocate  or
    she could join him  in  the  Sudan,  where  he  worked.   Judge  Fisher
    considered it arguable that the  judge  had  failed  to  deal  or  deal
    adequately  with  the  options  which  the  respondent  contended  were
    available to the appellant.

The Hearing and Submissions

 4. Ms Johnstone confirmed that the  respondent  relied  upon  the  grounds
    which were summarised  in  the  grant  of  permission.   She  referred,
    specifically, to paragraphs 39, 40 and 41 of the decision in which  the
    judge referred to the cross-examination  of  the  appellant  about  the
    alternatives available to her to either live with her husband in Darfur
    or return with him to Afghanistan where  he  could  obtain  employment.
    She thought the judge had failed to deal with these matters pointing to
    what she submitted was the inadequacy of the conclusions  in  paragraph
    80 where the judge concluded that the appellant would, for all material
    purposes, be a lone woman if returned to Afghanistan.  She reminded  me
    that there was no evidence to show that the husband had claimed  asylum
    even if his employer, the United Nations, had stated that it  would  be
    unsafe for him to return to Afghanistan.

 5. Mr Selwood confirmed  that  the  appellant  relied  upon  the  Rule  24
    response.  In this it is argued that the judge carefully  assessed  all
    of the evidence before him giving reasons for accepting her claims.  It
    was concluded (paragraphs 67 and 68) that the  appellant  would  be  at
    real risk of serious harm on return to  Afghanistan  because  of  death
    threats to her and her children on account of her husband's  employment
    by the UN.  This was a finding made on the basis of past persecution as
    opposed to whether or not she would also suffer harm as a  lone  woman.
    These  conclusions  were  adequately  assessed  and  supported  by  the
    husband's  employer  confirming  that  he  would  not  be  returned  to
    Afghanistan to work.

 6. As to the possibility of relocation to Sudan, the  response  emphasises
    that the appellant is not a national of Sudan and so the suggestion  is
    of no relevance when determining whether or not she is a  refugee  from
    Afghanistan.  Reference is made to Article 1A(2) of  the  1951  Refugee
    Convention which specifies that there must be a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason in the country of  the  applicant's
    nationality or former habitual residence.

 7. In further  submissions  Mr  Selwood  emphasised  that  the  judge  had
    considered the appellant's entire  claim  finding  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk wherever she went based  upon  the  problems  she  had
    suffered in Afghanistan.  Her husband had been moved  by  his  employer
    because of the risk to him in Afghanistan.  He  asked  me  to  consider
    that the lone woman point was something  of  a  "red  herring"  as  the
    appellant  had  already  been  assessed  as  being  at  real  risk   of
    persecution on return because of past events  involving  threats  which
    had continued even after her husband had left the country.

Conclusions

 8. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision did not show a material error on a point of
    law and should stand.  My reasons for that conclusion now follow.

 9. Mr Selwood is right to point out, both  in  his  response  and  orally,
    that, before considering the loan woman point, the  judge  had  already
    found that the appellant would be at  risk  on  return  to  Afghanistan
    because of the past threats which she and  her  children  had  received
    because  of  her  husband's  continuing  employment  by  the  UN.   The
    possibility  of  relocation  was  also  given  adequate  consideration,
    particularly in paragraph 67, where the judge relies upon  the  country
    guidance decision in PM and Others (Kabul - Hizb-i-Islami)  Afghanistan
    CG [2007] UKAIT 00089 to support the conclusion, open to him, that  the
    appellant's past history and circumstances would become known  at  some
    point on return putting her at risk, in effect, wherever  she  went  in
    Afghanistan.   For  completeness,  the  judge   also   reaches   proper
    conclusions about the inadequacy of protection available in relation to
    his conclusion that the appellant would be at risk on return (paragraph
    69).

10. It is therefore evident that the judge's conclusion that the  appellant
    would, for  all  material  purposes,  be  a  lone  woman  returning  to
    Afghanistan and so would be at risk on that  account  is  a  peripheral
    finding which, at  most,  serves  to  support  the  earlier  sound  and
    cogently reasoned conclusion of a real risk of persecution.   I  hasten
    to add that the judge's findings in respect of the  appellant's  status
    on return are not without good reason, in any event.  That  is  because
    the judge points out that the appellant's husband's employer,  The  UN,
    had assessed that it would be too risky  for  him  to  be  returned  to
    Afghanistan  to  work.   Although  the  respondent  believes  that  the
    appellant should have been able to relocate to Sudan where her  husband
    now works, that is not a relocation alternative bearing  in  mind  that
    the appellant is not a national of that country and so could not  claim
    the protection of it for the purpose of the definition of a refugee  in
    Article 1A(2) of the 1951 Convention.

11. Thus, the respondent's contention that the judge was wrong to  conclude
    that the appellant would be a lone woman on return to Afghanistan is an
    irrelevant point when the judge had already found  that  the  appellant
    was a refugee on the basis of past persecution and  would  be  at  real
    risk of suffering serious harm if returned whether with her husband  or
    not.  The possibility of the appellant living with her husband in Sudan
    is not a relocation alternative which the judge was obliged to consider
    even if cogent reasons were given by  the  judge  for  that  not  being
    possible.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction which I continue  having
regard to the child interests in this appeal:

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.







Signed                              Date 9th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
