
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05399/2015
                                                               AA/05407/2015
                                                               AA/05414/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 21st April 2016                     |on 25th April 2016                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             [A A] + 2 children
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mrs F Farrell, of Peter G Farrell, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are a mother and two children, all citizens of  Nigeria.
    No anonymity order has been sought.

 2. The appeals to the First-tier Tribunal were argued primarily on  asylum
    grounds.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Handley dismissed the appeals by  a  decision
    promulgated on 2nd December 2015, on asylum and on all other  available
    grounds.

 4. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    following grounds:

         "At paragraphs 30 and 31 the judge makes his assessment of the best
         interests of the children and states 'I accept that such  a  return
         will result in disruption to their  family  life  and  that  it  is
         generally in the interests of children to have both  stability  and
         continuity of social  and  educational  provision'.   He  concludes
         however that since [E] [the older child] has  changed  school  five
         times 'he is used to change'.  He deals with his relationship  with
         his father and accepts that he has a good  relationship  with  him.
         'However he can maintain contact with his  father  as  he  does  at
         present'.

         It is arguable that the fact  [E]  was  previously  in  care,  then
         returned to the  first  appellant  under  supervision  requirement,
         could have led to a different Article 8 assessment.  It is arguable
         that removing him from his present school and regular contact  with
         his father would not be in his best interests ..."

 5. A  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  refused  permission,  saying  that  the
    conclusions  reached  were  open  to  the  judge  and  were  adequately
    reasoned.

 6. The application for permission  was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    adding the observation that "a  number  of  agencies  including  social
    workers" had felt that it was in [E]'s best interests to  have  regular
    contact with his father, but otherwise relying on the same grounds.

 7. On 4th February 2016 the Upper Tribunal granted permission, on the view
    that the grounds relating to the best interests of  the  children  were
    arguable.

 8. In submissions further to the grounds, Mrs Farrell said that the  error
    of law identified centred entirely on the older child and his relations
    with his father.  He is a child now aged 10 who has lived in the UK for
    six years.  He  was  first  brought  here  by  his  mother  (the  first
    appellant) and left with her brother and his partner, which resulted in
    mistreatment such that he was taken into foster care.  During that time
    he had supervised contact with his father, who is  also  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria, living in the UK  with  his  UK  citizen  wife.   Mrs  Farrell
    pointed out that although the judge said that  the  child  could  still
    have contact with his father, the situation is that he  presently  sees
    his father (who lives in London, while the appellants live in  Glasgow)
    about once a month and during school holidays.  They are also in  daily
    contact by telephone.  It was not in the child's best interests  to  be
    removed from the UK and to lose that degree of contact.   The  question
    of how much contact there would be following removal to Nigeria had not
    been explored, but it seemed realistic to  suppose  that  such  contact
    would be much less frequent and perhaps no more than annual.  The judge
    has simply come to the wrong conclusion on proportionality, in light of
    the foregoing, and  the  decision  should  be  reversed.   Mrs  Farrell
    accepted my observation that although not so stated in the grounds this
    amounted  to  an  argument  that  the  judge  reached   an   irrational
    conclusion.

 9. Mr Matthews submitted that the grounds identified no error of law,  and
    amounted  to  no  more  than   disagreement   with   the   fact   based
    proportionality assessment which was open to the judge and was properly
    explained.  The decision, read as a whole, showed that  the  judge  had
    the factual background clearly in mind and was well aware that  removal
    to Nigeria must result in a lesser degree  of  direct  contact  between
    father and son.  It had not been shown that the interests of the  child
    would be adversely affected to any significant  extent,  or  so  as  to
    render it disproportionate to expect the three appellants to return  to
    Nigeria in accordance with the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules.
    In order to succeed the appellants would have had to establish that the
    outcome was irrational or perverse, of which they fell well short.

10. Mrs Farrell in response said that there had been no paucity of evidence
    on the matter of the best interests of the children, even if it had not
    been the main focus of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, and that
    the evidence ought to have led the judge to a  positive  conclusion  on
    those grounds.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. The grounds reassert the case made to the First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis of best interests of the children, and do no more.

13. Although Mrs Farrell again pressed that case on its merits as far as it
    properly could be made, the grounds do not  disclose  that  it  was  an
    error of law to come down on the other side.

14. The judge set out all the  relevant  circumstances  and  arrived  at  a
    proportionality assessment which was open to him.  In order to succeed,
    the appellants would have had to show absence of reasoning or at  least
    a significant deficiency.

15. If that had been an achievable  target,  I  might  have  permitted  the
    grounds to be  expanded  to  accommodate  such  a  challenge;  but  the
    decision is simply not open to such an attack.

16. The one passage which might be criticised, as identified in the  course
    of submissions, is in the middle of paragraph 31:

         "The child appellants ... are not British  citizens  and  have  not
         spent all  their  lives  here.   I  accept  that  [E]  has  a  good
         relationship with his father.  However  [E]  can  maintain  contact
         with his father as he does at  present.   It  is  likely  that  his
         father will be unable to visit him as  frequently  as  he  does  at
         present.  However many families are  in  the  situation  where  one
         parent lives or works in  a  different  country  from  his  or  her
         children.  I do not accept that the interference in the family life
         of the children is disproportionate ..."

17. Taken on its own, the proposition that [E] could maintain contact  with
    his father "as he does at present" does not fit well with the evidence.
     However the paragraph and the decision have to be  read  as  a  whole.
    There is no  reason  to  think  that  some  direct  contact  might  not
    continue, and the comment is immediately followed  by  the  observation
    that visits will not be as frequent.  There is nothing  in  this  which
    can be magnified into a material error of law.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           22 April 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
