
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05805/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th October 2016                           |On 18th October 2016          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   mr L P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Jones, instructed by Tamil Welfare Association


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 20th  March
    2015 refusing his application for asylum.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  G
    Clarke allowed the Appellant's appeal and the Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The background to this case is that the Appellant claims that he was  a
    low level supporter of the LTTE in Sri Lanka.  This was accepted by the
    Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal  letter.   The  Appellant
    claims that in  September  2008  his  father  and  elder  brother  were
    arrested and after they were released from detention they were required
    to report to the authorities.  He claims that the family were  harassed
    by the Sri Lankan authorities and that his brother was  again  arrested
    in April 2010 and that after his release he left Sri Lanka in  February
    2011.  It is the Appellant's  claim  that  the  Sri  Lankan  Army  came
    looking for his brother in February 2013 and when they were  unable  to
    find him they arrested the  Appellant,  his  younger  brother  and  his
    father.  The Appellant claims that he  was  interrogated  and  tortured
    during his attention and that he was released in May 2013.   He  claims
    that he was arrested for a second time on 22nd November  2013  and  was
    tortured and sexually assaulted during this detention.  He claims  that
    he was released on 15th December 2013 after payment of a bribe and left
    Sri Lanka on 5th February 2014.  He came to the UK and  claimed  asylum
    on 8th March 2014.

 4. The Appellant did not attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    but the judge accepted the medical evidence submitted from a consultant
    psychiatrist who met the Appellant three days before  the  hearing  and
    gave the opinion that the Appellant was not fit to attend  court.   The
    judge therefore did not draw any adverse inference from the Appellant's
    absence from the hearing.  The  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's brother-in-law.  The judge took account of medical evidence
    submitted in relation to the Appellant and took into account that there
    were some inconsistencies in the Appellant's account but  concluded  at
    paragraph 92;

         "However, any  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  are
         outweighed by the fact that the core  of  his  claim  has  remained
         consistent and credible ... I am therefore satisfied to  the  lower
         standard  that  the  Appellant  has  been  detained,  tortured  and
         sexually abused in Sri Lanka by the Sri Lankan authorities".

 5. The judge went on to consider paragraph 339K of the  Immigration  Rules
    which states;

         "The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution  or
         serious harm, or to direct threats  of  such  persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."

 6. The judge went on to say at paragraph 93

         "Having found that the Appellant has been tortured in Sri Lanka,  I
         find  that  past  persecution  is  a  good  indicator   of   future
         persecution.  I also find that  the  country  guidance  in  GJ  and
         Others has held that detention in Sri  Lanka  breaches  Article  3.
         Paragraph 356 of the judgment states that if a person  is  detained
         by the Sri Lankan security services there remains a  real  risk  of
         ill-treatment or harm requiring international protection."

 7. The judge went on to consider risk on return and took into account  the
    fact that the Appellant had left Sri Lanka on a false passport with his
    own photograph on it.  He referred again to the country  guidance  case
    of GJ and Others and states

         "There are a number of  risk  factors  relating  to  the  Appellant
         including his Tamil ethnicity, the fact he comes  from  the  Jaffna
         area in the Northern Province and his  past  involvement  with  the
         LTTE, all of which were  accepted  by  the  Respondent.   I  remind
         myself of paragraph 289 of GJ and Others which states,

         "the list of groups requiring particularly careful examination  who
         may be and in some cases are likely to be in need of  international
         protection was as follows:

          i) persons suspected of certain links with the Liberation  Tigers
             of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)"

 8. The judge went on to say that, given that the Respondent accepted  that
    the Appellant was a low level supporter of LTTE, it clearly places  him
    in the category  of  someone  who  will  attract  particularly  careful
    examination.  Also the judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  family
    links to the LTTE would place him at greater risk on  return  according
    to paragraph 390 of GJ and Others.  The judge went on to  consider  the
    fact that the Appellant would have to apply  for  an  emergency  travel
    document and his irregular exit from Sri Lanka and  concluded  that  he
    found that the Appellant will be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 9. The Secretary of State puts forward two Grounds of  appeal.  The  first
    ground is that the  judge  made  a  material  misdirection  in  law  in
    assessing the risk to the Appellant upon return by failing to have  any
    regard to the risk categories identified in GJ and Others in particular
    paragraphs 356 and the head note.  The second ground contends that  the
    judge erred in assessing the credibility of  the  Appellant  where  the
    Appellant was never himself a member of the LTTE because he  failed  to
    assess the plausibility of the Appellant's account  of  being  arrested
    and tortured as claimed when the country guidance makes clear that  the
    authorities of Sri Lanka are only interested in those  individuals  who
    are or perceived to be a threat to the Sri Lankan  State  because  they
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the judge had failed to consider the risk categories in GJ  and  Others
    and failed to assess the plausibility of the Appellant's account.

11. In her Rule 24 response and at the hearing Ms Jones contended on behalf
    of the Appellant that the  judge's  reasoning  discloses  that  he  has
    accepted the Appellant's argument that he  is  at  risk  under  GJ  and
    Others risk category 7(a) as set out in the skeleton argument submitted
    to the judge.  It is further contended that the judge has  given  ample
    and detailed reasons for accepting the  Appellant's  account  of  being
    detained and tortured in Sri Lanka.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me Mr Avery relied on the  Secretary  of  State's
    grounds.  He pointed out that both grounds were interlinked.  Mr  Avery
    accepted that the judge did mention the case of GJ and  Others  but  he
    fundamentally misunderstood the case.  He pointed out  that  the  judge
    relies on paragraph 289 and refers to the list  therein  but  fails  to
    understand that that list is one identified  by  the  UNHCR  and  later
    rejected by the Tribunal as providing a list of  risk  categories.   He
    referred  to  paragraph  290  of  GJ  and  Others  where  the  Tribunal
    considered the UNHCR Guidelines and said that they would later set  out
    what they considered to be the fact specific risk groups some of  which
    overlapped with the general category set out in the  UNHCR  Guidelines.
    He submitted that the Appellant does not fall within any  of  the  risk
    categories set out in GJ and Others.  He submitted that the Appellant's
    account of his arrest and detention in 2013 is  inconsistent  with  the
    country guidance in GJ and Others.

13. In her submissions Ms Jones submitted that the Appellant's account  was
    plausible in the context of the risk categories in GJ and Others.   She
    relied on paragraph 7(a) of the head note which states;

         "7.       The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on returning to Sri Lanka, whether
             in detention or otherwise, are:

               a) individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single State because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka."

14. In her submissions  Ms  Jones  emphasised  the  word  'perceived'.  She
    referred to the case of MP and Another v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA  Civ  829  and  to  paragraph  11  of  that
    decision which states;

         "11.     The primary submission on behalf of the Secretary of State
         is that there is no inconsistency between the UT's country guidance
         and the UNHCR Guidelines. Paragraph  356  (7)  is  consistent  with
         them. By not expressly adding to the list of risk categories,  the
         UT was not excluding the UNHCR's "more elaborate links" examples as
         risk factors. They remain  appropriate  for  consideration  in  an
         individual case. Accordingly, as there was no  departure  from  the
         UNHCR Guidelines, there was no need to explain or  justify  such  a
         departure."

15. Ms Jones relied on the Country of Origin Report from the Home Office of
    May 2016.  She referred  to  paragraph  6.4.1  which  quotes  from  the
    Amnesty International Report of 2015/16 on Sri Lanka which states

         "Tamils suspected of links to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil  Eelam
         (LTTE) were arrested and detained under the Prevention of Terrorism
         Act (PTA) which  permits  extended  administrative  detention,  and
         shifts the burden of proof onto a detainee alleging torture or ill-
         treatment."

16. She further referred to paragraph 6.2.4 which quotes the  Human  Rights
    Watch Annual Report of 2016 in relation to Sri Lanka and refers to  the
    Prevention of Terrorism Act allowing arrests for  unspecified  unlawful
    activities without warrant and permits detention  for  up  to  eighteen
    months without producing the suspect  before  a  court.   Human  Rights
    Watch also said that the law has been used since the  end  of  the  war
    including under the present government to  detain  and  torture  people
    suspected of links to  the  LTTE  including  forcibly  returned  asylum
    seekers. Ms Jones referred to 6.5.6 which cites the Freedom of  Torture
    Report and talks about people who had been associated with the LTTE  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities in some  way.   She  referred  to  paragraph
    6.6.1 of the Country of Origin Information Report which quotes from the
    US State Department's 2015 Country Report on  Sri  Lanka  which  talked
    about detention of civilians "accused of LTTE connections".   Ms  Jones
    pointed out that this document was before the judge and she pointed out
    that those extracts from the Home Office report show that  there  is  a
    risk to those who are suspected of  involvement  with  the  LTTE.   She
    submitted that it was therefore plausible that the Appellant could have
    been arrested and detained  as  claimed  and  she  submitted  that  the
    judge's findings are consistent therefore with the decisions in GJ,  MP
    and the country guidance and that the Secretary of State had  not  made
    out ground 2.

17. In relation to the first ground Ms Jones  submitted  that  the  judge's
    reasoning makes clear that he accepted that the Appellant  is  at  risk
    under category 7(a).  She accepted in her Rule  24  response  that  the
    judge had not explicitly stated the GJ risk  category  under  which  he
    finds the Appellant to be at risk but pointed out that that  the  judge
    considered the country guidance in detail and would have had  the  risk
    categories firmly in mind.  In her Rule 24 response Ms Jones highlights
    the submissions put in the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The skeleton argument highlighted the  GJ  risk  factors  as
    well as the fact that someone who is perceived to be a  threat  to  the
    unitary nature of the Sri Lankan State is at risk.  It was accepted  in
    the skeleton argument that the fact that the Appellant and  his  father
    and brother fit into the UNHCR risk factors is not in itself sufficient
    to bring him into the GJ category but it was submitted that when  taken
    together with his post-conflict detention and torture  the  account  is
    entirely coherent and internally and externally consistent.   Ms  Jones
    submitted that the judge adopted the same reasoning but  did  so  under
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules.  Ms Jones therefore  submitted
    that the submission in the skeleton argument and the reasoning  in  the
    judge's decision are the same, that is that the Appellant was  detained
    and tortured by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  2013  which  is  an
    indication of adverse interest placing him  at  risk  on  return.   She
    submitted that the judge was entitled to rely on paragraph 339K in  his
    assessment given that the adverse interest in this Appellant has arisen
    since the Sri Lankan authorities modified its approach  in  the  second
    half of 2009.  Ms Jones submitted that the determinative factor for the
    judge is not the Appellant's low level LTTE support  but  his  previous
    period of detention  and  his  irregular  exit  from  Sri  Lanka.   She
    submitted that the fact that the Appellant was tortured since the civil
    war ended means  it  must  have  been  on  the  basis  of  intelligence
    therefore paragraph 339K applies and the judge was right to apply it.

18. Ms Jones  submitted  that  if  the  judge  erred  in  not  specifically
    identifying risk category 7(a) as the one  under  which  the  Appellant
    falls this error is not material because it is clear from  the  judge's
    reasoning that he considers the detention and torture of the  Appellant
    in 2013 to be indicative of adverse interest and that a risk on  return
    therefore arises on the basis that the Appellant is perceived to  be  a
    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single State  because  he  is
    perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to  the  renewal  of
    hostilities in Sri Lanka.  In terms of the credibility finding Ms Jones
    pointed out that the judge attached significant weight to  the  medical
    evidence in support of the Appellant's claim  in  the  context  of  his
    account.  She pointed out that the judge considered inconsistencies  in
    the Appellant's evidence but concluded that the core of the Appellant's
    claim  had  been  established.   She  submitted  that  the  credibility
    findings are fully reasoned and unimpeachable.

19. In response Mr Avery submitted  that  the  evidence  from  the  Country
    Information Report does not take the case any further as a large  range
    of information was taken into account by the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and  it
    ended up with the risk categories identified in that case.  In terms of
    plausibility the background evidence must be fed into  the  credibility
    findings.  He submitted that the judge did not assess the  evidence  in
    the round relying only on the Appellant's  account  and  not  on  other
    evidence.  He asked why the Appellant would be of interest  given  that
    the Appellant's own account is difficult to  see  how  the  authorities
    could have concluded that he was involved in  diaspora  activities.  He
    submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  an  assessment  of   the
    Appellant's evidence as to whether he met the risk category of 7(a).

Error of Law

20. It is contended in the second ground of appeal that the judge erred  in
    failing to  take  account  of  the  background  evidence  in  assessing
    credibility. However I am satisfied that the judge  took  into  account
    all factors before him.  He took  into  account  all  of  the  evidence
    attaching weight to various parts of the evidence.  He clearly attached
    significant weight to the medical evidence. He concluded that the  core
    of the Appellant's account was consistent and  credible  and  that  the
    Appellant had been detained, tortured and  sexually  assaulted  in  Sri
    Lanka by the authorities there.  I do not see how this finding could be
    said to be inconsistent with the  decision  in  GJ  or  the  background
    evidence.  It is clear from the decision in GJ  that  there  remains  a
    risk to some people in Sri Lanka albeit it is  those  people  who  were
    identified as falling within the risk  categories.  It  is  clear  from
    reading the Country of Origin Report which cites from many other pieces
    of background evidence as highlighted in  Ms  Jones'  submissions  that
    there is evidence that people are arrested and detained  and  tortured.
    The judge accepted the Appellant's point about the role of  his  father
    and brother.  The Respondent had accepted the Appellant's claim to be a
    low level supporter of the LTTE.  It is therefore not implausible  that
    the Appellant could have been arrested  and  tortured  in  the  way  he
    claimed.  Accordingly this ground has not been made out.

21. The first ground is the contention that the judge  failed  to  properly
    apply the country guidance case of GJ  and  Others.   I  have  set  out
    paragraph 7(a) above.  It was accepted by Ms Jones and it is clear that
    in assessing the risk on return the judge did not specifically refer to
    the risk categories identified in the head note and in the body of  the
    decision of GJ.  Instead at paragraph 95 the judge refers to paragraphs
    289 to 290 of GJ which include the UNHCR Guidelines.

22. I note that in MP Lord Maurice Kay LJ said;

         "16.     I am unable  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  the  UNHCR
         Guidelines are  indeed  less  demanding  than  the  UT's  guidance,
         although no doubt it will be easier to  infer  that  the  paragraph
         356(7) test is satisfied where elaborate links are established than
         where they are not. The next question is whether the UT's  guidance
         is nevertheless legally  sound.  I  do  not  consider  that  it  is
         susceptible to the analysis that it permits  or  provides  for  the
         application  of  the  six  UNHCR  criteria  outside  the  ambit  of
         paragraph 356 (7) of the guidance. The way in  which  the  guidance
         was applied to NT's appeal convinces me of that. I think  that  the
         UT in KK (application of GJ) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00512 (IAC) was
         right to conclude that the UT in the present case was  endeavouring
         to provide "definitive" guidance on risk. That is why, in paragraph
         356, it stated that the risk categories then set out  "are"  rather
         than "include" those listed. It was therefore rejecting the  notion
         that those currently at risk might  embrace,  for  example,  former
         LTTE combatants  or  cadres  who  lack  current  potency,  real  or
         perceived, to threaten the unitary Sri Lankan state."

23. The Court of Appeal went on to conclude at paragraph  20  that  the  UT
    gave consideration to the UNHCR Guidelines but was  entitled  to  adopt
    the less generous approach to risk demonstrated by its guidance and the
    explicit and implicit reasoning underlining it.  The Court of Appeal in
    MP therefore confirmed the validity of the country guidance promulgated
    by the UT in GJ.

24. It is clear from reading GJ as a whole and from reading the decision in
    MP that the Tribunal provided more narrow guidance than that set out in
    the UNHCR Guidance in terms of the assessment of risk.  To that  extent
    the judge, whilst clearly aware of  GJ  and  Others  and  the  guidance
    therein, failed to specifically address the risk categories in GJ.

25. However I do not consider this to be a material error.  This is because
    it is clear on the findings made by the judge that he accepted that the
    Appellant had been arrested and tortured and detained by the Sri Lankan
    authorities twice in 2013.  He accepted that the Appellant had left Sri
    Lanka on a false passport with his own photograph on it  and  therefore
    had made an irregular exit  from  Sri  Lanka.   He  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had family links to the LTTE. In my view it is clear from the
    way the judge considered the UNHCR categories that he accepted that the
    Appellant is someone who would be suspected of having links to the LTTE
    in the post-war scenario.  Putting all of this  together  and,  in  the
    context of the skeleton argument put before the judge which  made  this
    argument very clearly and the judge's consideration of  paragraph  339K
    of the Immigration Rules, I accept that it is clear  from  the  judge's
    reasoning that he considered the detention and torture of the Appellant
    in 2013 to be indicative of  ongoing  adverse  interest.  The  risk  on
    return therefore arises  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellant  must  be
    perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as a threat.

26. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there is no  material  error
    of law in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the decision and the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed                              Date: 17 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date: 17 October 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


