
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05458/2015
                                                               AA/05583/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th June 2016                             |On 18th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  (1)  M P K
                                   (2) J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Abonie (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes, promulgated on 9th October 2015, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 9th September 2015.  In the  determination,
    the judge dismissed the appeals of both Appellants, whereupon they both
    applied for, and were  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are husband and wife.  The first Appellant, the wife, is
    a Tutsi, and the second Appellant, her husband, is a Hutu, and both are
    nationals of Burundi.   They  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse them asylum dated 12th  March  2015.   The
    first Appellant's claim is that, as a Tutsi married in  2008  in  South
    Africa to a man who is a Hutu, there are dangers that she would face if
    returned to Burundi.  Her father was killed and she  was  detained  and
    raped and beaten.  The second Appellant's claim is that as a  Hutu,  he
    would be regarded as a rebel supporter, particularly as his brother had
    been shot on return to Burundi, which is why he was granted  asylum  in
    South Africa.  Both  Appellants  claim  that  they  were  subjected  to
    xenophobic attacks in South Africa such that it was  not  possible  for
    them to relocate within that country (see paragraphs 12 and 14).

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed that there was  evidence  that  there  was  frequent
    intermarriage between Hutus and Tutsis and that it was  estimated  that
    up to 70% of Burundians are of mixed ethnicity (see paragraph 22).  The
    judge held that given the prevalence of mixed marriages and the decline
    of interethnic violence, he did not believe that  the  Appellants  were
    persecuted as  claimed  in  South  Africa  by  their  fellow  Burundian
    refugees (paragraph 25).  As for the second Appellant,  the  judge  was
    not satisfied that the claim that his brother was killed,  would  place
    him at risk because he was inconsistent in the evidence he  gave.   The
    judge  held  that  the  accounts  given  by   both   Appellants   "were
    contradictory and unclear" (paragraph 27).   Further,  the  judge  held
    that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  second  Appellant  would  be
    identified as being of interest in Burundi (paragraph 29).  Indeed, the
    Appellants did not attempt relocation in South Africa, which is a large
    country, which they  would  have  done  had  they  been  at  risk  (see
    paragraph  31).   Consideration  was  given  to  the  fact   that   the
    Appellants' eldest son has an allergy problem but there was  no  up-to-
    date medical evidence relating to this (paragraph 33).

 4. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  making  the
    credibility findings that were made and failed  to  take  into  account
    arguments made in submissions on risk on return  due  to  the  family's
    recognition as refugees.

 6. On 25th November 2015, the Tribunal held that, "there is real substance
    in most of the complaints in the fairly rambling grounds on  which  the
    Appellants seek permission to appeal" but that it was possible that the
    judge may have erred in not sufficiently  factoring  in  the  statement
    from the Appellant's mother (who has refugee status)  with  respect  to
    how the second Appellant's brother was killed.

 7. On 15th December 2015, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that the judge made adequate  findings  of  fact  in  relation  to  the
    credibility of the Appellants from paragraph 16 onwards.  At  paragraph
    29 the judge assessed risk on return to the  Appellants  and  concluded
    that there would not be any risk.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 24th June 2016,  Mr  Howard,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellants, submitted that he would rely upon the Grounds
    of Appeal.  He said that it was significant that  both  Appellants  had
    been granted refugee status in South Africa.  He  would,  however,  now
    make two points.

 9. First, the judge misdirected himself with regard to the mode of  escape
    of the Appellant after his brother was killed (see  paragraphs  26  and
    27) because the judge assessed the  "plausibility"  of  the  claim  and
    rejected the Appellant's claim on the basis that it was  unlikely  that
    the facts of his claim would have taken place given the risks that were
    involved if he was also a wanted  person.   However,  the  case  of  HK
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1037 saw the Court of Appeal confirm that  to  apply  a
    yardstick of "inherent probability" can be dangerous  and  even  wholly
    inappropriate in asylum cases, even though it may be  helpful  in  many
    domestic cases.  If there were inconsistencies in  what  the  Appellant
    was perceived to have said, these inconsistencies were not  substantial
    enough  to  render  the   Appellant's   account   to   be   incredible.
    Furthermore,  the  bundle  of  evidence  submitted  showed   that   the
    Appellants would not be safe if they were to be  deported  anywhere  in
    Burundi.  The second Appellant had a tenuous  connection  with  Burundi
    and none of the children had been there.  The judge also was  wrong  to
    say (at paragraphs 29 to 31) that the claim put forward was  incredible
    by the Appellant as reasons should have  been  given.   Therefore,  the
    entire assessment of "plausibility" was flawed.

10. Second, the judge failed to take into account the fact that the  family
    members had been granted refugee status.  The mother  and  sisters  and
    other family members had been granted asylum status.  This  meant  that
    risk on return as a failed asylum seeker would be  significant  to  the
    Appellants.  This was a "Robinson obvious" point and ought to have been
    considered by the judge but was not factored in.

11. For her part, Ms Abonie submitted that she would rely upon the Rule  24
    response and simply state that what  this  amounted  to  was  simply  a
    disagreement with the judge's determination.  Adequate reasons had been
    given.

12. Although the Appellant's mother's letter is not mentioned by the  judge
    it was not material because the judge had stated at paragraph 29 of the
    determination that, "if I am wrong and his account is to be believed  I
    have considered what he said about events in 2000 in the light  of  the
    situation now", and that, "there  is  no  evidence  that  he  would  be
    identified as being of interest in Burundi now either by  the  security
    services or any relatives that he may have.  There is  no  evidence  to
    show that ..." (paragraph 29).

13. In reply, Mr Howard submitted that the judge  had  not  made  a  proper
    assessment of paragraph 29 of the key features that arose in this case.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision  and  re-make  the
    decision.  This is a case where the judge has looked at each of the two
    Appellant's claim on their own individual merits.  Having done so,  the
    judge has rejected those claims.

15. As for the first Appellant, there was  frequent  intermarriage  between
    Hutus and Tutsis and the judge was clear that, "the fact of their being
    in a mixed marriage is not to  be  regarded  as  a  source  of  danger"
    (paragraph 29).

16. As for the second Appellant, the judge held that the account  given  by
    the Appellant, which is properly set out in detail at paragraph 26, was
    one that was "contradictory and unclear" (paragraph 27).

17. But most importantly, the judge then went on to say that even if he was
    wrong in this, he had considered the position now,  and  "there  is  no
    evidence that he will be identified as being of interest in Burundi now
    either by the security forces  or  any  relatives  that  he  may  have"
    (paragraph 29).  These are all conclusions that the judge was  entitled
    to come to and there is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

18.  There  is  no  material  error  of  law  in   the   original   judge's
    determination.  The determination shall stand.

19. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their  families.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st  September 2016
