

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05689/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent:          |
|On 20 March 2014                              |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     DB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Chaudhry of Duncan Lewis and Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule 14 of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria who was born on 1 February 1969.
       On 29 May 2013, the appellant claimed asylum with his wife,  son  and
      daughters as his dependents.  On 29 May 2013, the Secretary  of  State
      refused the appellant's application for asylum and on that date made a
      decision refusing him leave to enter.   The  appellant  appealed  that
      letter decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant's claim was that he  was
      a supporter of, and worked for, the Algerian Popular Movement (MPA), a
      political party in Algeria founded in 2012.  He claimed that he worked
      for the leader of the party and his brother.   The  appellant  claimed
      that he promoted the party by distributing leaflets  and  speaking  to
      the public.  His wife promoted the party policy concerning women.  The
      appellant claimed that at the beginning of November 2012 he received a
      threatening  telephone  call  at  the  MPA  offices  from  an  unnamed
      political group which demanded that the appellant leave  the  MPA  and
      join it.  He subsequently received a threatening letter and a  further
      telephone call from the group.   He  was  told  not  to  report  these
      incidents to the police or his manager and he did not do so.  However,
      he and his wife were frightened and put in fear of their  lives.   The
      appellant and his family came to the UK in December 2012  as  visitors
      before returning to Algeria after 15-17 days.  The appellant said that
      he did not claim asylum because he did not know how to and his  family
      ran short of money so they  returned  to  Algeria.   On  returning  to
      Algeria, in January through February 2013, the appellant and his  wife
      did not remain at their family home but moved around.  In March  2013,
      a second threatening letter arrived at the appellant's home  insisting
      that the appellant left the MPA party or he  and  his  family  members
      would be killed.  A few days  later,  the  appellant  and  his  family
      travelled to the UK where they claimed asylum.

The Appeal

   4. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge McLachlan)  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal.  Judge McLachlan rejected the appellant's  account.   She  did
      not accept that the appellant had been involved with  the  MPA  as  he
      claimed or that he and his family had been threatened by members of  a
      rival group.  In addition, Judge McLachlan found  that  the  appellant
      and his  family  could,  in  any  event,  safely  internally  relocate
      elsewhere in Algeria where the Algerian authorities  would  provide  a
      sufficiency of protection.

   5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.   On
      14  August  2013  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (DJ  Lewis)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before us.

Discussion

   6. The majority of the grounds relate to the Judge's adverse  credibility
      findings.  Before turning to those, we deal  first  with  three  other
      matters raised in the grounds.

   7. First, it is argued that the Judge wrongly considered the risk to  the
      appellant from the Algerian authorities when his fear  was  from  non-
      state actors in Algeria.  That submission (at para 8 of  the  grounds)
      is directed to para 39 of the Judge's determination which  is  in  the
      following terms:

           "39.  I find that the Appellant and his dependants do not have a
                 well-founded  fear  of  persecution  and  their  return  to
                 Algeria will not involve any of them in risk  upon  return.
                 The Appellant and  his  family  members  travelled  without
                 problems from Algeria on their passports without attracting
                 the adverse interest of the Algerian authorities.  Case law
                 has established that merely being a  failed  asylum  seeker
                 would not place them at risk upon  return.   The  Appellant
                 has not claimed that members of his family  are  associated
                 with Islamist  groups.   In  fact  the  MPA  is  a  secular
                 political party."

   8. This ground is wholly without merit.   Throughout  the  determination,
      Judge McLachlan deals with the appellant's claim to be a member of the
      MPA and to have been threatened by a rival political  group.   In  the
      paragraphs leading up to paragraph 39, Judge McLachlan gave  a  number
      of reasons for not accepting the truth of the appellant's  claim.   In
      paragraph 39, the first sentence is clearly a  conclusion  based  upon
      her assessment of the evidence relating to the risk claimed  to  arise
      from that rival group.  The  remainder  of  paragraph  39  is  clearly
      directed to the issue of whether nevertheless, even in the absence  of
      that risk, the appellant would be at risk on return as a failed asylum
      seeker from the Algerian authorities.  The Judge  concluded,  entirely
      correctly, that the appellant would not  be  at  risk  on  that  basis
      either. There is no basis for suggesting that the Judge  misunderstood
      the nature of the appellant's claim and her  adverse  finding  in  the
      first sentence of paragraph 39 of her determination  is  a  conclusion
      based upon an assessment of the evidence relating to that claim.

   9. Secondly, the grounds argue that the Judge erred in law in failing  to
      consider the possibility  of  an  adjournment  as  the  appellant  was
      unrepresented.   The grounds  assert  that  the  appellant  was  at  a
      disadvantage in dealing with questions put to him  by  the  Presenting
      Officer and, as a vulnerable individual, the Judge had failed to  take
      into account whether there could  be  a  fair  hearing  without  legal
      representation.  Mr Chaudhry accepted before  us  that  there  was  no
      evidence to support what was said to be the impact upon the  appellant
      at the hearing.  It is clear to us on reading the  determination  that
      the appellant had a full opportunity to  present  his  case  including
      giving oral evidence before the Judge.   We see nothing unfair in  the
      Judge  hearing  the  appeal  despite  the   absence   of   any   legal
      representation by the appellant.

  10. Thirdly, the grounds assert that  there  were  difficulties  with  the
      interpreter at the hearing and the appellant was not asked whether  he
      was satisfied with  the  interpreter.   Again,  Mr  Chaudhry  accepted
      before us that there was no evidence to support this ground.   Nothing
      in the determination suggests  that  the  appellant  even  raised  any
      difficulty with the interpreter at the hearing.  That is  by  contrast
      with the appellant's position that answers given at interview had  not
      been correctly interpreted.  The  Judge  rejected  this  part  of  the
      appellant's case at paras 29-30. In our judgment, there is nothing  in
      the determination to suggest that there is any basis for the assertion
      in the grounds that the appellant's evidence at the  hearing  was,  in
      any way, affected by difficulties with the interpreter.

  11. Having rejected those aspects of the grounds, we turn  to  the  points
      raised in relation to the Judge's adverse credibility findings.

  12. First, it is argued that the Judge placed "unfair weight" on  a  minor
      inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  evidence.   At  para  24  of  the
      determination the Judge took  into  account  that  the  appellant  had
      stated in evidence that the MPA was founded in January 2012  when,  on
      the basis of the objective evidence, it was in fact founded  on  17/18
      February 2012.  Paragraph 24 is as follows:

           "24.  The party  was  only  founded  in  February  2012.   I  am
                 satisfied that the Appellant should have  known  that  date
                 if, as he claimed, he had been involved since  the  party's
                 inception.  The Appellant wrongly stated that the  MPA  was
                 founded in January 2012, rather than 17-18  February  2012.
                 I  am  satisfied  from  the  objective  evidence  that  the
                 Appellant was  inaccurate  as  to  his  assertions  on  the
                 founding date."

  13. The grounds do not suggest that the Judge was  wrong  to  identify  an
      inconsistency  between  the  objective  evidence  and  that   of   the
      appellant.  Rather, it is said that the  Judge  placed  unfair  weight
      upon it.  It was one of a number of reasons given by the Judge in  her
      determination for doubting the credibility of the appellant and it was
      an inconsistency which, in our judgment, the  Judge  was  entitled  to
      take into account given that the appellant's  case  was  that  he  was
      involved with the MPA at the time of its formation in 2012.

  14. Secondly, the grounds argue that the Judge  was  wrong  to  take  into
      account, in assessing the credibility of the appellant's account, that
      his wife in her evidence had given an incorrect name for the MPA.   At
      paragraph 28, the Judge dealt with the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
      wife as follows:

           "28.  The Appellant claims that his wife  also  worked  for  the
                 party dealing with women's  issues but when she  was  asked
                 at the screening interview for the name of  the  party  for
                 which she worked, she called it the "Mouvement  Patriotique
                 Algerienne", rather than the  correct  name  of  "Mouvement
                 Populaire Algerien".  I reject the  Appellant's  suggestion
                 that his wife responded incorrectly  at  interview  because
                 she was scared  and  panicking.   She  answered  all  other
                 questions at  the  screening  interview  with  clarity  and
                 accuracy." (our emphasis)

  15. We are  in  no  doubt  that  the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  this
      discrepancy into account given the accuracy of all the  other  answers
      given by the appellant's wife at the screening interview.  It was not,
      in our judgment, a "small error" which the Judge  could  not  properly
      take into account for the appellant's wife to substitute "Patriotique"
      for "Populaire" in the name of the political party which the appellant
      claimed that she supported  and  furthered  its  policies  on  women's
      issues.

  16. Thirdly, the grounds argue that the  Judge  was  wrong  to  take  into
      account the fact that the appellant wrongly, in his evidence, recalled
      the colours of the party logo.  At para 31 the Judge said this:

           "31.  The Appellant has provided cards, allegedly confirming the
                 membership of himself and his wife in the MPA.   I  am  not
                 satisfied that the Appellant has shown those  cards  to  be
                 reliable evidence of his  support  for  and  activities  on
                 behalf of that party.  The cards themselves are pristine in
                 appearance, and although they bear the photographs  of  the
                 Appellant and his wife, they are apparently  of  so  little
                 significance to the  Appellant  that  he  could  not  state
                 correctly the colours of the party displayed  on  his  card
                 and, as far as his wife is concerned, she could not  repeat
                 the title of the party, although that is  set  out  on  the
                 reverse of the card allegedly belonging to her."

  17. When we enquired of Mr Chaudhry what were the relevant colours on  the
      cards he told  us  that  they  were  green  and  red.   The  appellant
      identified the colours as green and white.  We fail to  see  how  that
      difference can be properly described  as  only  "slightly  incorrect".
      The Judge was, in our view, entitled to take into account (in addition
      to the appearances of the cards) the appellant's  inability  correctly
      to identify one of the two primary colours in the logo of the party he
      claimed to support and to have worked for.

  18. Fourthly, the grounds argue that the Judge  was  wrong  to  take  into
      account that the appellant had applied for visit visas to the UK  some
      weeks before  he  claimed  that  he  had  been  first  telephoned  and
      threatened in early November  2012.   The  grounds  argue  that  on  a
      "careful reading of the appellant's substantive asylum interview", the
      appellant had said that he had applied to come to the UK as a  visitor
      in order to have a  holiday  rather  than  because  of  any  fears  in
      Algeria.   The  grounds  argue  that  the  Judge   misunderstood   the
      chronology of events in para 38 of her determination.

  19. Paragraph 38 is in the following terms:

           "38.  His truthfulness is also demonstrated by the fact that the
                 applications for visit visas were made  some  weeks  before
                 the first claimed telephoned threat to the Appellant  which
                 took place in early  November  2012.   The  Respondent  has
                 pointed out that the visas were applied for on  10/10/2012,
                 although  I  note  from  the  copies  of  the  applications
                 contained in the Respondent's bundle, the applications were
                 applications submitted  online  on  20/09/2012.   Whichever
                 date is correct, it is quite clear  that  the  applications
                 for visas were made several weeks before the claimed  first
                 approach to the Appellant by the alleged  terrorist  group.
                 Therefore, on his own account, the  Appellant  cannot  have
                 intended  to  have  obtained  visit  visas  in   order   to
                 facilitate his arrival in the UK in order to claim  asylum.
                 "

  20. In his asylum interview at Question 53, the appellant was asked,  "Why
      did you apply for a visa in 10th October 2012?" to which he replied "I
      applied for a holiday as a tourist".

  21. Whilst the evidence may not have shown  that  the  appellant  said  he
      applied for visas to the UK because of what he feared in  Algeria,  it
      is clear that his evidence was that by the time that he and his family
      travelled to the UK in December 2012 it  was  with  the  intention  of
      claiming asylum.  The Judge set that evidence out in para  36  of  her
      determination.  It was the appellant's evidence that he did not  claim
      asylum because he did not know how to and  his  family  ran  short  of
      money.  However, it was also the appellant's evidence that he had lied
      on his visa application form in order to obtain the visas.  The  Judge
      dealt with the appellant's evidence at paragraph 36 as follows:

           "36.  The Appellant claimed that  when  he  travelled  with  his
                 family to the  UK  at  Christmas  2012,  it  was  with  the
                 intention of claiming asylum because he and his  wife  were
                 so fearful of what was happening to  them  in  Algeria.  He
                 stated that he did not know how to claim asylum although he
                 was subsequently advised by another Algerian that one  went
                 to an immigration officer at the airport.  The  family  ran
                 short of money in the UK and so returned to  Algeria.   The
                 Appellant and his wife are both intelligent well  educated,
                 articulate  people   holding   responsible   positions   in
                 employment in Algeria at the local university.   I  do  not
                 find it to be believable that, if the Appellant  wished  to
                 claim asylum, he would not have ascertained exactly how  to
                 do  that.   Evidently,  he  is  able  to  access   internet
                 information.  The Appellant has admitted that  he  lied  on
                 his visa application form when applying for visit visas  by
                 stating that he and his family intended to visit a  friend,
                 Abderrahmane Mazit, living in Folkestone,  Kent.   In  oral
                 evidence, he stated that there was such a person who was  a
                 friend of a friend, but the invitation issued was a sham in
                 order to obtain visas.  There was  never  an  intention  to
                 visit the man.  It was a device he  employed  in  order  to
                 facilitate  the  issue  of  visas  to   himself   and   his
                 dependants."

  22. At para 37 the Judge continued:

           "37.  I conclude that the Appellant  has  shown  himself  to  be
                 dishonest in  his  dealings  with  the  UK  authorities  in
                 obtaining the issue of visit visas to himself  and  members
                 of his family, so too his being untruthful in his claim  to
                 fear persecution.  I do not believe that if  the  Appellant
                 wished to claim asylum, he could and would not have done so
                 on his visit to the UK in December 2012.  The fact that  he
                 did not, undermines his credibility."

  23. Those paragraphs immediately precede the paragraph challenged  in  the
      grounds, namely paragraph 38 of the determination.   It  was,  in  our
      judgment, properly open to the Judge for the reasons she gave to  take
      into account the circumstances  in  which  the  appellant  had  sought
      (dishonestly) visas to come to the UK and also had  not,  despite  his
      claimed fears in Algeria, made a claim for  asylum  in  December  2012
      but, instead, had returned to Algeria.

  24. In conclusion, we see no basis in the grounds for concluding that  the
      Judge's determination contains an error of law which justifies setting
      aside her adverse credibility findings.  The Judge gave  a  number  of
      other reasons, including the appellant's lack of knowledge of the  MPA
      which he wrongly described as an  Islamic  party  when  the  objective
      evidence showed that it was a  secular  party  (see  para  26  of  the
      determination).   Further,  the   Judge   identified   a   number   of
      inconsistencies   in   the   appellant's   evidence   concerning   the
      circumstances in which he claimed to have been  threatened,  including
      the number of telephone warnings he had received.  The Judge was  also
      entitled to take  into  account  that  it  was  implausible  that  the
      appellant would not have told others (particularly within the MPA)  of
      the threat that had been made against him and that  he  did  not  know
      what group had threatened him despite it being part of his claim  that
      they wished him to leave the MPA and join them.

  25. In our judgment, the Judge did not err in law in reaching her  adverse
      findings and concluding that the appellant  had  failed  to  establish
      that he was at risk on return to Algeria.

Decision

  26. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss
      the appellant's appeal stands.

  27. The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
