
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05666/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 January 2015                   |On 17 April 2015                     |


                                   Before
                       MR CMG OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                     AM
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Dunlop, Counsel, instructed by Treasury Solicitor



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant was granted  entry  clearance  in  September  2006  as  a
    student. There followed successive  decisions  to  vary  his  leave  to
    remain, but ultimately his leave to remain expired on 2 December  2012.
    In the meantime  his  wife  and  eldest  daughter  were  granted  entry
    clearance to join him as his dependents in January 2007, and  a  second
    child was then born to the couple in the UK on 3 April 2011. All of the
    family are citizens of Malawi.

 2. As an overstayer, on 24 December 2012,  the  Appellant  applied  for  a
    grant of leave to remain. In so doing he relied upon a risk of a breach
    of the Article 3 rights of his wife in the  event  of  her  removal  to
    Malawi. That application was refused on 27 September 2013.

 3. The Appellant then made an application on his own behalf for asylum  on
    7 November 2013. In so doing he relied upon the risk of  harm  that  he
    said his eldest daughter would face in the  event  of  her  removal  to
    Malawi. At interview he accepted that neither he nor his wife faced any
    risk of harm in the event of their removal  to  Malawi,  and  that  his
    concerns were focused upon his eldest daughter and the consequences for
    her education if  the  family  returned.  The  asylum  application  was
    refused on 6 August 2014, and in consequence  a  series  of  individual
    decisions to remove the Appellant and each  member  of  his  family  to
    Malawi as overstayers were made by the Respondent.

 4. The Appellant alone lodged an appeal against the removal decision  that
    was made in relation to him.  That  appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum,
    humanitarian  protection,  and  human  rights  grounds  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge Hands in a determination  promulgated  on  22  September
    2014. Permission to appeal that decision was granted to  the  Appellant
    by First Tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 16 October 2014.

 5. The matter came before a Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal on  5
    December  2014.  Based  upon  a  combination  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, the grant of permission, and the oral submissions
    made at that hearing, the following questions of law were identified as
    arising,  and  directions  were  made  for  their  determination.  (For
    administrative  reasons  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  not  been  able  to
    reconstitute the same panel, but the parties have no objection to  that
    and are content to treat the hearing of 5 December 2014 as a directions
    hearing.)

      i) The legal consequences of the failure of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (the "FtT") to consider all of the factors listed in  section  117B
         of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the  "2002
         Act"), taking into account what is mandated by section 117A(2)(a).

     ii) Whether, having regard to section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act, the  FtT
         erred in law in holding, in [52], that the  private  lives  of  all
         members of the Appellant's family were established during a  period
         when their immigration status was precarious "in that it was  of  a
         temporary nature dependent upon the Appellant's right to remain  in
         the United Kingdom as a student".

    iii) Whether, independent  of  the  two  issues  formulated  above,  the
         determination of the FtT is  erroneous  in  law  having  regard  to
         section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009.
         [See, in this respect, the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in
         JO Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).]

Sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act

 6. Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 introduced into the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 a new Part 5A, headed "Article 8 of the
    ECHR: Public Interest Considerations". These new provisions are set out
    in sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act, which were brought into  effect  on
    28 July 2014  pursuant  to  Article  3  of  The  Immigration  Act  2014
    (Commencement No 1, Transitory and Saving Provisions) Order 2014.  They
    provide, in so far as is material to this appeal, as follows;

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

            (a) breaches a person's right to respect for private and family
            life under Article 8, and

            (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the  Human
            Rights Act 1998.

         (2) In considering the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

            (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B,
            and

            (b) in cases concerning the deportation of  foreign  criminals,
            to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3) In subsection (2), "the public  interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).




         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

            (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

            (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

            (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

            (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

            (a) a private life, or

            (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

            (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
            relationship with

            a qualifying child, and

            (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
            United Kingdom.




         117D Interpretation of this Part

      1) In this Part -

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
         who -

            (a) is a British citizen, or,

         b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
            seven years or more.

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who -

            (a) is a British citizen, or,

            (b) who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the meaning of
            the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act.

The failure to set out ss117A-117D in full

 7. It is common ground that although  the  judge  in  the  course  of  her
    decision did make express reference both to s117A(3), and to  s117B(5),
    she did not therein set out in full either the provisions of s117A,  or
    s117B, and, she did not make any express reference to any of the  other
    provisions of s117A-D.

 8. The Appellant has sought to persuade us that this  is,  of  itself,  an
    error of law that is sufficient to require the decision to be set aside
    and remade. We disagree. It is not necessary for the FtT to set out  in
    full in each of its decisions each of the statutory provisions that  it
    seeks to apply to the evidence placed before it in  the  course  of  an
    appeal. Still less is it  necessary  to  make  reference  to  statutory
    provisions that have no application to that evidence. What is  required
    of the FtT is no more, and no less,  than  that  its  decisions  should
    demonstrate that the relevant statutory provisions have been taken into
    account, and that they have been applied to the facts of the particular
    appeal; AJ (India) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ  1191  at  [43].  That  is  a
    requirement of substance, rather than of form, and in this  respect  we
    would respectfully reiterate the caution expressed by Dyson LJ in Baker
    v SSCLG [2008] EWCA Civ 141 at [37];

         "The question in every case is whether the decision  maker  has  in
         substance had due regard to the relevant statutory  need.  Just  as
         the use of a mantra referring to the statutory provision  does  not
         of itself show that the duty has been performed, so too  a  failure
         to refer expressly to the statute does not of itself show that  the
         duty has not been performed."

 9. Accordingly we reject the suggestion that the effect of s117A(2) is  to
    render unlawful a decision of the FtT simply for failure to set out  in
    turn each of the provisions of s117A and s117B, whether or not they are
    relevant to the facts of a particular appeal. We can  find  no  support
    for any contrary view in either the decision of the Court of Appeal  in
    YM (Uganda) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1292, or  the  decisions  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  R  (on  the
    application of Luma Sh Khairdin) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (NIA 2002: Part 5A) IJR [2014] UKUT  00566  (IAC),  or  Dube
    (ss117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC).

10. In our judgement the FtT's duty is quite clear. By virtue  of  s117A(2)
    the  FtT  is  required  (in  particular)  to   have   regard   to   the
    considerations listed in s117B,  and  where  the  appeal  concerns  the
    deportation of a foreign criminal, the considerations listed in  s117C.
    The FtT has no discretion to leave one of those considerations  out  of
    account, if that is a consideration that  is  raised  on  the  evidence
    before it. Equally, there can be no error of law in the failure of  the
    FtT to have regard to one  of  those  considerations  if  the  evidence
    before the FtT does not raise it. Thus the circumstances  of  a  single
    man who asserts no relationship with a qualifying partner or  child  do
    not require the  FtT  to  specifically  set  out,  and  then  discount,
    s117B(6).

11. On the other hand, as the Upper Tribunal pointed out in Dube  [23]  the
    considerations set out in ss117B-117C are not  rendered  an  exhaustive
    list by s117A(2). If there are other relevant considerations raised  by
    the evidence then the FtT must have regard to them.

12. Although the judge did not in her determination make specific reference
    to s117B(1) or set that provision out in full, it  is  plain  from  its
    terms [57]  that  she  did  direct  herself  to  the  effect  that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  was  in  the  public
    interest.

13. There is also in our judgement no requirement that the FtT should  pose
    and answer the same question more than once,  simply  as  a  matter  of
    form. Thus since  both  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and s117B(6), both raise the same  question  in  relation  to  a
    particular child, of whether or not it would be  reasonable  to  expect
    that child to leave the UK: it is a question that need only be answered
    once. Although the judge did not make specific reference to s117B(6) or
    set its provision out in full, it  is  plain  from  the  terms  of  her
    determination at paragraphs 30-37,  48-52,  and  56-58,  that  she  did
    consider at some length the circumstances of  the  children  and  their
    ability to relocate to Malawi. There is no suggestion  before  us  that
    the judge failed to have regard to any material  circumstance  relating
    to either child. The mere presence of the children in the UK, and their
    academic success, was not a "trump  card"  which  their  parents  could
    deploy to demand immigration status for the whole family; Butt v Norway
    App 47017/09 4  December  2012,  and  EV  (Philippines)  and  others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

The effect of ss117B(2)-(3)

14. Whilst we heard extensive argument  upon  the  purpose  and  effect  of
    s117B(2) and s117B(3), we are satisfied that ultimately the  matter  is
    quite straightforward. Upon their proper construction neither s117B(2),
    nor s117B(3), grants any form of immigration status  to  an  individual
    who does not otherwise qualify  for  that  status,  because  they  have
    failed to meet the requirements set out in the  Immigration  Rules  for
    the grant of that status. If it was the intention  of  Parliament  that
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules should be over-ridden, merely
    because an individual could establish that  they  were  able  to  speak
    English, or were financially independent, to some degree, then  we  are
    satisfied that Parliament would have said so in the clearest terms.  In
    addition we consider that Parliament would have considered it necessary
    to set out what degree of fluency, or, level of financial  independence
    was required of the individual, and the  immigration  status  that  the
    individual would be entitled to once it had been demonstrated.  Plainly
    these statutory provisions do no such thing. One must continue to  look
    to the Immigration Rules to discern what Parliament considers  are  the
    requirements to be met by a claimant, and the length of the  period  of
    leave to be granted to them if those requirements are met.

15. What then is  their  purpose?  We  are  satisfied  that  s117B(2),  and
    s117B(3), were intended by Parliament to meet, and to  finally  dispose
    of, the arguments that have from time to  time  been  advanced  to  the
    effect that the language  and/or  the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules should either be ignored altogether, or, should carry
    little weight, when the Tribunal is weighing the proportionality  of  a
    decision  to  remove  in  the  context  of  the  consideration  of   an
    individual's Article 8  rights;  Bibi  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  322,  and  MM
    (Lebanon) [2013] EWCA Civ 985. That view is strengthened by  the  Human
    Rights  Memorandum  that  was  published  by  the  Respondent   as   an
    accompaniment to the 2014 Act [71-73]. In short we are  satisfied  that
    s117B(2) and s117B(3) can only properly  be  read  as  reinforcing  the
    statement of principle that is set  out  in  s117B(1),  as  indeed  the
    Appellant accepts both s117(4) and s117(5) should be read.

16. Read in that way, the arguments sometimes advanced that depend upon the
    inferior status of the Immigration Rules to  primary  legislation,  and
    the lack of full democratic legitimacy, are rendered sterile; R (on the
    application of Onkar Singh Nagre) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  at
    [25].

         There was some debate at the hearing about the status  of  the  new
         rules. For general discussion about the status of  the  Immigration
         Rules, which is also relevant to  the  new  rules,  see  Odelola  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 25; [2009] 1
         WLR 1230. They do not have the status of  primary  legislation,  or
         the full democratic legitimacy which goes with that status: Huang v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL 1; [2007]  2
         AC 167, [17]. That is the position even though the new  rules  were
         subject to debate in Parliament going beyond  what  is  usual  when
         such rules are  made  and  laid  before  Parliament.  However,  the
         Immigration Rules do have some degree of democratic endorsement, in
         that they represent the policy of the Secretary of  State  (who  is
         politically  accountable  to  Parliament   and,   ultimately,   the
         electorate) and they are laid before Parliament and so are amenable
         to being called up for  a  negative  resolution  in  Parliament  (a
         measure of parliamentary control which is greater than would be the
         case if, for example, the Secretary of State simply  had  power  to
         make the rules without them being  subject  to  such  a  procedure;
         although it also clearly less than would be the case if  they  were
         actually made as subordinate legislation,  in  particular  if  made
         pursuant to  the  affirmative  resolution  procedure,  or  as  full
         primary legislation).

17. It follows that we would  respectfully  disagree  with  the  concluding
    remark of Upper Tribunal Judge Lane in R (on the application of Luma Sh
    Khairdin) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (NIA 2002:  Part
    5A) IJR [2014] UKUT 00566 (IAC) at [59];

         "The most that section does is to offer some mild support  for  the
         applicant, rather than the respondent, in that the  evidence  makes
         plain that the applicant is not  and  will  not  be  "a  burden  on
         taxpayers" (subsection (3)(a)), with the result that the respondent
         cannot rely upon that as a public interest factor weighing  against
         the applicant."

18. The mere fact that  the  evidence  in  a  particular  case  establishes
    fluency or financial independence to some degree, does not prevent  the
    Respondent from relying upon these matters as public  interest  factors
    weighing against the claimant. The Respondent would only  be  prevented
    from doing so if a claimant could  demonstrate  fluency,  or  financial
    independence,  to  the  level  of  the  requirements  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules. There was therefore no error of law in  the  Judge's
    approach to the issues of fluency and  financial  independence  in  the
    context of her consideration of s117B. The Appellant  could  obtain  no
    positive right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B  (2)  or
    (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or the strength  of
    his financial resources.

The effect of ss117B(4)-(5)

19. How then should the FtT have approached s117B(4) and  s117B(5)?  Whilst
    the parties could see no difficulty of  interpretation  raised  by  the
    phrase "at a time when the person is in the United Kingdom  unlawfully"
    as used in s117B(4), the same could not be said  of  s117B(5)  and  the
    phrase "at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious".

20. The term "precarious" as used in s117B(5), is not defined within s117D.
    We  are  not  satisfied  that  any  significant  assistance  with   its
    definition in this statutory context can be obtained from past judicial
    use of the term "precarious immigration status", when it is plain  that
    the term "precarious"  is  one  that  has  been  used  judicially  both
    domestically, and in Strasbourg, to describe  a  variety  of  different
    situations, and sometimes to describe an individual without any  lawful
    status. As identified in Nagre [39]

         39.      In such a case, there is a substantial body of  Strasbourg
             case-law which explains the general  approach  to  be  applied
             when assessing the proportionality of a removal of  a  foreign
             national by reference to Article 8. In Rodrigues da Silva  and
             Hoogkamer v Netherlands (2007) 44 EHRR 34, drawing on previous
             statements in  its  jurisprudence,  the  ECtHR  explained  the
             approach at para. 39, as follows:

                  "The Court reiterates that in the context of both positive
                  and negative obligations the  State  must  strike  a  fair
                  balance between the competing interests of the  individual
                  and of the community as a whole. However, in both contexts
                  the  State  enjoys  a  certain  margin  of   appreciation.
                  Moreover, Art.8 does not entail a general obligation for a
                  state to respect immigrants'  choice  of  the  country  of
                  their residence and to authorise  family  reunion  in  its
                  territory. Nevertheless, in a case which  concerns  family
                  life as well as  immigration,  the  extent  of  a  state's
                  obligations to admit to its territory relatives of persons
                  residing there  will  vary  according  to  the  particular
                  circumstances of the  persons  involved  and  the  general
                  interest. Factors to be taken into account in this context
                  are  the  extent  to  which  family  life  is  effectively
                  ruptured, the extent of the ties in the contracting state,
                  whether there are insurmountable obstacles in the  way  of
                  the family living in the country of origin of one or  more
                  of them, whether there are factors of immigration  control
                  (e.g.  a  history  of  breaches  of  immigration  law)  or
                  considerations of  public  order  weighing  in  favour  of
                  exclusion. Another important consideration  will  also  be
                  whether family life was created at a time when the persons
                  involved were aware that the immigration status of one  of
                  them was such that the persistence  of  that  family  life
                  within the host state would from the outset be precarious.
                  The Court has previously held that where this is the  case
                  it  is  likely  only  to  be  in  the   most   exceptional
                  circumstances that the removal of the non-national  family
                  member will constitute a violation of Art.8 .

         40.      This has been repeated and adopted by  the  ECtHR  as  its
             reasoning in near identical terms in many  cases  since  then:
             Useinov v The Netherlands, App. 61292/00, ECtHR,  decision  of
             11 April 2006; Konstatinov v The Netherlands,  App.  16351/03,
             ECtHR, judgment of  26  April  2007,  para.  48;  M  v  United
             Kingdom, App. 25087/06,  ECtHR,  decision  of  24  June  2008;
             Omoregie v Norway, App. 265/07, ECtHR,  judgment  of  31  July
             2008, para. 67; Y v Russia  (2010)  51  EHRR  21,  para.  104;
             Haghigi v The Netherlands, App. 38165/07, ECtHR,  decision  of
             14 April 2009; Nunez v Norway, App. 55597/09, ECtHR,  judgment
             of 28 June 2011, para. 70; Arvelo Aponte  v  The  Netherlands,
             App. 28770/05, ECtHR, judgment of 3 November 2011,  para.  55;
             Antwi v Norway, App. 26940/10, ECtHR, judgment of 14  February
             2012, para. 89; Biraga v Sweden, App. 1722/10, ECtHR, decision
             of 3 April 2012, paras. 49-51; and Olgun  v  The  Netherlands,
             App. 1859/03, ECtHR, decision of 10 May 2012, para. 43. "

21. By way of example only, we note that in Arvelo Aponte v The Netherlands
    (28770/05) at [56] and [59] the term was used by the ECtHR in  relation
    to the whole of the period  of  time  spent  by  the  claimant  in  the
    Netherlands comprising; (i) the period of time  the  claimant  held  an
    initial tourist visa, (ii) the subsequent period of time  during  which
    she held a provisional residence visa issued to her to  enable  her  to
    make an application for a permanent residence permit,  and,  (iii)  the
    subsequent period of time during which she remained in the  Netherlands
    in the face of the refusal of that permit, and the exclusion order that
    was then made against her, whilst she pursued appeal proceedings.

22. Domestically, in the recent decision of Green J in Ahmed v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 300  the  term  was  used  in
    relation to the period of time that the claimant was an overstayer, and
    thus when that individual was in the UK unlawfully.

23. Our starting point must therefore be that Parliament has  now  drawn  a
    sharp distinction between any period of time during which a person  has
    been in the UK "unlawfully", and any period of time during  which  that
    person's immigration status in the UK was merely "precarious".  We  are
    satisfied  that  those  who  at  any  given  date  held  a   precarious
    immigration status must have held at  that  date  an  otherwise  lawful
    grant of leave to enter or to  remain.  They  must  have  enjoyed  some
    immigration status within the UK at the given  date,  because  if  that
    were not the case, then their  presence  in  the  UK  would  have  been
    unlawful at that date. Thus we are satisfied that Parliament  envisaged
    that the immigration history of a particular individual might  disclose
    periods when they had enjoyed lawful immigration status in the UK,  and
    periods when they were in the UK unlawfully because  they  had  enjoyed
    none. Some might enter unlawfully and never acquire a grant  of  leave.
    Others might subsequently acquire a grant of leave.  Some  might  enter
    lawfully but then fail to obtain a variation  of  their  leave.  Others
    might always have held a grant of  leave.  We  regard  the  immigration
    history  of  the  individual  whose  Article   8   rights   are   under
    consideration as an integral part of the context in which any Article 8
    decision is made, whether by the Respondent or the FtT.

24. We reject the suggestion that some yardstick for the identification  of
    whether or not a period of lawful immigration status  is  "precarious",
    might be found by reference to its length. We can see no basis for such
    an approach, not least because that would impose upon the judiciary the
    burden of identifying where that boundary lay, which cannot  have  been
    Parliament's intention. If the answer was to be found in the length  of
    the period then Parliament would simply have  said  so.  Nor  does  the
    statute oblige the FtT to descend to adopting the approach of affording
    subtle gradations of "little weight" to the elements  of  private  life
    established during different periods of time. Whether an individual was
    present unlawfully, or had a precarious immigration status,  Parliament
    has required the FtT to give little weight to the "private life" relied
    upon. The distinction in approach to the issue of weight is to be found
    in s117B(4) so that little weight is also to be given to a relationship
    formed with a qualifying partner at a time when the claimant is present
    unlawfully. It is open to the FtT to give such weight as it sees fit to
    such a relationship formed at a time when the individual's  immigration
    status was precarious, but  the  FtT  is  not  required  to  give  that
    relationship little weight any more than it  is  required  to  give  it
    significant weight.

25. Nor is there any merit in our judgement  in  the  suggestion  that  the
    answer is to be found in an individual's subjective  belief  that  they
    would in the future be able to extend the period of leave that had been
    granted to them. The test must be an objective one.

26. That approach is in our judgement entirely consistent with the approach
    of the ECtHR to those families with children who seek to resist removal
    on the basis of their "private life" from a host  state  when  none  of
    them is a citizen of their host; Alidjah-Anyame v  The  United  Kingdom
    App 39633/98 4 May 1999, and Sarumi v The United Kingdom  App  43279/98
    26 January 1999.

27. In our judgement all those who have been granted by  the  Respondent  a
    defined period of leave to enter the UK, or, to remain in the UK (which
    includes both those with a period of limited leave to remain, and those
    with a period of  discretionary  leave  to  remain),  hold  during  the
    currency of that leave, an immigration status that  is  lawful,  albeit
    "precarious". Even if  the  individual  genuinely  holds  a  legitimate
    expectation that their leave will ultimately be extended further by the
    Respondent, they have no absolute right to insist that this will occur,
    whether or not they meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  at
    the date of their application; HSMP Forum UK Limited [2008]  EWHC  664.
    Still less will those who merely  hold  a  genuine,  and  well  founded
    belief, that they will  at  some  future  date  be  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and thus be  able  to  obtain  an
    extension; E-A (Article 8 - best interests of a child)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00315 (IAC).

28. In all such cases, in order to obtain  the  variation  that  they  seek
    (whether to gain a further grant of leave which is limited in duration,
    or is indefinite) the individual will need to meet at some future  date
    the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  that  are  then  in  force;
    Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] 1WLR  1230.
    The ability of the individual to do so is not capable of prediction  in
    advance - even if at any given moment  during  the  currency  of  their
    existing  leave  the  individual  genuinely  believes  that  they   are
    continuing to meet the requirements attached to their  existing  grant.
    Indeed the ability of those who have not yet  been  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain, to obtain a variation of their leave  in  the  future,
    will probably always depend in part upon matters that are outside their
    control - whether  that  be  the  actions  of  others,  or  the  future
    prosperity of themselves or others.

29. During the course of argument we were referred to  Chapter  13  of  the
    IDIs, version 5.0 published on  28  July  2014,  entitled  "Criminality
    Guidance in Article 8 ECHR  cases".  At  paragraph  4.4.5  appears  the
    following;

         The Immigration Rules also  require  that  a  relationship  not  be
         formed  at  a  time  when  the  foreign  criminal  has   precarious
         immigration status because a  claim  to  respect  for  family  life
         formed when there was no guarantee that family life could  continue
         indefinitely in the UK, or when there was no guarantee that if  the
         person was convicted of an offence while he had  limited  leave  he
         would  qualify  for  further  leave,  will  be  less   capable   of
         outweighing the public interest. For the purposes of this guidance,
         a person's immigration status is precarious if he is in the UK with
         limited leave to enter or remain, or he has  settled  status  which
         was obtained fraudulently, or he has committed a  criminal  offence
         which he should have been aware would make him liable to removal or
         deportation.

30. Again, whilst in no way binding upon any court, one can  see  that  the
    Respondent's view of what the term "precarious"  meant  where  used  in
    s117B is entirely consistent with out own.

31. In consequence we are satisfied that the judge made no  material  error
    of law in holding, as she did, that the private lives  of  all  of  the
    members of the Appellant's family were established in the UK at a  time
    "when their immigration status was precarious  in  that  it  was  of  a
    temporary nature dependent upon the Appellant's right to remain in  the
    United Kingdom as a student". During the periods in which  the  members
    of the family had the benefit of a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  their
    immigration status was "precarious" for the purpose of s117B(5). To the
    extent that the FtT did fail to identify with clarity that for a period
    of time the members of a family held no immigration  status,  and  that
    they were present unlawfully when their  most  recent  application  for
    leave was made, there could be no material  error  of  law  that  could
    count in the Appellant's favour. First it would be entirely  reasonable
    to consider that if any distinction was to be  drawn  between  the  two
    periods of time, there was a greater public interest in the removal  of
    those present unlawfully. Second the  statutory  consequences  for  the
    weight that the FtT could give to the private life relied upon was  the
    same. Whether by virtue of s117B(4), or s117B(5), the FtT was  required
    to give that private life little weight.  In  fact,  the  text  of  the
    Judge's decision, when read as a whole, shows that she did have in mind
    both the period during which the claimant was in the UK unlawfully, the
    period in which he held a grant of leave to remain, and, that  she  had
    properly distinguished between the lengths  of  those  periods  in  the
    course of her analysis of the immigration history of the  family  [51].
    That was the context in which she had to consider the Article 8  appeal
    before her. This was after all a family who would be removed to  Malawi
    together, and so the immigration decisions under appeal did not  result
    in any interference in the "family life" enjoyed by the members of  the
    family together. Thus the Judge properly approached  the  appeal  as  a
    "private life" appeal.

32. To put the matter shortly, it appears to us that a person's immigration
    status is "precarious" if their continued presence in the  UK  will  be
    dependent upon  their  obtaining  a  further  grant  of  leave.  It  is
    precisely because such a person has no indefinite right to  be  in  the
    country that the relationships they form ought to be considered in  the
    light of the potential need to leave the country should that  grant  of
    leave not be forthcoming.

33. Of course in some circumstances it may  be  that  even  a  person  with
    indefinite leave to remain, or a person who has  obtained  citizenship,
    enjoys a status that is "precarious"  either  because  that  status  is
    revocable by the Secretary of State as a result of their deception,  or
    because  of  their  criminal  conduct.  That  is  a  different  set  of
    circumstances to these, but we can see no answer  to  the  point  that,
    vitiated by dishonesty, a grant of indefinite leave to remain would  be
    susceptible to curtailment on proper  grounds  with  immediate  effect,
    with the  consequent  removal  of  the  immigration  status  previously
    enjoyed. The Appellant did not seek to persuade us,  correctly  in  our
    judgement, that this was the sole basis upon which an individual  would
    hold a precarious immigration status. If  that  had  been  Parliament's
    intention it would have been a simple matter to spell it out.  Equally,
    the decision by an individual with  a  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain to embark upon a course of criminal conduct, (even if  it  would
    not be sufficient  from  the  outset  to  trigger  a  decision  by  the
    Respondent under the automatic deportation provisions of the 2007  Act)
    would probably be sufficient to render his status precarious. In  these
    cases the person is  well  aware  that  he  has  either  initially,  or
    subsequently, imperilled the status he had,  and  cannot  viably  claim
    thereafter that his status is other than precarious.

The effect of s55 of the Borders Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009

34. Independently of the requirements of s117A-117D of the  2002  Act,  the
    FtT was required by s55 of the 2009 Act to consider in some detail  the
    circumstances of the children of the family;  JO  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT
    00517 (IAC).

35. In the circumstances of  this  family  only  the  eldest  child  was  a
    "qualifying child" as defined in s117D(1). By virtue of  her  entry  to
    the UK in January 2007, it was not in dispute before the FtT  that  she
    had lived in the UK for a continuous period of seven years or  more  at
    the date of the appeal hearing. As a result the  FtT  was  required  to
    consider her position by reference to s117B(6). There  was  no  dispute
    before the FtT that the Appellant as  her  father  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his eldest daughter  is  child  -
    thus the only issue was whether or not it would be reasonable to expect
    her to leave the UK.

36. As set out above, the question posed in relation to the eldest child by
    s117B(6) was the same  question  posed  in  relation  to  both  of  the
    children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii). It was a question that was  posed
    and answered by the judge in the  proper  context  of  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect each of  those  children  to  follow  her  parents
    (because they had no right to remain) to their country of  origin;  EV.
    We reject the suggestion that this question  needed  to  be  posed  and
    answered in relation to each child more than once.

37. The circumstances of each child did require separate consideration, but
    it is abundantly clear from what was an entirely appropriate  level  of
    analysis of the evidence relating to them, that this is precisely  what
    the judge sought to do. To  be  sustainable,  the  criticisms  levelled
    against the judge's decision would require the  concluding  passage  of
    the determination to be read in isolation, rather than  for  it  to  be
    read as a whole. Such a criticism is plainly ill founded, and  at  this
    point we would respectfully reiterate the guidance of  Pill  LJ  in  AJ
    (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191.

         43.      Before expressing final conclusions I make the following
             general comments, in addition to those made in paragraphs
             above.

             (a) As Baroness Hale stated at paragraph 33 in ZH,
                  consideration of the welfare of the children is an
                  integral part of the Article 8 assessment. It is not
                  something apart from it. In making that assessment a
                  primary consideration is the best interests of the child.

             (b) The absence of a reference to section 55(1) is not fatal
                  to a decision. What matters is the substance of the
                  attention given to the "overall wellbeing" (Baroness Hale)
                  of the child.

             (c) The welfare of children was a factor in Article 8
                  decisions prior to the enactment of section 55. What
                  section 55 and the guidelines do, following Article 3 of
                  UNCRC, is to highlight the need to have regard to the
                  welfare and interests of children when taking decisions
                  such as the present. In an overall assessment the best
                  interests of the child are a primary consideration.

             (d) The primacy of the interests of the child falls to be
                  considered in the context of the particular family
                  circumstances, as well as the need to maintain immigration
                  control.

38. The younger child of this family  had  not  then  been  diagnosed  with
    autism [32], and that remains the position today. Whilst she  has  both
    behavioural and delayed speech development characteristics  that  would
    give any parent cause for real concern, the evidence placed before  the
    FtT fell well short of establishing either that she  could  not  access
    the care and assistance that she then required, or might  need  in  the
    future. Nor did it establish any well founded fear for her safety  upon
    return. Her characteristics did not establish that it was  unreasonable
    to expect her to live as a member of her family in the country of which
    the whole family were nationals.

39. There was no reason to infer that any interruption to the education  of
    the elder child upon return to Malawi would  be  any  more  significant
    than that faced by any child forced to move from one country to another
    by virtue of the careers of their parents. Nor should the  difficulties
    of a move from one school to  another  become  unduly  exaggerated.  It
    would be highly unusual for a child in the UK to complete the  entirety
    of their education within one school. The trauma, or excitement,  of  a
    new school, new classmates and new teachers  is  an  integral  part  of
    growing up. In too many appeals the FtT  is  presented  with  arguments
    whose basic premise is that to change a school is to submit a child  to
    a cruel and unduly harsh experience. Indeed, as if  to  illustrate  the
    point, we note that the eldest child of this family has  been  required
    to move schools, and move from one end of the UK to  the  other,  as  a
    result of the decisions of her parents. The evidence does  not  suggest
    she suffered any hardship or ill effect from so doing.

40. By the date of the hearing the Appellant was a highly educated and well
    qualified  man,  and  it  would  be  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
    educational  qualifications  he  had  acquired  would  stand   to   his
    considerable benefit in the labour market within Malawi upon return. He
    had been able to gain a degree in agriculture from  the  University  of
    Malawi, and he had used that degree  when  working  for  six  years  in
    Malawi in that field. He had won scholarships in Malawi and in the  UK,
    in order to finance his further study  in  the  UK,  no  doubt  in  the
    expectation that he would  return  to  Malawi,  and  put  that  further
    education to use in that country for  the  benefit  of  its  population
    generally, and his own circumstances.

41. Thus the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude,  as  she  did,  that  this
    Appellant was well placed to seek out, and pay for  any  assistance  in
    Malawi that he might consider either of his daughters required; whether
    that be in the  field  of  autistic  spectrum  disorder  physiotherapy,
    speech therapy, or education  generally.  There  was  every  reason  to
    suppose that both children would be able to  access  both  primary  and
    secondary education in Malawi. There was no evidential basis upon which
    the  judge  could  find  that  either  of  them  would  be  denied  the
    opportunity of tertiary education, or the ability to access it if  they
    attained the educational threshold  requirements.  The  reports  relied
    upon were written in general terms, and thus failed to have any  proper
    regard to the family's true circumstances.

Conclusions

    In our judgement, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission  to
    appeal was granted, there is no merit in the grounds advanced.  It  was
    open to the Judge to reach the conclusion that she did, for the reasons
    that she gave. Those reasons  were  adequate  and  disclosed  that  the
    relevant statutory provisions had  been  considered  and  applied.  The
    complaints made about the Judge's approach reveal no material error  of
    law that requires her decision promulgated on 22 September 2014  to  be
    set aside and remade. It is accordingly confirmed.




Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 2 April 2015





Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.





Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 2 April 2015


