
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/05746/2015
                                                               aa/05749/2015
                                                               aa/05751/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                       |
|On 14 March 2018                       |On 12 April 2018                  |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                        Daniah [C] (first appellant)
                          [A c] (second appellant)
                           [S c] (third appellant)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Gaisford, instructed by Sriharans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Grenada.  She  appealed  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of 13 March 2015 of the  Secretary  of
    State refusing asylum and refusing a human rights claim.
2.   She claimed to be at risk on return to  Grenada  from  her  ex-partner,
    who is the father of her elder child, AC, who was born on [ ] 2004.

3.   The appellant had come to the United Kingdom in July 2010  and  had  an
    affair with a man while here  and  became  pregnant  with  her  younger
    daughter SC, who was born on [ ] 2011.  They had returned to Grenada in
    late 2010 or early 2011.  When her partner learned that the  child  was
    not his, she said that he became violent and  threatened  her  and  the
    younger child and as a consequence she left the house in November  2011
    and returned to the United Kingdom on 15 December 2011 and  has  stayed
    here thereafter.  She and the two children,  who  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom with her, lived with the appellant's mother and the appellant's
    half-sister.

4.   An appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  originally
    heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  September  2015.   The  judge
    dismissed the asylum appeal and the human rights appeal.  I shall  need
    to return to some of the findings in that decision subsequently.   That
    appeal was challenged, in relation to the human rights issues only, and
    a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal found that  the  judge  had  erred
    with regard to the Article 8 evaluation and  ordered  that  the  appeal
    fell to be reheard de novo before the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   The subsequent decision of the First-tier Tribunal, promulgated  on  11
    December 2017, is the appeal with which we  are  concerned  today.   To
    avoid repetition, it may be more helpful if, rather  than  setting  out
    the judge's findings, I refer to the challenge to the decision and will
    then refer to the particular parts of it with which issue is taken.  In
    brief, the judge bore in mind the findings of the first judge  and  did
    not  accept  that  the  appeal  could  succeed  under  or  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

6.   There are nine grounds of challenge to that  decision.   The  first  of
    these is that the judge erred on the misconceived  basis  that  he  was
    bound by the previous findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  he
    took as  the  starting  point  for  assessing  the  appellant's  claim.
    Reliance was placed on the fact that the Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge,
    who found an error of law in the early decision, remitted the case  for
    a de novo hearing.  In the ground and in Mr Gaisford's  submissions  it
    was argued that the claim that the appellant suffered domestic violence
    has always been maintained.  He referred to the first  settled  grounds
    of appeal against the 2015 decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  where
    reference was made at paragraph 29 to the connection between the second
    appellant's anxiety and the domestic violence she witnessed in Grenada.
     It was argued that the judge had failed to give  proper  consideration
    to the fact of the first appellant  suffering  domestic  violence,  the
    fact of the second appellant witnessing  the  abused  and  having  been
    caused anxiety by it.  The judge then lawfully relied on the First-tier
    Tribunal's adverse  credibility  findings,  which  it  was  argued  had
    contaminated his approach to the appellant's evidence as a whole.

7.   If one turns to the First-tier  Judge's  decision,  it  is  clear  from
    paragraph 19 that the judge did not accept the appellant's  claim  that
    her partner had abused her, having discovered the second child was  not
    his.  The judge found that that relationship had broken down before the
    appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2010.  The grounds of challenge
    to that decision do not in my view challenge the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's claim to have been the victim of domestic  violence  lacked
    credibility.  The closest  they  come  to  it  is  the  point  made  at
    paragraph 28 disagreeing with the judge's conclusion  that  the  second
    appellant's learning difficulty  had  been  caused  by  her  witnessing
    domestic violence as such, but it was a consequence of her anxiety  and
    enhanced emotional needs.  There was also reference at paragraph 29  to
    the connection between the second appellant's anxiety and the  domestic
    violence  she  witnessed  in  Grenada  as   being   relevant   to   the
    proportionality of removal.  Nor does one see any  challenge  to  those
    findings in the decision of the Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  who  found
    the error of law.  The concerns of the judge were  that  there  was  no
    finding by the judge in 2015 concerning  whether  or  not  family  life
    existed, there was no assessment  of  the  impact  of  removal  on  the
    appellant's mother and her minor sibling and  proportionality  had  not
    been assessed in light of the impact on the entire family unit.   There
    had been no evaluation of the best interests of the  first  appellant's
    minor sibling.

8.   As a consequence, I do not agree that the judge erred at  paragraph  29
    when concluding that he was bound by the findings of the judge in 2015.
     It was clear that the conclusions in respect of the asylum  claim  had
    not been challenged in the appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  and  he  was
    entitled and indeed required to consider that they had been  preserved.
    The starting point was therefore  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
    prove, even on the lower standard,  that  she  had  been  a  victim  of
    domestic violence.

9.   The judge also noted the letter from the special needs  teacher  of  15
    September 2015 referring to the second appellant having  anxiety  based
    on seeing domestic violence in the home situation when she was 4.   The
    judge commented that the child would have  been  4  in  2008  or  2009,
    whereas the appellant's allegations over domestic violence only started
    after the birth of the second child, which would have been  well  after
    the second appellant was 4.  He commented  that  even  if  the  implied
    evidence of the child was accepted it did not corroborate the  mother's
    account.  It is unclear why he found it necessary as a  consequence  of
    paragraph 43 to  say  that  if  the  oldest  child  witnessed  domestic
    violence previously it was long in the past and the mother did not need
    to return to the relationship, in light of his clear  adopting  of  the
    2015 decision on the lack of credibility of the claim and the perfectly
    sound point he made at paragraph 32 about the discrepancy and dates.  I
    should say that I do not consider  that  discrepancy  can  properly  be
    explained, as suggested by Ms Gaisford on the basis that it  failed  to
    take into account the special educational needs of the first appellant.
     There is no evidence to show that the learning  difficulties  she  has
    experienced were such as to make her evidence reliable on  this  point.
    Accordingly, I see no error of law as identified in ground  1.   It  is
    clear that there was no challenge to the decision of the judge in  2015
    that the appellant's claim to have suffered  domestic  violence  lacked
    credibility, and the judge properly went on to adopt  the  findings  of
    the First-tier Judge in 2015 in that regard.

10.  Essentially the same comments can be  made  with  regard  to  ground  2
    where it is argued that the judge failed to make a finding  in  respect
    of whether the second appellant had witnessed domestic violence.  It is
    true, and as I have noted above, that there is the  final  sentence  of
    paragraph 43, but I think that has to be read in light of  the  judge's
    endorsement of the earlier adverse credibility findings of the judge in
    2015 and the discrepancy noted at paragraph 24 as regards dates.

11.  Ground 3 contends that the judge made a perverse or irrational  finding
    in respect of the evidence from the school in saying  at  paragraph  32
    that either the school had not  been  asked  to  provide  any  evidence
    specifically for the hearing or the evidence they had produced had  not
    been favourable enough to be served.  The judge however then went on to
    note the letter from  the  special  educational  needs  teacher  of  15
    September 2015, to which I have already referred.  He also referred  to
    having copies of school reports which show that the children were doing
    better, but that was all.  I consider  in  the  circumstances  that  no
    error of law in this regard has been identified.

12.  Ground 4 is concerned with what the judge said at  paragraph  45  about
    the weight to be attached to the children's private life in the context
    of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT 00197
    (IAC).  The judge noted in the context of that case that neither  child
    had been in the United Kingdom for more than seven  years,  still  less
    seven years of what I would describe as the formative  years,  in  that
    case, being the years from the age of 4.

13.  It was argued that in Azimi-Moayed it was said  that  whilst  past  and
    present policies have identified seven years as  the  relevant  period,
    what amounts to lengthy residence was not clear-cut and  therefore  the
    point quoted by the judge did  not  exclude  the  possibility  or  even
    probability that a child who had lived just short of six years  at  the
    time of the hearing had developed ties it  would  be  inappropriate  to
    disrupt.

14.  I do not see any error of law in this regard.  It was relevant to  note
    what had been said in Azimi-Moayed, and the  judge  clearly  considered
    the weight to be attached  to  the  children's  private  life  in  that
    context, and the findings in that regard were properly open to him.

15.  Ground 5 contends  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant's mother in saying that she had arrived in the United Kingdom
    in 2010 on a visit visa and overstayed and  the  only  reason  she  was
    granted leave to remain was that she had a child in the United  Kingdom
    by a British man, which meant her own child was British.  The  comments
    on this was that the family had shown a long-term willingness  to  work
    around and evade UK immigration control.

16.  In fact it seems to  be  common  ground  that  the  appellant's  mother
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2004 in the immediate aftermath of the
    hurricane that devastated Grenada,  and  the  judge  therefore  clearly
    erred.  It is argued that the materiality of this error is relevant  to
    the comment about working around and evasion  of  immigration  control,
    and also to the findings at paragraph 38 that  the  appellant  had  not
    shown it was in the best interests of the children to  stay  living  in
    the same house as their grandmother and their aunt.   When  looking  at
    the grandmother's immigration history it was said she could not be said
    to be an unequivocally good influence on the children.   I  agree  that
    there is an error here and I accept also that there is a  relevance  to
    the proportionality evaluation: that is  a  matter  to  which  I  shall
    return.

17.  Ground 6 concerns the contention that the judge overlooked  or  ignored
    material  evidence  in  respect  of  the   relationship   between   the
    appellant's aunt (A, who is aged 16) and her mother and the appellants.
      The  judge  referred  to  other  supporting  letters  but   did   not
    specifically refer to the letter written by A where  she  explains  how
    she had benefited from being in the United Kingdom and the problems she
    would experience on return, photographs of family members together, and
    also a letter from the appellant's aunt, who refers to the closeness of
    her daughter and the appellants.

18.  I am not persuaded that there is any materiality  to  the  points  made
    here.  The letter from A at page 33 of the  bundle  does  not  in  fact
    contain a reference to her aunt other than a reference to leaving  half
    her family and friends, the  photographs  may  take  matters  a  little
    further, and the statement by the first appellant's aunt about her  and
    how her daughter sees the relationship with the  appellants,  is  again
    not  a  matter  which  relates  to  the  relationship  with  the  first
    appellant's half-sister in any event.

19.  Ground 7 contends that there is an error of law  in  the  finding  that
    there  was  no  family  life  between  the  appellants  and  the  first
    appellant's sister and  mother.   The  judge  referred  to  a  lack  of
    evidence which he considered to be reliable and detailed,  including  a
    letter or specific evidence  from  the  school  or  the  special  needs
    teachers and the very real doubts he had as to  the  integrity  of  the
    appellant and her mother as witnesses.  He accepted that  if  they  had
    lived as a family unit there was a chance that they  were  closer  than
    might ordinarily be the case but that that was the same  as  him  being
    satisfied that the family life was at a qualitatively  different  level
    to the norm, as required under Kugathas.  He went on to say  that  this
    put him in some  difficulty  in  trying  to  establish  what  the  best
    interests of the children were.

20.  I think that the challenge here is well made.  It  is  clear  that  for
    over six years the appellants have been living in the same household as
    the first appellant's mother and her half-sister.  Certainly, there  is
    detailed evidence from the half-sister at  page  32  of  the  closeness
    between them and the impact  on  her  if  they  are  removed.   In  the
    independent social worker's report there is detail as to the  closeness
    of the relationship, in particular between the children.  A spoke about
    her relationship not only with her sister but with her  aunt  as  well.
    There is further evidence from the half-sister set out there also.   In
    my view the judge erred in law in concluding that there was not  family
    life in this case, it was not a finding that was open to him  in  light
    of the evidence in particular of the closeness  between  the  group  of
    people and the fact they had been living together in the same household
    for six years.  I accept also the point made by Mr Gaisford  that  this
    impacts on the findings of the best interests of the children and  also
    on the proportionality evaluation.  I also consider  that  the  comment
    about there being very real  doubts  as  to  the  appellant's  mother's
    integrity was not a point that was well taken by the judge.

21.  I shall deal briefly with the further two grounds.  Ground  8  concerns
    failure to give consideration  to  the  best  interests  of  the  first
    appellant's aunt's daughter, whose mother had provided a statement  and
    in respect of whom her best interests required  to  be  considered.   I
    agree that the judge erred in this regard, but if it had not  been  for
    the previous ground I would have concluded I think in the end  that  it
    lacked materiality.  Likewise, I do not  consider  it  was  a  material
    procedural error as contended in ground 9 that the judge failed to make
    specific reference to the content of the skeleton argument.

22.  In conclusion therefore, the key issue in my  view,  which  involves  a
    material error of law in this case, is that identified in ground 7 with
    regard to the finding as to family  life.   There  I  think  the  judge
    erred, and as a consequence as was argued by Mr  Gaisford,  I  consider
    that the matter will have to go back to the First-tier Tribunal in  the
    circumstances for a full rehearing on the  Article  8  issues  in  this
    case.  But I think that rehearing will have to be circumscribed by what
    I have had to say about grounds 1 and 2 in this  case.   There  was  no
    challenge to the credibility findings of the judge in 2015, and  it  is
    therefore not open to argument that the first appellant was the  victim
    of domestic violence.  To that extent therefore the appeal is  allowed,
    and it will have to be reheard again at Hatton Cross before a different
    judge.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 9 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
