
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05380/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2016                 |On 14 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    K. A.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  who  entered  the  UK  as  a
       student in October 2010. She became an overstayer in 2012,  and  made
       an application for protection in February 2014. That application  was
       refused on 15 July 2014 and a decision to remove her from the UK  was
       made in consequence by reference to s10.
    2. The Appellant's appeal against those decisions was heard  on  18  May
       2016, and it was allowed on  asylum  and  Article  3  grounds,  in  a
       decision promulgated on 2 June 2016 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Head-
       Rapson.
    3. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal that decision  on  24
       June 2016 by Designated Judge Manuell on the basis  it  was  arguable
       the Judge's approach to  the  evidence  before  her  was  flawed  for
       failure to take into account material evidence, and  for  failure  to
       follow the correct approach to the medical evidence  relied  upon  by
       the Appellant.
    4. Thus the matter comes before me.




   Error of Law?
    5. Both parties were agreed before me that  the  Respondent  had  served
       upon the Appellant a document verification report  dated  13  January
       2016 ["the DVR"], and had relied upon that  at  the  hearing  of  the
       appeal as evidence that the Appellant was a liar who had resorted  to
       using forged documents to maintain  a  bogus  claim  to  asylum.  The
       content of the DVR was brief, but direct. The author  had  spoken  to
       the policeman at Saddar Police Station who was said to be the creator
       of the FIR that the Appellant had relied upon as a genuine  document,
       and as evidence that corroborated her account of the risks she  would
       face upon return to Pakistan. The policeman in question  had  however
       disowned the document in question as a forgery,  and  had  identified
       the reference number it bore as relating  to  an  entirely  different
       document that did lie in the records of the police station.
    6. On the face of it the DVR was cogent  and  compelling  evidence  that
       both the Appellant, and in turn, the Judge, needed  to  engage  with.
       The parties are however agreed before me that the decision  makes  no
       reference to it, either expressly or implicitly. Thus Ms Cleghorn  on
       behalf of the Appellant accepts that  the  Respondent  has  made  out
       Ground 1(i) of her  application  for  permission,  because  the  very
       existence and content of the DVR goes to the heart of the credibility
       of the Appellant's case.
    7. In the circumstances it is unnecessary to  go  through  each  of  the
       other complaints that are raised by the Respondent in relation to the
       decision, which together touch not only the  approach  taken  to  the
       Appellant's general credibility as a witness, but also  the  adequacy
       of the reasoning offered for the findings of fact that were made. Put
       shortly however the Respondent's case was that there were a number of
       reasons why the Appellant's evidence should have been approached with
       great caution as highly unreliable. In turn those had to  inform  the
       approach  taken  to  the  reports  the  Appellant  had  made  to  the
       psychiatrist, and his  diagnosis.  If  her  reports  to  him  of  her
       experiences were untrue that raised the issue of what value could  be
       attached to his diagnosis.
    8. Since both parties were agreed that the decision had to be set  aside
       and remade, the focus of the hearing then turned to the mechanism for
       doing so. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not  to
       remit the appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  as
       requested by both parties. In the circumstances of the  appeal  I  am
       satisfied that this is the correct approach. In  circumstances  where
       it would appear that the relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
       considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of  that  error  of
       law has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case
       to be properly considered  by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph
       7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.  Moreover  the
       extent of the judicial fact finding  exercise  is  such  that  having
       regard to the over-riding  objective,  it  is  appropriate  that  the
       appeal should be remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph
       7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Having reached
       that conclusion, with  the  agreement  of  the  parties  I  make  the
       following directions;
        i) The decision upon  the  appeal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
           remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing.  No  findings
           of fact are preserved. The appeal is not  to  be  listed  before
           Judge Head-Rapson.
       ii) An Urdu interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
      iii) There are anticipated  to  be  three  witnesses,  and  the  time
           estimate is as a result, 4 hours.
       iv) There is no need to provide a further  report  from  Dr  Lingam,
           since the current report is dated 13 May 2016, and there  is  no
           suggestion  there  has  been  any  material  alteration  in  the
           Appellant's condition since it was prepared.
        v) The appeal is to be listed on the first available  date  at  the
           North Shields hearing centre after 30 September  2016  for  full
           hearing. No further Directions hearing is presently  anticipated
           to be necessary. Should the Appellant anticipate  this  position
           will change, she must inform the Tribunal immediately, providing
           full details of what (if any) further evidence she seeks to rely
           upon.
       vi) The Anonymity  Direction  previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal is preserved.





Decision

    9. The decision promulgated on 2 June 2016 did involve the making of  an
       error of law sufficient to require it to be set aside and the  appeal
       to be reheard. Accordingly the decision upon the appeal is set  aside
       and the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  with  the
       following directions;
        i) The decision upon  the  appeal  is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
           remitted to the First Tier Tribunal for rehearing.  No  findings
           of fact are preserved. The appeal is not  to  be  listed  before
           Judge Head-Rapson.
       ii) An Urdu interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
      iii) There are anticipated  to  be  three  witnesses,  and  the  time
           estimate is as a result, 4 hours.
       iv) There is no need to provide a further  report  from  Dr  Lingam,
           since the current report is dated 13 May 2016, and there  is  no
           suggestion  there  has  been  any  material  alteration  in  the
           Appellant's condition since it was prepared.
        v) The appeal is to be listed on the first available  date  at  the
           North Shields hearing centre after 30 September  2016  for  full
           hearing. No further Directions hearing is presently  anticipated
           to be necessary. Should the Appellant anticipate  this  position
           will change, she must inform the Tribunal immediately, providing
           full details of what (if any) further evidence she seeks to rely
           upon.
       vi) The Anonymity  Direction  previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
           Tribunal is preserved.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 13 September 2016
