

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/05129/2015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Promulgated                 |
|On March 15, 2016                    |On April 12, 2016           |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   MRS STR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Cross (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia. The  appellant  entered  the
       United Kingdom as a domestic worker on August 4, 2014. On  September
       24, 2014 she claimed asylum and was served with Form  IS151A  as  an
       illegal entrant. The respondent refused her asylum claim on February
       26, 2015 under paragraph 336 HC 395.

    2. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on March 25, 2015.

    3. The appeal came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Fisher
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on September 14, 2015 and  in
       a  decision  promulgated  on  October  16,  2015  he   refused   the
       appellant's appeal on all grounds.

    4.  The  appellant  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  November  3,  2015
       submitting the Judge had erred in his assessment of credibility, the
       weight to be attached to the medical report and scarring report  and
       the the risk on  return  having  regard  to  the  country  evidence.
       Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Andrew on December 1, 2015.

    5. In a Rule 24 letter dated December 8, 2015  the  respondent  opposed
       the  appeal  arguing  the  Judge  had  made  adequate  findings   on
       credibility and had had regard  to  medical  evidence  and  scarring
       report when assessing the appellant's account.

    6. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives. I agreed that if there was  an  error  in
       law I would retain the matter in the Upper Tribunal and dal with the
       matter without the need for a further hearing.

    7. The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction and pursuant  to
       Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I
       extend that order in the light of the sensitive  matters  raised  in
       this appeal arising out of the appellant's international  protection
       claim. This order prohibits the disclosure  directly  or  indirectly
       (including by the parties) of the identity  of  the  appellant.  Any
       disclosure in breach of this order  may  amount  to  a  contempt  of
       court. This order shall remain in force unless revoked or varied  by
       a Tribunal or Court.

SUBMISSIONS

    8. Mr Cross relied on  his  skeleton  argument/grounds  of  appeal  and
       submitted that in assessing credibility the Judge had erred. He  had
       applied too high a standard of proof and had failed to  have  regard
       to the medical report when considering her account.  Mr  Cross  also
       argued that the Judge's  concerns  about  the  country  expert  were
       unfounded and his opinion that the appellant could be at risk was an
       objective finding that was open to him to give. In assessing  future
       risk, the Judge erred because he failed to  take  into  account  the
       more recent material including the Amnesty International Report  and
       the respondent's own guidance which both suggest the appellant would
       be at risk if she were returned. The Judge also  failed  to  address
       the issue of human trafficking and this also amounted to an error in
       law.

    9. Mr Mangion relied on the Rule 24 response but accepted  he  did  not
       appear to engage with the country evidence and Home  Office  reports
       that had formed part of the evidence  before  him  and  he  did  not
       appear to deal with the human trafficking part  of  the  appellant's
       claim. He submitted that for there to be an error in law such errors
       had to be material and he  invited  me  to  find  that  the  Judge's
       failure to deal with such matters  did  not  amount  to  a  material
       error.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   10. The appellant's asylum claim was based on the following claims:

      a. The appellant's claim to be a member of the Oromo Liberation  Front
         (OLF).
      b. The appellant claimed to have had  contact  with  the  OLF  in  the
         United Kingdom.
      c. The appellant was a member of the Oromo Women's Association (OWA)
      d. She had been trafficked here as a domestic worker from Saudi Arabia
      e. She would be at risk, if returned, to Ethiopia as a member of  both
         the OLF and OWA.

   11. The Judge considered her claims concerning her membership of the OLF
       and OWA and what she claimed had happened  to  her  because  of  her
       involvement  with  the  OLF  in  Ethiopia  and   concluded   between
       paragraphs [23] and [29] that much of account was  not  credible  or
       supported by the evidence she sought to rely on. The Judge concluded
       that the appellant was a low level member of the OLF in Ethiopia and
       had joined the OLF in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  rejected  her
       claim that either she or her husband were detained or that  she  was
       wanted by the authorities. The Judge further found that she had  not
       been a victim of trafficking and that she had fabricated her account
       of detentions to give the appearance that she would be  at  risk  on
       return.

   12. Paragraph [29] of his decision is relevant when considering  whether
       there has been an error in law. The Judge stated:

    "I do not accept that she would have a profile  on  return  that  would
    generate a real risk of persecution according to the country  guidance.
    Equally her activities in the United Kingdom have been at a  low  level
    and I am not satisfied they would bring her to the adverse attention of
    the authorities on return."

   13. There are three distinct limbs to the appellant's appeal today.  The
       first  concerned  the  credibility  of  her  account  of  events  in
       Ethiopia. Mr Cross sought to persuade me that the Judge had erred in
       his assessment of the evidence. However, for the reasons I now  give
       I reject that part of his appeal.

   14. The Judge considered the medical evidence and expert evidence of  Dr
       Trueman along with the account she gave.  Mr  Cross  submitted  more
       weight should have been attached to the scarring report because  the
       Judge found her injuries consistent with her account. However, it is
       clear from the  expert's  conclusions  and  having  regard  to  what
       "consistent with" means on the  Istanbul  Scale  that  the  scarring
       could have been occurred for any number of reasons.  The  Judge  had
       regard to the appellant's account of what happened  and  gave  clear
       and cogent reasons for rejecting the claims. Whilst Mr Cross  argued
       the appellant had clarified discrepancies it is clear that the Judge
       rejected her explanation and found her  account  to  be  lacking  in
       credibility. With regard to Dr Trueman's conclusions whilst  I  note
       Mr Cross's submission that the Judge was wrong to state  the  expert
       may have a bias towards  the  Oromo  people,  the  Judge  was  still
       entitled to reject his evidence on the basis his report was based on
       a finding the appellant had given  a  credible  account  and  having
       considered her account the Judge was then entitled, in the round, to
       reject it.

   15. The Judge was therefore entitled to reject the  appellant's  account
       of what happened to her in Ethiopia and for those reasons  I  reject
       Mr Cross's submissions on grounds one to three.

   16. I indicated at the  hearing  that  Mr  Cross's  submissions  on  the
       remaining matters may have merit. The country guidance  decision  of
       MB (OLF and MTA-risk) Ethiopia CG [2007] UKAIT  00030  remains  good
       law and binding unless evidence  is  adduced  that  would  show  the
       position in the country guidance case can be  departed  from.  There
       was evidence contained in the bundles that needed to  be  addressed.
       It would clearly have been open to the Judge to  have  rejected  the
       evidence but his failure to address the new evidence amounts  to  an
       error of law

   17. The Judge only made a passing reference in  paragraph  [29]  of  his
       decision to the issue of trafficking and I am satisfied that reasons
       should have been given to support that brief finding.

   18. Both representatives had previously agreed that if an error  in  law
       was found then I  could  remake  this  decision  without  a  further
       hearing. I therefore approach this matter on the basis that I  would
       have to remake the decision having regard  to  future  risk  to  the
       appellant and having regard to any trafficking issues.

   19. I deal firstly with the trafficking issue. The appellant's case  was
       referred to the Competent Authority (CA)  to  consider  whether  the
       circumstances of  the  case  met  the  definition  of  a  victim  of
       trafficking. In a decision issued October  21,  2014  the  CA  found
       there were no reasonable grounds to believe she met that definition.
       The reasons for that decision were contained in on Pages F3 to F8 of
       the respondent's bundle.  The  CA  noted  that  she  willingly  left
       Ethiopia with the assistance of an agent and  a  false  passport  to
       obtain a job with a Saudi family. After arriving in Saudi Arabia she
       had no further contact with the agent. She worked for  a  family  in
       Saudi Arabia but with the exception of not being  paid  the  correct
       amount of money she was neither physically nor sexually abused.  She
       came to the United Kingdom using a valid passport  and  stayed  with
       the family in London. She claimed to have fled after she claimed she
       heard talk of returning her to  Ethiopia.  Whilst  the  CA  accepted
       there were some  trafficking  indicators  they  rejected  her  claim
       because she had willingly applied for the job, signed a contract and
       voluntarily come to the United Kingdom with her and extend her  stay
       with them. In her witness  statement  the  appellant  described  her
       circumstances as "slavery" but she nevertheless  continued  to  work
       for them over a number of years. She claimed that  despite  the  way
       she was treated she managed to flee the house.

   20. In assessing whether the appellant was trafficked I have had  regard
       to the appellant's claims but the account she has given  has  to  be
       considered against the background of  overall  credibility.  In  any
       event, she was not "trafficked" even on her account  from  Ethiopia.
       She claimed to have left the country voluntarily on a false passport
       and then sought work in Saudi Arabia through an  agent.  She  worked
       for a considerable period for this family before  agreeing  to  join
       the family in the United Kingdom.

   21. She has had no further contact with the agent in  Saudi  Arabia  and
       the family claimed not to have know she had entered Saudi Arabia  on
       a false passport and had reported her missing after she disappeared.
       She did not claim asylum on arrival  but  claimed  asylum  some  six
       weeks later.

   22. The decision not to accept she was trafficked was a decision open to
       the CA and I find nothing in the appellant's evidence to persuade me
       a  different  decision  should  have  been  reached.  I  reject  her
       trafficking claim.

   23. The issue therefore is whether she would face risk of persecution or
       serious harm if returned to  Ethiopia.  The  Judge  found  that  the
       appellant was a low level member of the  OLF  in  Ethiopia  and  had
       joined the OLF in the United Kingdom.

   24. The Country Guidance case of  MB  (OLF  and  MTA-risk)  Ethiopia  CG
       [2007] UKAIT 00030 states:

    "65. As at February 2007, the situation in Ethiopia is  such  that,  in
    general:-


    (a) OLF members and sympathisers;


    (b) persons perceived to be OLF members or sympathisers; and


    (c) members of the MTA;


    will, on return, be at real risk if  they  fall  within  the  scope  of
    paragraph 66 or 67 below.


    66. In the case of OLF members and  sympathisers,  the  Tribunal  finds
    that the conclusions in paragraph 17 of HA continue to be supported  by
    the background country evidence. OLF members and sympathisers and those
    specifically perceived  by  the  authorities  to  be  such  members  or
    sympathisers will in  general  be  at  real  risk  if  they  have  been
    previously arrested or detained on suspicion of OLF involvement. So too
    will those who have a significant history, known to the authorities, of
    OLF membership or sympathy. Whether any such persons are to be excluded
    from  recognition  as  refugees  or  from  the  grant  of  humanitarian
    protection by reason of armed activities may need to  be  addressed  in
    particular cases (see paragraph  3.6.10  of  the  Operational  Guidance
    Note).


    67. Given the proscription of the MTA and the current state of  tension
    on the part of the Ethiopian authorities, the Tribunal  considers  that
    MTA members will also be at real risk on return if they have previously
    been arrested or detained on suspicion of MTA membership and/or of  OLF
    membership or are known or suspected of membership of the MTA.  Despite
    the banning of the  MTA,  the  Tribunal  does  not  consider  that  the
    evidence is such as to show  a  real  risk  where  the  extent  of  the
    authorities' knowledge or suspicion  about  an  individual  relates  to
    something less than membership of the MTA."

   25. In light of the Country Guidance decision and the  Judge's  findings
       the appellant would not face a real risk of persecution  or  serious
       harm. The issue I am asked to consider is whether the  position  has
       worsened to enable me to depart from this decision. In particular, I
       was asked to have regard to the Home Office's  Operational  Guidance
       Note issued in November 2013 (paragraph 3.15.16).  This  section  of
       the Guidance indicates that "perceived members  or  sympathisers  of
       the OLF are likely to be  targeted  and  should  they  come  to  the
       attention of the authorities they  are  likely  to  be  at  risk  of
       persecution. The section  concludes  that  up  to  date  information
       should be sought from COIS. There is nothing  contained  within  any
       government or US government reports that sheds further light on this
       point but the Guidance Note does not  appear  to  deviate  from  the
       findings in MB. Paragraph  3.15.16  follows  directly  on  from  the
       paragraph that dealt with the Country Guidance  case.  The  Guidance
       therefore does not suggest the situation has changed  so  much  that
       the Country Guidance of MB should be departed from.

   26. Contained within the appellant's bundle is an  article  prepared  by
       Amnesty International entitled "Because I am Oromo".  In considering
       the effect of this report on the appellant's case I must approach it
       from the stance that she was a low level supporter who  had  neither
       been detained nor arrested (Judge's earlier findings).

   27. The report referred to the fact that between 2011 and 2014 at  least
       5,000 Oromos had been arrested  as  a  result  of  their  actual  or
       suspected peaceful opposition to the government. The  majority  were
       detained without charge or trial for some or all of their  detention
       for weeks, months or years. Amnesty  International's  report  listed
       persons spoken to but all were anonymous sources. The report  itself
       is based on information collated between 2011 and  2014  and  whilst
       there  is  anonymous  evidence  of  mistreatment  there  is  nothing
       elsewhere or more recent that provides confirmed details in the  way
       that Dr Love and Dr Trueman did when giving evidence to the Tribunal
       in 2007 in MB.

   28. In fact, Dr Trueman's current report does not  appear  to  take  the
       appellant's case much further. Risks remain for OLF members and some
       supporters but I find nothing in the  Amnesty  International  report
       (which is based on information collates  between  2011  and  October
       2014) or the expert report advanced on her behalf that persuades  me
       that the findings in MB should be departed from.

   29. In R and Others v SSHD (2005) EWCA Civ 982 the Court of Appeal  made
       clear that any failure to  follow  a  clear,  apparently  applicable
       country guidance case or to show why it does not apply to  the  case
       in question is likely to be regarded  as  a  ground  for  review  or
       appeal on a point of law.  In OM  (AA  wrong  in  law)  Zimbabwe  CG
       [2006] UKAIT 00077 the Tribunal said that  country  guidance  stands
       until it is replaced or found to be wrong in law.

   30. The issue that remained for me to consider was whether the appellant
       would face a future risk based on the findings made by the Judge and
       the material not considered by him.

   31. I am not satisfied the position has changed sufficiently for  me  to
       move  away  from  what  the  Tribunal  said  in  MB  and  in   those
       circumstances I dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum and article
       3 grounds.

   32. In all other  respects  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  shall
       remain as stated by it.


DECISION

   33. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I have remade the decision
       but dismiss the appellant's appeals on all grounds.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
