
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05918/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2016                 |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                         MISS MIYAMBOH MIMI CHABWERA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss T Jabin (Maya Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant in relation to  a  Decision  and  Reasons  of  Judge  Brunnen
    promulgated on  the  26th  January  2016  by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Malawi born in 1991. She came to  the  UK
    in 2005. The Appellant's claim is that she was an only child who  lived
    with her parents in Malawi until  they  were  both  killed  in  a  road
    traffic accident when she was 10 or 11 years of age. She then  went  to
    live with her paternal uncle who was the local chief. The Appellant had
    an older half-sister in the  UK  who  arranged  to  sell  her  father's
    property and pay for the Appellant to be brought to the UK in 2005.

 3. The Appellant claims that when she was in Malawi  she  suffered  sexual
    abuse at the hands of a schoolteacher, a childminder  and  one  of  her
    mother's friends. Additionally she was physically beaten by her  father
    and by her uncle.

 4. The Appellant had expected to live  with  her  half-  sister  when  she
    arrived in the UK but in fact has had nothing  to  do  with  her  half-
    sister and instead went to live  with  an  "aunt,"  who  was  no  blood
    relative but a friend of her mother. The  Appellant  remains  close  to
    that aunt and to her aunt's children.

 5. In 2007 the appellant moved to Manchester where  she  attended  college
    until 2009 and lived with a family friend. In 2010 she moved  to  Leeds
    where she lived with another friend and supported herself doing  casual
    work. In 2011 she returned to Manchester where she lived  with  another
    "aunt". She has relied on the help of friends for support and has  been
    unable to obtain employment as she has no status.

 6. The Appellant registered with a GP in Manchester in 2011 and  GP  notes
    provided to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  show  various  consultations
    irrelevant for the purposes of the  appeal  between  October  2011  and
    March 2013. On 31st March 2013 the Appellant was seen at casualty at  a
    Manchester hospital with a laceration to her wrist caused by self-harm.
    She was referred to counselling from a support organisation called 42nd
    Street. The Appellant said that she has been self-harming since she was
    13 years old. She has been supported by 42nd Street since April 2013.

 7. The Appellant contacted her uncle in Malawi but his manner towards  her
    was angry and threatening. She understood this  was  because  when  her
    half-sister sold her father's  property  she  failed  to  settle  their
    father's debts so that the responsibility for them fell on  the  uncle.
    The uncle made clear he wanted nothing to do  with  the  Appellant  and
    that if she returned he would accuse her of being  a  witch  and  would
    kill her. The Appellant has not contacted him since.

 8. The Appellant had a relationship with Mr Odemorin  and  gave  birth  to
    their daughter in April 2015. She  lives  with  her  daughter  in  NASS
    accommodation. Although Mr Odemorin stays with her three or four nights
    a week they do  not  live  together.  The  remainder  of  the  time  Mr
    Odemorin, who has  no  settled  address,  spends  nights  staying  with
    various friends. The Appellant does  her  own  shopping  and  likes  Mr
    Odemorin to accompany her for Drs appointments but he  is  not  present
    during the consultations.

 9. The Appellant remains in contact with  her  aunt  in  the  UK  and  her
    cousin. Her fear is that if she is to return  to  Malawi  she  will  be
    directly harmed by her uncle or indirectly harmed as a  result  of  him
    accusing her of witchcraft. She also fears that her mental health  will
    deteriorate and that would support the accusation  of  witchcraft.  She
    also fears that she would not be able to care for her baby.

10. The judge heard  evidence  from  a  number  of  people  including  Sara
    Flounders who is a councillor with 42nd  Street.  She  had  provided  a
    statement and gave oral evidence to the effect that the  Appellant  was
    referred to the organisation from the Accident and Emergency department
    of North Manchester General Hospital in March 2013 because she had self-
     harmed and had apparently been self- harming since she was 13 years of
    age. Miss Flounders gave evidence that at times of increased stress the
    Appellant often reported strong suicidal thoughts and feelings of panic
    which escalated when she was considering  her  immigration  status  and
    fear of return.

11. The Judge noted  that  Miss  Flounders  generally  offered  clients  12
    counselling sessions but this was extended where the need arose and has
    been extended in relation to  the  Appellant  especially  at  times  of
    increased risk of self-harm or suicide. She referred to having provided
    increased support over the Christmas period because of the  Appellant's
    increasing anxiety about the approaching appeal hearing and referred to
    the fact that the  appellant  had  seen  her  GP  and  been  prescribed
    antidepressant tablets.

12. The Judge also heard evidence from the Appellant's  partner,  a  friend
    who had been a friend of the Appellant's parents in Malawi and  various
    other persons.

13. Judge Brunnen started his consideration of the evidence at paragraph 61
    of the Decision and Reasons.

14. At paragraph 63 the Judge found that the delay in claiming  asylum  was
    not sufficiently significant to damage her overall credibility.

15. The main reason for the asylum claim was the Appellant's  fear  of  her
    uncle and he found that provided the Appellant did not seek  assistance
    from him on return, given the  time  that  has  passed,  there  was  in
    reality no reason to think he would seek to  do  her  any  harm  either
    direct physical harm or indirect harm by accusing  her  of  witchcraft.
    She had only been 14 years of age when she left Malawi  and  could  not
    possibly be responsible for her half-sister's  failure  to  settle  her
    father's debts.

16. The Judge noted that the Appellant had the benefit of a good  education
    and had the capacity to support herself and her child. The  reason  she
    gave for not working in the UK over the last few years was not  because
    of her mental ill-health but because she had no status. The Judge found
    that there would be no need for her to return to  Blantyre,  where  her
    uncle lives, as there are other substantial centres  of  population  in
    Malawi. She had demonstrated an ability to make friends at college  and
    church in the UK and draw on support.  She could do the same in Malawi.
    The letters of support that been provided  to  the  Tribunal  indicated
    that the Appellant is hard-working and capable and on  that  basis  the
    Judge found it would not be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect  her
    to settle in a different area of Malawi away  from  her  original  home
    area in order to avoid contact with her uncle.  The  Judge  found  that
    there was no reason to think that the  uncle  would  seek  her  out  or
    attempt to harm if she were to do so.

17. At paragraph 71 the Judge noted  that  Miss  Flounders  and  two  other
    witnesses  had  expressed  their  concern  about  the  impact  on   the
    Appellant's mental health of her returning to  Malawi  but  also  noted
    that none of them had any medical qualifications to justify giving  any
    great weight to their concerns. In particular the Judge noted  that  he
    had not been provided with any medical evidence more recent than August
    2013 when the GP notes came to an end. He noted that there was not even
    a GP letter commenting on the Appellant's current  mental  health,  let
    alone a report from a consultant psychiatrist such as one would  expect
    to see in such a case. The Judge  noted  that  it  appeared  from  Miss
    Flounders' evidence that  the  Appellant's  anxiety  was  very  largely
    caused by her fear that she would not be allowed to stay in the UK  and
    that if her return was a fait accompli her anxiety  might  subside.  He
    found that the evidence did not establish that there was  a  real  risk
    that she would suffer such serious mental illness such that  she  would
    be at risk of being regarded as a witch and ill- treated as a result.

18. The Judge went on to find that the mere fact that a  return  to  Malawi
    would  have  some  detrimental  effect  on  her   mental   health   was
    insufficient to found a claim to remain in the UK.

19. The Judge then went on to consider Article 8 and did not accept for the
    reasons he had previously given that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant's integration and found that as she and  her
    daughter would be removed together their family life would continue  in
    Malawi as it did in the UK. He also found there to be no  substance  in
    her partner's reasons for not washing to go  with  her  to  Malawi  and
    found that he had put his desire to stay in the UK before  his  concern
    for the Appellant and their daughter.

20. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the Judge  may  have
    erred in not giving adequate reasons in his decision for his conclusion
    that giving any great weight  to  Miss  Flounders'  concerns  were  not
    justified.

21. Before me Miss Jabin indicated that the grounds were quite detailed and
    she relied upon them but essentially the ground  she  relied  upon  was
    that the evidence of Miss Flounders, who had been working closely  with
    the Appellant for  many  years,  who  had  detailed  the  problems  the
    Appellant would face and the impact upon her of removal  had  not  been
    given adequate weight. She noted that at paragraph  71  the  Judge  had
    lumped together the evidence of Miss Flounders with two other witnesses
    whereas Miss Flounders was qualified to give  evidence  as  she  was  a
    counsellor who had been working with the Appellant closely for a number
    of years. She said that it was not the medical  qualification  but  the
    detailed evidence of Miss Flounders' dealings with the Appellant  which
    should have been afforded considerable weight. The Appellant  had  been
    referred to Miss Flounders' organisation by the hospital who must  have
    considered the organisation appropriately qualified to offer support.

22. Whilst I can  see  that  Miss  Flounders'  evidence  was  detailed  and
    expressed concerns for her "client" following a close relationship over
    a number of years, I cannot find that the Judge erred in the amount  of
    weight he gave to that evidence. That has to be tempered  by  the  fact
    that  the  Appellant's  representatives  chose  to  adduce  no  medical
    evidence more recent than August 2013 when they  could  have  done  so.
    There  was  no  psychiatric  report  which  would  have  carried   very
    considerable weight.  Indeed there has been no  application  to  adduce
    any such evidence to the Upper Tribunal.

23. The medical evidence that there was and indeed the evidence  from  Miss
    Flounders showed that the Appellant had self- harmed in March 2013  but
    there had been no incidents of self-harm  since  and  no  incidents  of
    attempted suicide. Miss Jabin confirmed that was the case.  Miss  Jabin
    in referring to it being a very serious mental illness  overstated  the
    evidence. The evidence did not point to  that.  The  Appellant  is  not
    receiving any treatment or medication for mental illness. She  has  not
    been hospitalised. She is not under the care of a psychiatrist and  she
    has not exhibited  any  concerning  behaviours  such  as  self-harm  or
    suicide attempts save for the one  incident  in  March  2013.  Had  the
    hospital deemed it as serious as Miss Jabin suggested they  would  have
    referred her to psychiatric services rather than simply a counsellor.

24. A Judge is entitled to expect,  if  indeed  it  is  the  case  that  an
    Appellant has a serious and abiding mental illness,  greater  and  more
    detailed medical evidence. Its absence pointed to her  condition  being
    far less serious than claimed.

25. The Judge noted that she shopped on her own, cared for her daughter  on
    her own, attended sessions with Miss Flounders on her own.  Indeed  she
    appears to be managing in the community without any concerns about  her
    daughter and without the support of a partner.

26. The First-tier Tribunal  approached  his  consideration  appropriately,
    took all the evidence into account and reached conclusions plainly open
    to him on the evidence.  His Decision and Reasons contains no  material
    error of law.

Decision

    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    There having been no application for an anonymity order I do  not  make
    one.


Signed   Date 14th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

