
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05838/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 14 April 2015                             |On 17 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M Q
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Hoshi, instructed by Migrant Legal Project


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  Neither party invited  me
    to rescind the order and I continue it  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Archer) allowing the appellant's appeal on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds against a decision  taken  on  1  August  2014  to
    remove the appellant to either Syria or the  Kingdom  of  Saudi  Arabia
    ("KSA").

 3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties as  they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Syria who was born on 1 January 1985.

 5. The appellant claims that he arrived clandestinely in the UK  concealed
    in a lorry on 17 June 2014.  He claimed asylum.  Following a  screening
    interview on 17 June 2014 and an asylum interview on 21 July 2014, in a
    decision dated 1  August  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's  claim  for  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and   under
    Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

 6. In that decision, the Secretary of State accepted  that  the  appellant
    was  a  national  of  Syria  and  had  established  a  "real  risk   of
    persecution" or a breach of the ECHR in Syria (see para 32).   However,
    the Secretary of State concluded that the  appellant  could  be  safely
    removed to the KSA where his wife and son were born and lived and where
    he had married his wife, and where he had visited several times.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Archer
    accepted, on the evidence, that the appellant was a  citizen  of  Syria
    and so was his wife.  At para 23 of  the  determination,  Judge  Archer
    found, on the evidence, that the appellant had no right  to  reside  in
    the KSA.  He said this:

         "23. The objective evidence submitted in the appellant's bundle  at
             C1-C6  confirms  that  foreign  workers  require  a  residence
             permit.  I find that [S's] residence in KSA was based upon her
             father's residence permit.  The  appellant  has  never  had  a
             residence permit in KSA and has  only  ever  visited  for  the
             Hadj.  I find that it is reasonably likely that he  overstayed
             his Hadj visa as claimed and then paid a bribe  to  return  to
             Jordan.  He has never worked in KSA.  He has no status  there.
             There is no basis upon which he can apply for KSA citizenship.
              [S] is not a KSA citizen and  the  appellant  cannot  acquire
             citizenship through her.  Contrary  to  paragraph  31  of  the
             refusal letter; there is no evidence that  the  appellant  can
             live freely with his family in KSA."

 8. In her decision letter, the Secretary of State relied on  the  decision
    in MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 289  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant was (at para 29):

         "... required to act bona fide and take  all  reasonable  practical
         steps to seek to obtain the requisite documents to enable return to
         KSA.  It is considered you have failed to  advance,  or  establish,
         that it is unreasonable for you to do this.  It is concluded  that,
         as with the appellant in the case of MA [2009], there is no  reason
         why you should not yourself take the necessary steps to do this."

 9. At para 24, Judge Archer rejected reliance upon  MA  in  the  following
    terms:

         "24. I have carefully considered the legal arguments.  I find  that
             the respondent has misinterpreted MA (Ethiopia) v SSHD  [2009]
             EWCA Civ 289.  The appellant is not a KSA citizen and there is
             no requirement for him to  take  bona  fide  steps  to  obtain
             authorisation from KSA.  The respondent accepts  that  KSA  is
             not  the  appellant's  country  of  nationality.   He  has  no
             residual entitlement to KSA nationality.  He is  not  entitled
             to KSA citizenship, any more than he is entitled to  Jordanian
             citizenship.  I  therefore  accept  the  submissions  made  at
             paragraphs 10-14 of Mr Hoshi's skeleton argument."

10. Consequently, the judge found that the appellant had no right to reside
    in the KSA and, accepting the submissions of the  appellant's  Counsel,
    rejected the Secretary of State's reliance upon MA which  related  only
    to establishing entitlement to citizenship of a second, safe country of
    nationality.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  the  following
    single ground:


         "In this case it was the intention of the respondent to remove  the
         appellant to KSA.   At  para  23  of  the  determination  the  FTTJ
         acknowledges the objective evidence submitted by the  appellant  as
         to the fact that foreign workers require a  residence  permit.   He
         goes on to accept the appellant's account that  he  had  only  ever
         visited KSA for the Hajj and never had a residence permit.


         This finding totally ignores the reference in the Refusal Letter at
         Para. 10 to the fact that  the  appellant  had  said  that  he  had
         visited KSA twice  because  he  had  a  work  permit  there.   This
         information appears in the Screening Interview at  para  2.1  which
         was before the FTTJ.


         In failing to consider this vital piece of information the FTTJ has
         made  flawed  findings  in  relation  to  the  possibility  of  the
         appellant obtaining residence in KSA as  per  the  appellant's  own
         objective evidence mentioned above."

12. On 29 December 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on that ground.

13. In a rule 24 response dated 22 January 2015, the  appellant  sought  to
    uphold Judge Archer's determination  on  the  basis  that  the  judge's
    factual finding that the appellant could not  reside  in  the  KSA  was
    properly open  to  him  and  the  respondent's  reliance  upon  MA  was
    erroneous as that was only concerned with citizenship and it could  not
    be said that even if he held a KSA  work  permit  he  was  entitled  to
    citizenship in the KSA.

14. Thus, the appeal came before me.

15. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary  of
    State, relied upon the grounds of appeal.   In  essence,  he  submitted
    that the judge had failed to deal with the  whole  of  the  appellant's
    evidence in relation to his connection with the KSA and  in  particular
    his evidence in his screening interview that he had a work  permit  for
    the KSA.  Mr Richards submitted that the appellant had extensive family
    connections with the KSA, including that his wife and child  were  born
    there.  The appellant had not made a bona fide attempt  to  demonstrate
    that he could not live in the KSA.  Consequently, although Mr  Richards
    accepted that the appellant was a refugee, the FtT had  been  wrong  to
    allow his appeal on the basis that he could not safely  be  removed  to
    the KSA.

16. On the factual issue, Mr Hoshi submitted that the judge had, in effect,
    set out the appellant's evidence given in his screening interview  that
    he had previously had a "work permit" for the KSA at  para  15  of  his
    determination.  However,  having  heard  the  appellant  give  evidence
    orally which was consistent with his written evidence that he  had  not
    worked in the KSA and had only visited the KSA for the purposes of  the
    Hadj, the judge's finding was properly open to him on the evidence.

17. Further, Mr Hoshi submitted that the Secretary of State's  reliance  on
    MA was wrong in principle as there was no basis for suggesting that the
    appellant was entitled to  citizenship  of  the  KSA  based  upon,  for
    example, his residence or that of his wife in the KSA.

Discussion

18. As I have already indicated, both in the refusal letter and before  me,
    the Secretary of State accepted that the appellant was a  refugee  from
    Syria.  However, the removal direction contemplated his removal  either
    to Syria or the KSA.

19. The appellant's  claim  that  his  removal  would  breach  the  Refugee
    Convention depended upon him, first not having or being entitled to the
    citizenship of a second country (here the KSA) in  which  he  could  be
    safe; and secondly, if no such second country of  nationality  existed,
    he could nevertheless be safely removed to a third  country  (here  the
    KSA) where he could reside.

20. In her refusal letter, it appears that the Secretary  of  State  relied
    upon both these matters to reject the appellant's claim.  Certainly  at
    paras 26-28, including a quotation from  MA,  the  Secretary  of  State
    appears to consider whether the appellant was entitled  to  citizenship
    of the KSA.  However, at paragraph  29-32,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    reasoning appears to reflect  the  second  issue,  namely  whether  the
    appellant could be safely removed to the KSA  based  upon  a  right  of
    residence there, even if he  did  not  have  or  was  not  entitled  to
    citizenship of the KSA.

21. In his determination, Judge Archer found in para 23, which I  have  set
    out above, that the appellant was not entitled to  citizenship  of  the
    KSA.  That decision is not challenged in the grounds  and  stands.   On
    the evidence, it was clearly legally unassailable.

22. The only remaining issue, therefore, before Judge  Archer  was  whether
    the appellant could be safely returned to the KSA where he was entitled
    to reside.  The judge found that he had no right to reside there  based
    upon his wife's residence or that of her family.   He  found  that  the
    appellant had never worked in the KSA.   It  is  a  challenge  to  that
    factual finding which is the sole ground  on  which  the  Secretary  of
    State sought, and was granted, permission to appeal.

23. So far as the ground relies upon the judge's failure  to  consider  the
    appellant's evidence given at section 2.1 of his  screening  interview,
    it is clear that the judge did have that evidence in mind when reaching
    his finding.  That evidence was:

         "I left Syria Feb 2012.  I went to Jordan with a smuggler  by  car.
         I stayed there until approx six weeks.   However  in  this  time  I
         travelled to Saudi Arabia as I had a work  permit  there.   I  went
         there and back twice, the longest being six months ..."

24. At para 12 of his determination the judge, in effect,  summarises  that
    evidence when he says:

         "The appellant states that he left Syria for  Jordan  in  2012  and
         stayed there for six weeks.  He has been to the  Kingdom  of  Saudi
         Arabia (KSA) twice as he had a work permit there."

25. There is, in my judgment, no basis for concluding that the judge failed
    to take that evidence into account, which he in effect set out at  para
    12 of his determination, when reaching his findings at paras 21-25 even
    though he made no express reference to it there.  The determination has
    to be read as a whole  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  this  experienced
    Immigration Judge had well in mind what he  said  in  para  12  of  his
    determination when he reached  his  findings  in  paras  21-25  in  the
    appellant's favour.

26. In reaching his conclusions, the judge had  other  evidence  which  was
    consistent with his factual finding.

27. First, in the appellant's screening interview (at questions 25 and  26)
    the following appears:

         "Q25:  Have you lived anywhere outside of Syria?  A:  No.

         Q26:  Have you ever worked anywhere outside of Syria?  A:   No.   I
         used to work in Jordan for short periods,  just  lately,  before  I
         left Syria."

28. Secondly, in his witness statement the appellant stated at paras  13-15
    that he had visited Saudi Arabia for the Hadj and on one  occasion  had
    spent eight months there during the time of his marriage.  He  did  not
    claim to have worked there  or  had  a  work  permit  to  do  so.   The
    appellant's evidence was as follows:

         "13. I used to go to Saudi Arabia most years for  the  Hadj.   When
             you travel for the Hadj you are given entry for that  purpose.
             It is valid for about a month.  The most time  I  spent  there
             was eight months during the time of my marriage.

         14.  When I stayed in Saudi Arabia for eight months I got the  visa
             in Syria and travelled overland through Jordan  to  Mecca  for
             the holy visit.  Syrians enter Saudi Arabia though Jordan  but
             do not require visas to enter Jordan.  I overstayed my visa in
             order to get married and then made a few phone calls and  paid
             bahshish (a 'back-hander') at the Saudi-Jordanian border on my
             [way] out to 'pay' for my overstay.

         15.  In answer to the Home Office, I cannot live lawfully in  Saudi
             Arabia because my wife, my child, and my  in-laws  are  Syrian
             nationals.  We do not have lawful residence  in  Saudi  Arabia
             and we do not have the protection of  the  Saudi  authorities.
             While living in Saudi Arabia we could be removed at any  point
             to Syria.  The only time I have spent legally in Saudi  Arabia
             is while doing the Hadj.  I do  not  know  what  status  [S's]
             parents had while living in Saudi Arabia but I  do  know  that
             they are no Saudi nationals and I also know that  it  is  very
             common for Syrians to  work  in  Saudi  Arabia  for  financial
             reasons but they are never given  Saudi  nationality  even  if
             they are born there."

29.  Mr  Hoshi  pointed  out  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was  not
    challenged at the hearing except to the extent that he had not  claimed
    asylum in France prior to reaching  the  UK  which,  he  told  me,  the
    Presenting Officer had described as a "minor" factor.  Mr Richards  did
    not dispute Mr Hoshi's submission, having been present at the  hearing,
    that the appellant was not cross-examined on any inconsistency  between
    his screening interview and his other evidence and no inconsistency  in
    that  regard  was  relied  upon  by  the  Presenting  Officer  in   his
    submissions.

30. It is trite to  state  that  factual  matters  are  primarily  for  the
    tribunal of fact, here, the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge  had  an
    opportunity to consider the appellant and his evidence  which  he  gave
    orally.  He formed a positive view of the appellant's  credibility  and
    made his factual finding preferring the appellant's  written  evidence,
    adopted at the hearing, that he had never had a work  permit  in  Saudi
    Arabia.  As I have said, I do not accept  that  the  judge  failed,  in
    reaching his positive finding, to bear in mind that the  appellant  had
    stated in  his  screening  interview  that  he  had  a  "work  permit".
    However, that  apparent  inconsistency  was  not  relied  upon  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing and  the  appellant  was  not  cross-
    examined upon it.

31. I see no basis upon which it  can  be  said  that  the  judge  was  not
    properly entitled to prefer the appellant's later evidence and to  find
    in para 23 of his determination that the appellant had never worked  in
    the KSA and had no right of residence.  There  was  no  other  evidence
    that the appellant had a current right to reside  in  the  KSA  and  so
    could be safely returned there despite the real risk of persecution  to
    him in his country of  nationality,  Syria.  The  Judge's  finding  was
    adequately reasoned and not irrational given the evidence.

32. The grounds do not rely upon any other basis to challenge  the  judge's
    decision to allow the appellant's appeal.

33. In particular, the Secretary of State's grounds do not rely upon MA and
    the judge view that it did not apply where the issue is not whether the
    individual is entitled to citizenship of a second, safe country.  It is
    readily apparent why an individual should, as a generality, in  proving
    his claim to be at risk in his country  or  countries  of  nationality,
    produce supporting evidence of his citizenship if disputed,  including,
    where relevant, contact with a relevant government or embassy  that  he
    is not entitled to citizenship of a country where  it  is  proposed  he
    should be returned.  Had it been necessary to decide the point not,  as
    I say, relied upon in the grounds by the Secretary of  State,  I  would
    have preferred Mr Hoshi's submissions (as did Judge  Archer)  that  the
    evidential obligation, and it is no more than that, has no  application
    where the issue is whether  an  individual  could  reside  (apart  from
    rights based upon citizenship) in a country  to  which  the  respondent
    intends to remove the individual.  At least, I would so conclude  in  a
    case such as the present where there is a finding that the  basis  upon
    which the respondent claimed that the individual could reside  in  that
    country is rejected, namely as here  that  the  appellant  had  a  work
    permit in the past.

Decision

34. Consequently, for the reasons I have given, the First-tier Tribunal did
    not err in law in allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  That decision stands.

35. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is,  accordingly,
    dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

