
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05503/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                           Mr PRATHEEPAN JEYAPALAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, Dotcom Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
I find that no particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give
rise to the need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is
made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shiner
    promulgated on 15 October 2015 ("the Decision").  Permission to  appeal
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker on the Article 8 ground
    only on 5 November 2015.

 2. The Judge in dismissing the appeal  on  this  ground  relied  on  three
    factors.  Those were that the Appellant's children although potentially
    entitled to British citizenship had not yet been  granted  citizenship,
    the Respondent had unreasonably delayed in  the  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's case and the Appellant's mental health.

 3. Mr Harris, who appeared for the Appellant before me, pressed  only  the
    first of those factors although he did indicate at  one  point  in  his
    submissions that the delay may be relevant.  However, before turning to
    that factor I will deal with the second and third factors.

 4. The Judge noted the delay in dealing with the  Appellant's  application
    but at  [96]  of  the  Decision,  having  found  that  there  was  some
    unreasonable delay on behalf of the Respondent, indicated that she  had
    taken that delay into account.  This is sufficient to  deal  with  that
    point.

 5. In relation to the  Appellant's  mental  health,  that  is  dealt  with
    separately at [78] onwards of the Decision, as it was raised  initially
    in relation to Article 3 claim.  At [91] the Judge indicated  that  the
    Appellant's mental health condition was taken into account also  within
    the context of his other Article 8 claims.

 6. There is a complaint that  the  various  factors  were  not  considered
    cumulatively.  That challenge is without  foundation.   The  Judge  has
    clearly considered all the factors on which  the  Article  8  claim  is
    based as a whole.

 7. I turn therefore to the first factor, which, as I say, was the focus of
    submissions before me.   The  Appellant  says  that  his  children  are
    automatically entitled to British nationality because their mother  had
    indefinite leave to remain at the time of their birth.  That  certainly
    appears to be right under Section 1  of  the  British  Nationality  Act
    1981.  However, the Judge is required to consider  the  facts  as  they
    stood at the time of the hearing, and the only real complaint which, it
    seems to me, the Appellant can make about the way in which  this  issue
    was treated (bearing  in  mind  that  the  children  had  not  acquired
    citizenship at the date of the hearing) is  at  [98]  where  the  Judge
    says: "I accept that the children are dependent upon the appellant  and
    his partner, however I do not accept  that  the  children  are  British
    citizens or that it is inevitable that they will obtain British citizen
    status, it may not be so."

 8. As I pointed out to Mr Harris, however,  the  Judge  then  went  on  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  Indeed Mr Harris did not suggest
    even now that the Appellant could meet the Rules as  the  children  are
    not  yet  British  citizens.   The  judge  there  considered  the  best
    interests of the children and in that context says at [105]: "They  are
    not British citizens."  That was and is of  course  entirely  factually
    correct. The Judge has considered the best interests  of  the  children
    therefore on the right factual basis.

 9. Having made that finding in relation to best interests the  Judge  goes
    on to consider whether it is reasonable for the Appellant's partner  to
    return to Sri Lanka, as I repeat again, on the  basis  of  the  factual
    finding that the children were not at the date of the  hearing  British
    citizens.  He found that it is not unreasonable  for  the  partner  and
    children to return to Sri Lanka with the Appellant.

10. Insofar as there is an error therefore at [98] in the finding  that  it
    is not inevitable that when the application is considered the  children
    will be granted citizenship (all things being equal, as Mr Kotas put it
    to me), this error is not material.  Accordingly I uphold the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

11. I make clear of course that if matters change,  in  particular  as  and
    when the children are granted citizenship,  it  will  be  open  to  the
    Appellant to make a further application to deal with the facts as  they
    will then stand.

Decision

I am satisfied that the Decision does not involve the making of  a  material
error of law and I therefore uphold the First-Tier Tribunal Decision.

Signed   [pic]    Date 28 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

