
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05386/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 November 2015                            |On 11 December 2015           |
|Prepared 2 November 2015                      |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     PAK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Owen Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri Lanka, date of birth 6 February  1977,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to refuse to extend leave to
    remain and to make removal directions on 14 July  2014.   The  relevant
    application had been made on 10 December 2012.   The  adverse  decision
    [D] was subject of an appeal which was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McLachlan (the judge) whose decision on 9 February 2015 dismissed
    the appeal on asylum, human rights grounds and  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

2.   Permission to appeal that decision was given by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen on 8 June 2015 with reference to the potential error of the judge
    made in the assessment of the medical evidence and its  materiality  to
    the issue of the Appellant's credibility and thus to the issue of  risk
    on return.

3.   By a letter, dated  30  July  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  made  a
    response under Rule 24.

4.   The grounds supporting the renewed application are  in  substitute  for
    the original grounds that were refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Frankish on 9 March 2015.  Those grounds were not settled by Mr Muquit,
    his grounds are dated 20 March 2015.

5.   Mr Muquit touched upon a number of  issues  but  essentially  the  only
    challenge went to the core of the Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR
    claim in terms of the judge's assessment of the medical evidence.

6.   At [D5] of 9 February 29015 the  judge  said  "I  have  considered  the
    evidence in the round in the light of all  the  relevant  circumstances
    judged against the situation as at the  time  of  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal".  Assuming that is not simply a pro forma statement, what  then
    transpired was that the judge heard the  evidence  in  the  usual  way,
    received skeleton argument and a submission  filed  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant as well  as  heard  the  representations  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent.

7.   Unfortunately the judge then at [D17] started her findings  by  stating
    "I find that the core of the Appellant's account is  a  fabrication  to
    enable him to enter into and remain in the UK.  I reach this conclusion
    because of the contradictions, inconsistencies  and  implausibility  in
    the evidence".  Between [D18 and 24] the judge proceeded to set  out  a
    range of findings in relation to the Appellant's personal credibility.

 8.   The judge also then went on to consider the injuries  claimed  by  the
    Appellant.  Aspects of his claim, for example that he had been sexually
    abused, were really not dealt with as such  but  at  [D25  -  34]  more
    evidence was considered.  Ultimately and  from  [D35]  and  onwards  to
    [D40] there was  the  consideration  of  the  medical  evidence].   The
    evidence particularly of Dr Izquirierdo-Martin, dated  9  August  2014,
    made reference to  photographs  of  injuries,  originally  provided  of
    photos taken in December 2012, also considered the  injuries  sustained
    and their potential timescale.  Dr Dhumad wrote an expert report on the
    Appellant's  mental  health  issues.   At  the  conclusion   of   those
    considerations by the judge, the judge said [D 41] "although I note the
    contents of the medical reports, it does not alter my finding that  the
    Appellant is not credible and his account is a fabrication".

9.   It seemed to me that if the judge was, as she said  she  was  going  to
    do, considering all the evidence in the round then  at  the  outset  of
    [D17] she would have  said  that  her  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    account was taken in the context of all the evidence in the round.  She
    did not do so and the wording of [D47] appears almost unequivocally  to
    suggest that the medical reports have not been considered in the  round
    but considered after the assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility:
    Accordingly they were discounted.

10.   I take the view that the assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility
    went to the very core of the claim as to past  ill-treatment,  risk  on
    return and what might follow thereafter in  terms  of  the  Appellant's
    background being looked into or considered and/or further  investigated
    on a return. In the light of the case law particularly  GJ  and  Others
    Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319, irrespective of what the assessment  might
    be made or have been made of his  refugee  sur  place  type  activities
    insofar as they might be claimed also to be a basis  of  real  risk  on
    return.
11.  In those circumstances it is unfortunate these errors should have  been
    made which undermined what was otherwise a carefully  written  decision
    addressing the evidence before the judge.

Notice of Decision

         The original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The  decision  will
    have to be remade in the First-Tier Tribunal.
 Directions

 (1) No findings  of  fact  to  stand  other  than  those  conceded  by  the
    Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal  letter,  dated  14  July
    2014.  List for hearing in the First-tier Tribunal but not before Judge
    McLachlan or Judge Frankish.
(2)  Time estimate three hours.
(3)  Tamil interpreter required.
(4)  Further directions relating to documents to be considered at a  CMR  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.
(5)  List for hearing at Columbus House, Chepstow Road, Langstone,  Newport,
    NP18 2LX.

12.  Although it is by no means obvious why an anonymity order was made  for
    which the judge gave  no  reasons,  I  am  satisfied  in  view  of  the
    allegation of sexual abuse that it would be appropriate to continue the
    order.

Signed                                  Date 2 December 2015




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




