
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05355/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination issued                 |
|on 23 February 2016                  |On 8 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [S B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr J Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on [ - ].  She has  not  asked
    for an anonymity order.

 2. The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  for  reasons
    explained in a letter dated 12 March 2015.  She filed an appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 27 March 2015.

 3. Neither the appellant's original claim nor her grounds of appeal to the
    FtT are based on a religious aspect.  However, when the case  came  for
    hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton on 28 April  2015  the
    appellant  added  a  claim  based  on  her  conversion  from  Islam  to
    Christianity since she came to the UK.

 4. In her determination, promulgated on 8 May 2015, Judge Kempton rejected
    the original claim on credibility grounds.

 5. Judge Kempton dealt with the conversion to Christianity  at  paragraphs
    28 to 33.  At paragraph 31 she noted the case of SZ and JM  (Christians
    - FS confirmed) Iran CG [2008] UKAIT 00082.  At paragraph 32  she  said
    it was not clear how the authorities  would  know  of  the  appellant's
    conversion, that  there  was  no  evidence  that  she  could  not  live
    discreetly if she wished to continue  her  Christian  faith,  and  that
    there is:

         "... a clear option in Iran to live discreetly and  to  move  to  a
         more remote area away  from  Tehran,  as  the  background  evidence
         suggests that many people do in order to avoid persecution."

    At paragraph 33, she said:

         "... the appellant] was not interested in Christianity  before  she
         left Iran.  If she is now interested in Christianity, it is  a  new
         interest and not one which is deeply rooted.  She has not expressed
         any desire to go out and publicly convert as  many  people  as  she
         can.  She has not said that she cannot live  without  Christianity.
         There is no evidence of this being a burning desire  in  her  whole
         being.  I cannot see her having a desperate need to  evangelise  if
         she were returned to Iran ... Rather, I have  the  impression  that
         Christianity has been helpful to her ... in the  UK  and  primarily
         has prevented her from being socially isolated  ...  that  is  more
         important to her than the religion itself, however well meaning the
         Reverend and clergy of the church might  have  been  in  coming  to
         court to give evidence on her behalf."

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal firstly  suggest  that  the
    judge went wrong regarding the standard of proof.  Ms Warren,  who  was
    not the author of the grounds, did not press that point.  There  is  no
    error to be detected along those lines in the determination.

 7. The grounds next criticise the judge for failing to allow the appeal on
    the basis of the appellant's particular social  group  as  a  woman  in
    Iran.  However, the adverse credibility findings left no scope for such
    an outcome.

 8. The final point in the grounds, and the one substantially pursued by Ms
    Warren, is that the judge went wrong by basing her decision on  whether
    Christian converts might be expected  to  tolerate  living  discreetly,
    which has not been the correct test since HJ and  HT  [2010]  UKSC  31,
    [2010] Imm AR 4.

 9. Mr Kingham conceded that there was an  error  of  legal  approach.   He
    fought a valiant rearguard action along the lines that  notwithstanding
    that error, the prior country guidance left scope to hold that converts
    living discreetly (by choice) would not be at risk of persecution; that
    the appellant had not shown that she would have any objection, or would
    wish to choose anything other than  living  discreetly;  and  that  the
    questions set out in HJ and HT  could  be  answered  only  against  the
    appellant.

10. I indicated that in my view the decision required to be set aside.

11. HJ and HT is not to the effect that all those who behave discreetly and
    avoid persecution are entitled to  protection;  everything  depends  on
    whether they modify their behaviour, and, if so, why.

12. If the judge's analysis had been restricted to the last  two  sentences
    of paragraph 33, that might arguably have amounted to a finding that on
    return the appellant would either have little interest in Christianity,
    or if she did, would pursue that interest with all discretion,  because
    that is the extent of her interest and not because of  modification  of
    her behaviour to avoid persecution.

13. The judge's analysis, however, also went into  the  territory  of  what
    people might do specifically in order to avoid  persecution,  and  into
    such observations as the appellant  not  having  a  burning  desire  to
    evangelise.  That suggests that the bar was being  set  above  what  is
    required by HJ and HT.  I did not think that  the  outcome  can  safely
    stand.

14. Parties agreed that in consequence of my finding, the case  required  a
    rehearing in the First-tier Tribunal.

15. Mr Kingham asked for the judge's conclusions on the original  political
    asylum aspect of the claim and on  the  appellant's  particular  social
    group as a woman to be preserved.  For the reasons briefly given  above
    in relation to the relevant grounds of appeal, I agree.  Ms Warren  did
    not suggest that those findings fell to be set aside.  The  conclusions
    reached at paragraph 24, in particular, are preserved.

16. The future hearing of the case is to focus on the aspect  of  religious
    conversion - in particular, on how the appellant is likely to behave on
    return and why, and  what  consequences,  if  any,  her  conduct  might
    attract.  The stages or tests, to be adapted as necessary, are  as  set
    out in HJ and HT by Lord Hope at paragraph 35  and  by  Lord  Roger  at
    paragraph 82.

17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside,  apart  from
    its conclusions on the credibility of claimed events  in  Iran  and  on
    those aspects of the case  resolved  at  paragraph  24.   None  of  the
    conclusions regarding religious conversion are to stand.  Under section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 the  nature  and
    extent of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade
    is such that it is appropriate to remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to  reconsider
    the case are not to include Judge Kempton.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           29 February 2016
