
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05700/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 May 2019                       |On 11 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     DKA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling of Counsel, instructed by Barnes,
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In a determination issued following an  initial  hearing  on  25  March
    2019, I found an error of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett promulgated on 6 July 2018 and set aside  that  decision
    with preserved findings of fact.  The error of law decision is  annexed
    to this decision and sets  out  the  background  and  history  of  this
    appeal, which will not be repeated herein save as is necessary.

 2. At the outset of the resumed oral hearing before me on 10 May 2009, the
    Appellant's Council made a renewed application for  an  adjournment  of
    the hearing on the basis of the forthcoming country  guidance  case  in
    relation  to  Iraq,  focusing  on  whether   Article   15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive is still applicable to certain  areas  in  Iraq
    which it was suggested would undoubtedly touch on issues in relation to
    the CSID and available documentation.   The  Respondent  supported  the
    application on the basis that there was a lack of information about the
    current situation in Kirkuk.

 3. I refused the application for an adjournment on the basis that the sole
    remaining issue in the present appeal is whether or not  the  Appellant
    has or can obtain within a reasonable time, a CSID, which is  an  issue
    which could fairly  be  determined  without  awaiting  further  country
    guidance from the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The outstanding issue in this appeal is whether  the  Appellant  had  a
    CSID card, or the means  of  obtaining  one  on  return  to  Iraq;  the
    Appellant having accepted some time  ago  in  2013,  that  he  was  not
    otherwise at risk on return to Iraq.

Applicable law

 5. The current country guidance on the situation in Iraq is  contained  in
    AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) as  amended  by  the
    Court of Appeal in  AA  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and further amended and supplemented  by
    AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT  00212
    (IAC).  In so far as  relevant  to  the  current  appeal,  the  country
    guidance in AA, as amended, is as follows:

      A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE QUALIFICATION
         DIRECTIVE

          1. There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
             certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
             militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
             ISIL.  The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called
             "contested areas", comprising the govenorates  of  ...  Kirkuk
             ... is such that, as a general matter, there  are  substantial
             grounds for believing that any civilian returned there, solely
             on account of his or her presence there, faces a real risk  of
             being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
             serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive.

         ...

      C. POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

         9.   Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A CSID  is
             generally required in order for an Iraqi to  access  financial
             assistance  from  the  authorities;   employment;   education;
             housing; and medical treatment.   If  P  shows  there  are  no
             family or other members likely to be able to provide means  of
             support, P is in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
             destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the  time  any
             funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
             assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
             that P will still have no CSID.

         10.  Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID, P  should
             as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil
             Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an Iraqi
             passport (whether current or expired), if P  has  one.   If  P
             does not have such a passport, P's ability to  obtain  a  CSID
             may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
             the book holding P's information (and  that  of  P's  family).
             P's ability to persuade the officials that  P  is  the  person
             named on the relevant page is likely to depend  on  whether  P
             has family members or other individuals who  are  prepared  to
             vouch for P.

         11.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
             if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of P's
             Governorate because it is  in  an  area  where  Article  15(c)
             serious harm is occurring.   As  a  result  of  the  violence,
             alternative CSA Offices for Mosul, Anbar and  Saluhaddin  have
             been established in Baghdad and Kerbala.   The  evidence  does
             not demonstrate that the "Central Archive",  which  exists  in
             Baghdad, is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need
             of them.   There  is  however,  a  National  Status  Court  in
             Baghdad, to which P could  apply  for  formal  recognition  of
             identity.  The precise operation of this  court  is,  however,
             unclear.

         12.  Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether he is able to do  so,  or  do  so
             within any reasonable timeframe, will depend on the individual
             circumstances.  Factors to be considered include:

             i)   whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register.  An INC, passport,  birth/marriage  certificates
                  or expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  Someone in possession of one or more  of  these  documents
                  process  should  be  straightforward.   A   laissez-passer
                  should not be counted for these  purposes:  these  can  be
                  issued without any other form of ID being  available,  are
                  not of any assistance in  'tracing  back'  to  the  family
                  record and confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;

             ii)  the location of the relevant civil registry  office.   If
                  it is in an area held, or formally held, by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?

             iii) Are there male family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side.  A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID
                  would be able to assist  in  locating  original  place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage.  It must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with the case at all.

         D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IRAQI  KURDISH
         REGION)

         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
             harsh for a person  from  a  contested  area  to  relocate  to
             Baghdad City or (subject to paragraph  2  above)  the  Baghdad
             Belts.

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
             P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are,  however,
             likely to be relevant:

             (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain  one  (see
                  Part C above);

             (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those  who  cannot  are  less
                  likely to find employment);

             (c)  whether P has family members or friends in  Baghdad  able
                  to accommodate him;

             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
                  difficulties than men in finding employment);

             (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room  or
                  rent accommodation;

             (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

             (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in  mind
                  there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers
                  are provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
             from Baghdad airport to the southern  governorates,  suffering
             serious harm en  route  to  such  governorates  so  as  engage
             Article 15(c).

         E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         2.   There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region (IKR).  All returns from the United Kingdom are
             to Baghdad.

         3.   For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
             Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable  and
             practical can be made without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering
             persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill  treatment  nor  that
             any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.

         4.   P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

         5.   P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  valid
             passport.  There are numerous checkpoints en route,  including
             two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport.   If
             he has neither a CSID nor valid passport there is a real  risk
             of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such  time  as  the
             security personnel are able to verify P's identity.  It is not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  as  a
             checkpoint.  This normally requires the attendance of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.

         6.   Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted  entry  to  the  territory.    Subject   to   security
             screening, and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P
             would be permitted to enter and reside  in  the  IKR  with  no
             further  legal  impediments  or  requirements.   There  is  no
             sponsorship requirement for Kurds.

         7.   Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
             the security screening process must be assessed on a  case-by-
             case  basis.   Additional  factors  that  may  increase   risk
             include: (i) coming from a family  with  a  known  association
             with ISIL, (ii) coming from an area associated with  ISIL  and
             (iii) being a single man fighting age.  P is likely to be able
             to evidence the fact of recent  arrival  from  the  UK,  which
             would dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from
             ISIL territory.

         8.   If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
             require that family to accommodate P.  In such circumstances P
             would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the  family
             so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would  not  be
             unduly harsh.  It  is  nevertheless  important  for  decision-
             makers to determine the extent of any assistance likely to  be
             provided by P's family on a case-by-case basis.

         9.   For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
             accommodation options are limited:

               a. absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
                  that P will be able to gain access to one of  the  refugee
                  camps in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                  overcrowded  and  close  newcomers.   64%  of   IDPs   are
                  accommodated in private settings with  the  vast  majority
                  living with family members;

               b. if P cannot live with a family  member,  apartments  in  a
                  modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent
                  at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;

               c. P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living
                  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned   structure,   makeshift
                  shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
                  building.  It would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
                  relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing
                  shelter without access to basic amenities  such  as  food,
                  clean water and clothing;

               d. in considering whether P would be  able  to  access  basic
                  necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
                  asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
                  Voluntary Returns Scheme, which would  give  P  access  to
                  �1500.  Consideration should also be given  to  whether  P
                  can obtain financial support from other  sources  such  as
                  (a) employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c)
                  the availability of ad hoc charity or  by  being  able  to
                  access PDS rations.

         10.  Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:

             (i)  Gender.  Lone women are  very  unlikely  to  be  able  to
                  secure legitimate employment;

             (ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR is
                  70%;

             (iii)    P cannot work without a CSID;

             (iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be  important  factors
                  in  securing   employment.    A   returnee   with   family
                  connections  to  the  region  will  have   a   significant
                  advantage in that he would ordinarily be able to call upon
                  those  contacts  to  make  introductions  to   prospective
                  employers and to vouch for him;

             (v)  Skills, education and experience.  Unskilled workers  are
                  at the greatest disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in  the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;

             (vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with ISIL,
                  that may deter prospective employers.

 6. In relation to returns to Baghdad specifically, the country guidance is
    supplemented by that in BA (Returns to Baghdad)  Iraq  CG  [2017]  UKUT
    00018 (IAC) as follows:

          i)  The  level  of  general  violence  in  Baghdad  city  remains
             significant,  but  the  current  evidence  does  not   justify
             departing from the conclusion of the Tribunal in  AA  (Article
             15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).

         ii) The evidence shows that  those  who  worked  for  non-security
             related Western  or  international  companies,  or  any  other
             categories  of  people  who  would  be  perceived  as   having
             collaborated with foreign coalition forces, are  still  likely
             to be at risk in areas which are under ISIL  control  or  have
             high levels of insurgent activity. At  the  current  time  the
             risk is likely to emanate  from  Sunni  insurgent  groups  who
             continue to target Western or international companies as  well
             as those who are perceived to collaborate with the  Government
             of Iraq.

        iii) The current evidence indicates that the  risk  in  Baghdad  to
             those  who  worked  for  non-security   related   Western   or
             international companies is low although there is  evidence  to
             show that insurgent groups such as ISIL are active and capable
             of carrying out attacks in the city. In so far as there may be
             a low level of risk from such groups  in  Baghdad  it  is  not
             sufficient  to  show  a  real  risk  solely  as  a   perceived
             collaborator.

         iv) Kidnapping has been, and remains, a significant and persistent
             problem contributing to the breakdown  of  law  and  order  in
             Iraq. Incidents of kidnapping are likely to be  underreported.
             Kidnappings might  be  linked  to  a  political  or  sectarian
             motive; other kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity  for
             a purely financial motive. Whether a returnee from the West is
             likely to be perceived as a potential target for kidnapping in
             Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has  been  away  from
             Iraq. Each case will be fact sensitive, but in principle,  the
             longer a  person  has  spent  abroad  the  greater  the  risk.
             However, the evidence does not show a real risk to a  returnee
             in Baghdad on this ground alone.

          v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal  of  US-
             led coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels seen in
             2006-2007. A Shia dominated government is  supported  by  Shia
             militias in Baghdad. The evidence indicates that Sunni men are
             more likely to be targeted as suspected  supporters  of  Sunni
             extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni  identity  alone
             is not sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious harm.

         vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves  create
             a real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount
             to a real risk for the  purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive or Article  3  of
             the ECHR if assessed on a  cumulative  basis.  The  assessment
             will depend on the facts of each case.

        vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in  the
             case of Sunni complainants, are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to
             provide sufficient protection.

The Appellant's claim

 7. The Appellant's claim, in short, is that there is insufficient evidence
    to depart from the country guidance case  of  AA  to  the  effect  that
    Kirkuk is a contested area posing a continuing Article 15(c) threat and
    that even  if  not,  there  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  there  is  a
    functioning civil registry office there.  The Appellant claims that  he
    would need identity documentation to enter Kirkuk and at  other  points
    on route between Baghdad and Kirkuk.

 8. The Appellant has been unable to obtain a replacement CSID at the Iraqi
    Embassy in London because he does not have the extensive  documentation
    required for this and he continues to claim he is not in  contact  with
    family members to assist him either in obtaining a CSID or generally.

 9. Finally, the Appellant claims that  there  is  no  reasonable  internal
    relocation option for him to either the IKR or Baghdad.  In relation to
    the IKR, the Appellant has no family or support there and in accordance
    with the findings in AAH, it would be unduly harsh to  relocate  there.
    In relation to Baghdad, the Appellant has no CSID or realistic prospect
    of obtaining one; he does not speak Arabic; he has no family members or
    friends in Baghdad to assist him; he is a Sunni Kurd and therefore from
    a minority community; it is unlikely that there  will  be  any  support
    available for him in Baghdad and finally there  is  no  sufficiency  of
    protection for Sunnis in Baghdad.

10. At the resumed hearing, the parties continued to rely on  the  evidence
    that was before the First-tier Tribunal and in addition,  there  was  a
    document from the Appellant showing attendance at the Iraqi embassy  on
    8 May 2019; and the Respondent's "Country Policy and Information  Note,
    Iraq: Security and humanitarian protection  situation"  dated  November
    2018 (the "CPIN November 2018"); and the Respondent's  "Country  Policy
    and Information Note, Iraq: Internal  relocation,  civil  documentation
    and returns" dated February 2019 (the "CPIN February 2019").

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

11. On behalf of  the  Respondent,  Mr  Kotas  submitted  first,  that  the
    Appellant doesn't need a CSID, and secondly, that if he does, he  could
    get one in either London or Kirkuk.  On the preserved findings of  fact
    and adverse credibility findings made against  the  Appellant,  it  was
    submitted that there was no risk on return to Iraq such that no  issues
    of internal relocation arose and the only issues were  in  relation  to
    Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  Humanitarian
    Protection or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

12. On the first point, paragraph 11 of the Court of Appeal's  decision  in
    AA confirms that if a person has a family to support them on return  to
    Iraq, the lack of a CSID is not material to the  risk  of  destitution.
    In the present appeal, this Appellant was  totally  disbelieved  on  no
    longer being in contact with his family and that they were not able  to
    support him on return to Iraq.  The Appellant would be able  to  travel
    on a laissez-passez and would not need a CSID to do so.

13. It was submitted that in accordance with paragraph 173 of  the  current
    country guidance in AAH; the Appellant would be able to obtain  a  CSID
    in the Iraqi Embassy in London.  Further, the Respondent submitted that
    on the basis of the Appellant's poor credibility, it was  not  accepted
    that he did not have an Iraqi passport.  If the Appellant had lost  his
    CSID, then paragraph 174 of the country guidance states that even if he
    did not know the details of his book records, a person can obtain  this
    for him using a power of attorney in Iraq or through the Iraqi embassy.
     If the Appellant does not know the book records and page number of the
    family registration details, this is information which he can  discover
    from his family.

14. In his screening interview, the Appellant states that he has  an  Iraqi
    national ID card in Kirkuk, which the Respondent takes to mean that  he
    has a CSID.  Even if this is not a CSID, it is a relevant  document  to
    establish  the  Appellant's  identity,  which  can  be  used  with  the
    authorities to obtain a CSID.

15. The Respondent relies on paragraph 2.6.16 of the CPIN February 2019  to
    the effect that an individual does not need a CSID to leave the airport
    in Baghdad and travel throughout  Iraq.   This  view  is  supported  by
    cogent evidence from a named person at the  Iraqi  embassy,  copies  of
    which are annexed to the CPIN February 2019.

16. In relation to the current position in Kirkuk, Mr Kotas invited  me  to
    take judicial notice that the war with ISIL in Kirkuk has  come  to  an
    end and that that group has no meaningful  presence  left  anywhere  in
    Iraq.  The CPIN November 2018  contains  details  of  the  humanitarian
    situation, with local populations returning to areas  including  Kirkuk
    and humanitarian support being available in those areas again which are
    newly accessible and where there is a decline  in  security  incidents.
    Overall it was submitted that there is no longer an Article 15(c)  risk
    in Kirkuk.

17. In these circumstances, the Appellant ought to go to Kirkuk and reunite
    with his family there.  He would be able to  obtain  a  CSID  from  the
    local government there if needed.  In accordance with the  guidance  in
    AAH, it is relevant that the Appellant has family  in  his  home  area,
    including his father, and has a form of documentation  there.   As  the
    Appellant can obtain a CSID from either the Iraqi embassy in London  or
    from Baghdad, he could board an internal direct flight from Baghdad  to
    Kirkuk and in any event, there is now credible evidence which  was  not
    before the Upper Tribunal in AAH to show that a person can travel using
    a certification letter.

18. Overall it was submitted that the Appellant had a range of options open
    to him to obtain a CSID and that it was for him to show that  he  would
    not be able to do so by any of these means, to  which  the  significant
    adverse  credibility  findings  made  against  him  would  need  to  be
    considered.

19. Finally, in the alternative, it was submitted that the Appellant  could
    relocate to the IKR, which despite the  possible  difficulties  without
    family there, would not reach the high threshold of an Article 3 breach
    and in any event  the  Appellant's  family  could  potentially  provide
    financial support for him.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

20. On behalf of the Appellant, Counsel accepted that if the Appellant  can
    get to Kirkuk and that there is a functioning registry and  members  of
    the Appellant's family there, then he would be able to obtain  a  CSID.
    However, the real question is whether the Appellant  can  realistically
    do that.

21. In paragraphs 24 to 26 of AAH, there is provided a  list  of  documents
    which would be needed in Kirkuk for a person to obtain a CSID  and  the
    different requirements which apply abroad.   These  include  a  written
    statement, countersigned by a family  member,  the  person's  passport,
    details of their status in the United Kingdom, a proxy  in  Iraq,  four
    copies of the INC, photos and location of the family  register  details
    in Iraq.

22. The fact that in his screening interview, the Appellant said  that  his
    CSID was in Kirkuk in 2007, is insufficient to conclude that  it  still
    exists and that his family is still there and able to send it  to  him.
    There is undisputed  evidence  that  control  of  Kirkuk  changed  from
    government hands in 2014 and back to government control at the  end  of
    2017.  During this time approximately 180,000 people fled the area  and
    there was  a  clear  degree  of  chaos  around  this  time.   In  these
    circumstances, it cannot  be  safely  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    family remain in Kirkuk and would be able to assist the Appellant.

23. The Respondent's submission that the Appellant does  not  need  a  CSID
    assumes that the Appellant can get to his family members and that  they
    can assist him.  The current country guidance in AA is  to  the  effect
    that Kirkuk is a contested area where there  exists  an  Article  15(c)
    risk such that the Appellant cannot return there  and  therefore  makes
    the need for him to obtain a CSID more important.  There is at  present
    insufficient evidence before the Tribunal to depart from  this  country
    guidance and, in particular, a lack of  evidence  about  how  good  the
    government control is and the  safety  of  the  area.   The  fact  that
    members of the local population  are  returning  is  also  insufficient
    evidence of the safety of the area.

24. In relation to the CPIN documents relied upon by the Respondent, it was
    submitted that these include a significant lack  of  detail  about  the
    certification  letter  relied  upon  and  its  use,   particularly   at
    checkpoints which may be manned by the authorities or  by  militia  and
    there is no evidence of recognition at such points of  a  certification
    letter.  It was suggested that this evidence is aspirational  only  and
    not sufficient to depart from the existing country guidance.

Findings and reasons

25. There is no dispute in the current appeal that the Appellant  does  not
    fall within the terms of the Refugee Convention and is not entitled  to
    asylum in the United Kingdom as he is not at  risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Iraq for a Convention reason.

26. Although the remaking of this appeal was intended to  be  on  the  sole
    issue of whether the Appellant had or could obtain within a  reasonable
    time a CSID card,  part  of  that  consideration  has  to  include  the
    situation in the Appellant's home area  of  Kirkuk,  which  necessarily
    continues to raise the issue of humanitarian protection as well.

27. The current country guidance in AA is to the effect that  there  is  an
    Article 15(c) risk  to  an  individual  in  Kirkuk.   Although  I  take
    judicial notice of the fact that ISIL no longer has control  in  Kirkuk
    and in fact has no meaningful presence left anywhere in Iraq, this does
    not, even taken together  with  the  information  in  the  Respondent's
    latest CPIN, provide sufficient evidence to enable me  to  depart  from
    the existing country guidance.  It does not necessarily follow that the
    removal of ISIL means that there is no ongoing internal armed  conflict
    posing a risk to civilians  and  the  fact  that  residents  and  other
    organisations are returning to the area is not determinative either.  I
    am therefore bound to conclude in accordance with the  current  country
    guidance that the Appellant is unable to return to  his  home  area  of
    Kirkuk, either to obtain a CSID card from there or to resettle there on
    a longer term basis because he faces an Article 15(c) risk there.  I am
    however mindful that new country guidance on this issue is pending  and
    that there may be a change to this  position  in  the  relatively  near
    future which the parties may need to take into account in the future.

28. In light of the above, the issue is therefore whether the Appellant can
    return to Iraq, namely Baghdad, or in the alternative to the IKR, where
    in neither place is there any real risk of persecution and  no  Article
    15(c) risk on the basis of the Appellant's claim  and  current  country
    guidance.  The country guidance on return to Baghdad is contained in AA
    and BA, as above and on return to the IKR in AA,  as  amended  by  AAH,
    also set out above.

29. The preserved findings of fact from the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    are as follows:

         "16. There were a number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
         account.

         17.  In his screening interview the appellant said that he last saw
         his parents and siblings in June 2007 at his home address.  In  the
         asylum interview before me the appellant said he and  his  siblings
         had left the family home together in September or October 2006 when
         his brother eloped.  In the interview  he  said  he  left  Iraq  in
         February 2007.

         18.  In his witness statement the appellant said that  he  attended
         school until he was 18 years old but  in  his  screening  interview
         said that he had never been to school.  When  he  was  asked  about
         this in oral evidence he said that he did go to school but only  to
         a nursery school and that he did not study until he was 18.  He did
         not explain why he had given a different  account  in  his  witness
         statement dated 27 August 2018 and which he adopted before me.

         19.  In the screening interview he said he  was  a  transporter  of
         fruit and vegetables but in his witness statement that he  used  to
         wash cars.  He also said that he came to the United Kingdom  for  a
         better life for himself and his family but in the interview he said
         that he came because he was at risk  in  Greece.   He  denied  ever
         having had his fingerprints taken  in  Greece  until  evidence  was
         produced to him and then he admitted it.  In interview he  said  he
         did not know how much had been paid to the agent to  bring  him  to
         the United Kingdom although in his witness statement he said it was
         $13,000.  In his interview said that he had four  brothers  but  in
         his witness statement he has two and one sister.

         20.  In his witness statement he said that he had no  contact  with
         his family since leaving Iraq but in his  evidence  before  me  the
         appellant said that when he left Iraq his siblings were still there
         but his uncle had subsequently told him that they  had  left  Iraq.
         His evidence in the screening interview was that he  last  saw  all
         his family members in June 2007 at his home address.  In the asylum
         interview, however, he said that his older brother  ran  away  with
         the girl in October 2006 and that they went  to  the  KRG  and  the
         appellant saw his brother there.  When the house was raided by  the
         authorities the appellant, his brothers and sister left the  family
         home together.  That  is  plainly  inconsistent  with  leaving  his
         siblings behind.

         21.  The appellant was also inconsistent about the event after  his
         departure.  He said that the police investigated  the  colonel  who
         had come to his house after the appellant's departure.  In his oral
         evidence, he was asked if his family had reported  the  colonel  to
         the police and said that they did not because they were scared.

         22.  The appellant says that his father was not at  risk  from  the
         colonel because both his mother and father were old.  However,  his
         father was the head of the family and it is not credible  that  the
         colonel would seek only the appellant and his  siblings,  including
         his sister, and not seek redress against the head of the family.

         23.  I take into account as damaging to the appellant's credibility
         that the appellants lied on arrival in the United Kingdom about his
         journey from Iraq denying that he had travelled through Greece  and
         being inconsistent about when he left.  Very shortly after  arrival
         he absconded for a period of five years  and  did  not  pursue  his
         asylum claim until some five years after his arrival.

         24.  I am not satisfied that the appellant has told the truth about
         his reasons for leaving Iraq because of the inconsistencies in  the
         account.  I do not believe you showing that his siblings left  with
         him or that his sister  would  have  been  in  any  danger  is  not
         explained why she would suffer.  I do not believe  he  is  at  risk
         from his sister-in-law's father.  I do not believe the appellant no
         longer  has  contact  with  his  family  members  in  view  of  his
         inconsistent evidence about when he last saw them.

         25.  I am not satisfied that he will be at any risk from any of the
         authorities Iraq if returned  now.   He  says  that  he  cannot  be
         returned because he does not have the  CSID  document.   I  do  not
         believe that he is not in touch with his family.  His evidence  was
         that his identity document was left  Iraq  with  his  family.   I'm
         satisfied that he has not told the truth about his contact with his
         family and it is reasonably likely that he will be able  to  obtain
         either his original  identity  document  from  them  or  sufficient
         information from them to allow him to obtain a  new  one  with  the
         help of his family.

         26.  The appellant says that he has twice been to the Iraqi embassy
         to try and obtain a travel document but has been unable to  do  so.
         It does not appear that he produced any identity  documentation  to
         show them who he was."

30. In summary, the preserved findings of fact are that the  Appellant  has
    not been truthful about contact with his family  members  and  that  he
    remains in touch with them in Iraq.  The Appellant has  chosen  not  to
    give any further evidence in relation to his family members, where they
    are, who specifically he is in touch with and  what  support  (if  any)
    they could provide him on return.

31. In these circumstances, it is more difficult to make findings  of  fact
    as to whether the Appellant has family in Kirkuk or the IKR (given that
    part of his claim previously was that he last saw at least one  of  his
    family members in the IKR where he claimed they  fled  to  previously),
    Baghdad or elsewhere; what practical or other support they  could  give
    him, in terms of identity documents and obtaining a CSID or  for  daily
    living.  However, the Appellant is not a credible witness, he has  made
    a false asylum claim in the past and has continued in the course of the
    current appeal to give evidence which has been found not to be truthful
    or credible. The burden is on the Appellant to establish his claim  and
    in light  of  the  preserved  findings  of  fact  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  which  included  that  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the
    Appellant's family would be able to  obtain  the  Appellant's  original
    identity document or will be able to provide sufficient information  to
    obtain a replacement, as well as the adverse credibility findings, I do
    not find that he has established that he would not  have  any  relevant
    family support on return to Iraq.

32. The  same  difficulties  arise  in  relation  to  findings  as  to  the
    Appellant's ability to obtain a CSID, it is extremely difficult to make
    findings of fact, in accordance with the factors identified as relevant
    in the country guidance set out above, on the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before me.  On the basis of the current country guidance the  Appellant
    would not be able to return to Kirkuk  to  attend  the  civil  registry
    office  there  as  there  remains  an  Article  15(c)  risk   and   the
    alternatives are therefore to seek to obtain one from the Iraqi Embassy
    in London or in Baghdad following return.

33. The Appellant's claim is that he has  attended  the  Iraqi  Embassy  in
    London, but has not been able to obtain any relevant identity documents
    or a CSID from them.  However, the Appellant's claim is lacking in  any
    real detail as to what genuine attempts he  has  made  to  provide  the
    necessary documentation and produce it to the Iraqi Embassy  nor  given
    any credible reasons as to  why  the  required  documents  can  not  be
    obtained, through family or otherwise.  Again, the burden is on him  to
    establish his claim and in light of the  preserved  findings  of  fact,
    including adverse credibility findings and that it is reasonably likely
    that the Appellant's family would be able  to  obtain  the  Appellant's
    original identity document or provide sufficient information to  obtain
    a replacement, and the Appellant's claim that he has previously had  at
    least some form of identity document, I do not find that the  Appellant
    has established that he is unable to  obtain  a  CSID  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in London, even though it is  recognised  that  the  procedural
    requirements for this are onerous, as set out in paragraph 26 of AAH.

34. I make essentially the same findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    ability to obtain a CSID on return in Baghdad, save for the  fact  that
    this appears to be a less  onerous  process,  with  less  documentation
    required and that this would likely be relatively straightforward if an
    old CSID could be produced to the authorities.  There is at least  some
    uncertainty in the evidence as well  as  to  alternative  provision  in
    Baghdad for those unable to attend the registry  in  Kirkuk.   However,
    for the same  reasons  as  identified  above,  the  burden  is  on  the
    Appellant and I do not find that he has established that  he  would  be
    unable to obtain  a  CSID  on  return  to  Iraq  in  Baghdad  within  a
    reasonable period of time.  The Appellant is in touch with  his  family
    and although he cannot travel to Kirkuk due to the Article 15(c)  risk,
    there is no suggestion in the evidence nor the  country  guidance  that
    the Appellant's family could not travel  to  Baghdad  or  elsewhere  to
    assist the Appellant on return.

35. On the basis  of  the  above,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    reasonably likely to be able to obtain a CSID either prior  to  leaving
    the United Kingdom, or within a reasonable period of time on return  to
    Iraq.  He has family members there  whom  he  is  in  touch  with,  and
    although he has not disclosed their whereabouts or  current  situation,
    there is nothing to  suggest  that  they  are  unable  to  provide  the
    Appellant with any practical or financial support.

36. When considering relocation to Baghdad, to where the Appellant would be
    returned in the first instance, in addition to the above findings,  the
    following is also relevant to the factors to be taken into  account  in
    accordance with the country guidance set out above.  There has been  no
    substantive challenge to the Appellant's claim that he does  not  speak
    Arabic and that he is a Sunni Kurd, both  of  which  are,  despite  the
    other adverse credibility findings, accepted as in accordance with  his
    history and background evidence.  There is nothing to suggest that  the
    Appellant has any relevant work history in Iraq which could potentially
    put him at risk and his Sunni identity alone is not sufficient to  give
    rise to real risk of serious harm.

37.  Despite  the  Appellant's  lack  of  disclosure   about   his   family
    circumstances in Iraq, there is nothing to suggest any family or  other
    connections with Baghdad and I do not find it reasonably likely that he
    has connections or  support  immediately  available  there,  albeit  as
    above, no reason why family could not travel to assist him.

38. Taking all of these factors into account, although it  is  likely  that
    relocation to Baghdad would be difficult for the Appellant,  I  do  not
    find that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh for  him  to  remain
    there on return.  There is nothing to suggest he would not be  able  to
    use the funds available to him on return (from  the  Voluntary  Returns
    Scheme), or his general skills and experience in finding  accommodation
    and employment there, particularly with his likely ability to obtain  a
    CSID and family support.

39. In the alternative, the Respondent submitted that the  Appellant  could
    internally relocate to the IKR.  Again, the same difficulties in making
    specific findings of fact in relation to  this  arise  because  of  the
    Appellant's  lack  of  disclosure,  in  particular  about  his   family
    circumstances in Iraq.  There  was  some  previous  suggestion  that  a
    family member was in the IKR and that the Appellant had last seen  them
    there, but I would put it no higher than  it  being  possible  that  he
    currently has family members living in the IKR such that he would  have
    sufficient assistance to lead a relatively normal life there.   In  the
    absence of being able to  find  that  this  is  reasonably  likely,  in
    accordance  with  country  guidance  set  out  above,  I  find  it   is
    unreasonable and/or unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate to
    the IKR for the following main reasons.  Although the  Appellant  would
    be entitled to funds as part  of  the  Voluntary  Returns  Scheme,  his
    circumstances are such that he is unlikely to gain  access  to  an  IDP
    camp and would have difficulty obtaining employment, particularly given
    the high unemployment rate and lack of anything to suggest any specific
    connections within the IKR to assist him with finding accommodation  or
    employment.

40. In summary, I find that the Appellant is not at risk on return  to  any
    part of Iraq for a Convention reason and his appeal on  asylum  grounds
    is  therefore  dismissed.   In  accordance  with  the  current  country
    guidance, I am bound to find that the Appellant cannot currently return
    to his home area due to an Article 15(c) risk,  although  it  would  be
    reasonable and not unduly harsh for him to  relocate  to  Baghdad  such
    that  his  appeal  fails  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.    The
    Appellant has not separately pursued any human  rights  claim  and  any
    claim under Articles 2 and/or three of the European Convention on Human
    Rights would fail for the same reasons as his asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection claims have been dismissed.



Notice of Decision

For the reasons set out in the error of law decision annexed, the making  of
the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law and  as  such  it  was  necessary  to  set  aside  the
decision.

The decision is remade as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed on protection grounds.

    The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date         4th July 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05700/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th March 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     DKA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M McHardy of Counsel instructed by Barnes,
                    Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Chuna, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Grimmett promulgated on 6 July 2018,  in  which  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights
    claim dated 16 May 2012 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 1  July  1985,  who  first
    entered the United Kingdom clandestinely in 2007,  claimed  asylum  but
    then absconded and was not interviewed in relation to his  claim  until
    2012.  The Respondent refused the claim, made on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant was at risk from a named member of the military  because  his
    elder brother had eloped with that person's daughter, on the basis that
    it lacked credibility, was not for a Convention reason and in any event
    there was a sufficiency of protection and option of internal relocation
    open to the Appellant.  The Respondent further decided that  there  was
    no breach of Article 15(c), nor of Articles 3  or  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The Appellant's appeal against that refusal  was  first  heard  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in late 2013, by which point the Appellant did  not
    pursue his asylum claim, having  accepted  it  was  false  and  in  the
    alternative the focus was on whether or not he had a CSID card  or  the
    means of obtaining one on return to Iraq.  That has remained the  issue
    throughout appeal proceedings which  have  followed  through  both  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  a  number  of  times,  most
    recently with First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett dismissing the  appeal
    on 6 July 2018 on the basis that the Appellant has a means of obtaining
    a CSID and following adverse credibility findings in  relation  to  the
    Appellant.

 4. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal that decision
    to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had not
    applied the country guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)
    Iraq CG UKUT 00212  (IAC),  which  had  been  promulgated  between  the
    hearing of the appeal and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and
    that in any event, the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  in  relying
    solely on adverse credibility findings to conclude that  the  Appellant
    was in contact with family members and would have their  assistance  in
    obtaining a CSID.

 5. At the oral hearing, Mr McHardy on behalf of the  Appellant  relied  on
    the grounds of appeal and by reference to the guidance  given  in  AAH,
    highlighted the factors which had not been expressly considered by  the
    First-tier Tribunal in this case and the lack of material  findings  in
    that regard, leading to an error of law  in  the  conclusions  reached.
    These factors included, whether the Appellant had  any  other  form  of
    documentation or information about the location of  his  entry  in  the
    civil register; the location of the relevant civil registry office  and
    whether it is an area held, or formally held by ISIL and whether it  is
    operational; and whether there are male family  members  who  would  be
    willing and able to attend the civil registry with the Appellant.

 6. Further, the First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  specifically  take  into
    account witness evidence and evidence from the Red Cross and the  Iraqi
    Embassy as to the Appellant's attempts to locate his  family  in  Iraq,
    with an irrational conclusion in paragraph 26 of the decision about not
    being able to obtain an identity document  without  presenting  another
    form of identity.

 7. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms  Chuna  accepted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had expressly failed to take into account the country guidance
    in AAH and also that the conclusion  in  paragraph  26  lacks  adequate
    reasons and was contrary to other parts of the decision.   However,  it
    was submitted that these  errors  were  not  material  given  the  very
    significant adverse credibility findings made against the Appellant and
    the finding that he was still in contact with his family in Iraq,  such
    that he would have their assistance to obtain a CSID.  This was said to
    be a very significant consideration  which  would  outweigh  any  other
    factors or issues in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  This  is
    particularly so in circumstances where Kirkuk is not a  contested  area
    and a place which has retained most of its  government  administration,
    so  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  seek  documents  from   there,
    particularly because he had  a  birth  certificate.   Overall,  it  was
    submitted that sufficient reasons had been given in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal  and  the  adverse  credibility  findings  remained
    sufficient for the appeal to be dismissed in any event.

Findings and reasons

 8. The First-tier Tribunal's findings are in paragraph 16 onwards  of  the
    decision  and  begin  in   paragraphs   17   to   22   by   identifying
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's account.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found as damaging to the Appellant's credibility the fact that  he  had
    lied on arrival in the United Kingdom  about  his  journey  from  Iraq,
    absconded for a period of five years shortly after his arrival, failing
    to pursue his asylum claim for  a  significant  period  and  later  not
    relying on it at all.  The Judge was not satisfied that  the  Appellant
    had told the truth about his reasons for leaving Iraq  because  of  the
    inconsistencies in his account and did not believe he was no longer  in
    contact with his family members in view of  the  inconsistent  evidence
    about when he last saw them.  Further, the Judge did  not  believe  the
    Appellant was not in touch with his family in Iraq, nor  that  he  told
    the truth about contact with them and  found  that  it  was  reasonably
    likely that the Appellant would be able to obtain either  his  original
    identity document from his family or sufficient information  from  them
    to allow him to obtain a new one with their help.

 9. Although there is considerable force in the submissions made on  behalf
    of the Respondent about the significance  of  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made against the Appellant in relation to  continuing  contact
    with his family, in light of the guidance given in AAH, that is not the
    only relevant factor to consider when determining whether a person  can
    obtain a CSID.  There are also more objective factors that  a  Tribunal
    must consider, including the location of the  relevant  civil  registry
    office, whether it is operational and whether it has been  affected  by
    recent conflicts.  In these circumstances, it is not  possible  to  say
    that the error  in  failing  to  consider  the  new  country  guidance,
    promulgated after the hearing but before the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal, was not material.  There are factors contained therein  which
    simply haven't been addressed at all by the First-tier Tribunal,  which
    is a material error of law requiring the decision to be set aside.

10. The remaking of this appeal is retained in the Upper Tribunal  as  only
    limited further findings of fact are required to determine  the  appeal
    in accordance with the guidance given in AAH.  The adverse  credibility
    findings made against the Appellant on the basis of inconsistencies  in
    his account and evidence, together with  his  immigration  history  are
    preserved for the purposes of the remaking of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Directions

The appeal is re-listed for further hearing before UTJ  Jackson  on  10  May
2019 with a time estimate of 2  hours.   A  Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter  is
required.

Any further evidence to be relied upon by either party is to  be  filed  and
served, with the appropriate application to rely on new evidence,  no  later
than 4pm on Friday 26 April 2019.


Signed   [pic]         Date         28th March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

