
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05847/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23rd April 2015                   |On 19th May 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           mr vijayakumar kesavan
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Coutts, promulgated on 29th January 2015, following a hearing at Hatton
    Cross on 16th January 2015.  In the determination, the judge  dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born  on  20th
    October 1981.  He appears to have entered the UK illegally on 9th March
    2010 using a false passport and on 17th March 2010 made an  application
    for asylum, humanitarian protection, and human rights violations.   The
    Respondent refused the application by way of letter on 7th  April  2010
    and issued removal directions on the same date.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is based upon fear that if returned to Sri  Lanka
    he would face persecution due to his involvement with the LTTE  and  is
    previously ill-treated by the authorities.  In July 2005, the Appellant
    was transporting a parcel for the LTTE when he, and another man who was
    driving the vehicle, was stopped by Sri Lankan authorities.   When  the
    vehicle was searched the parcel was discovered  and  it  was  found  to
    contain bullets.  The authorities arrested the driver  of  the  vehicle
    but they only took the Appellant's details saying that they would be in
    contact with him later (see paragraph 21).  In October  2005,  the  Sri
    Lankan Army came to the Appellant's house in Colombo and  arrested  him
    saying that the driver had  said  that  they  are  always  transporting
    weapons for the LTTE.  The Appellant denied the allegation.   The  army
    spoke to his employer who terminated his employment.  The Appellant had
    no further involvement with the LTTE after this time.  On  2nd  October
    2006, the Appellant was arrested and held at Wellawatte Police Station.
     He was taken to court.

 4. It is proven that he was a member of the LTTE.  The  case  against  him
    was that the parcel contained bullets discovered when  the  vehicle  in
    question was searched.  He was detained for five days.  He was released
    on payment of a bribe (see paragraph 24).  Then in February  2009,  the
    authorities came to the Appellant's house.  He was taken to a dark room
    where he was beaten, burned with cigarettes and also  hot  metal  rods.
    He was shown a photograph of someone which they  said  he  had  brought
    into the area in his vehicle back in 2005 which  he  denied.   On  28th
    February 2010, he was released through the payment of a bribe and taken
    by the CID to a checkpoint and delivered to his uncle and an agent.  He
    was told that if he was arrested again he would not be  released.   The
    Appellant's parents, wife and younger brother remain in Sri Lanka.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge held that,

         "On the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the  Appellant  was
         detained and tortured by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  claimed.
         The medical report prepared  by  Professor  Lingham,  following  an
         examination of  the  Appellant  on  8th  May  2010,  is  clinically
         corroborative of his account and there is no  evidence  to  suggest
         that the Appellant's injuries were self-inflicted  by  proxy"  (see
         paragraph 29)

 6. The judge went on to say that it followed, "on the lower standard, that
    I accept as credible the Appellant's account of  his  involvement  with
    the LTTE and his ill-treatment  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  ..."
    (paragraph 30).

 7. The judge then turned  to  the  consideration  of  the  authorities  in
    relation to Sri Lankan asylum claims.  The principal authority here was
    GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319, and  the
    judge went through the "risk factors" (see paragraph  31).   The  judge
    noted how one of the risk factors relates to,

         "... individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  Diaspora  and/or   a   removal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka." (see paragraph 31)

 8. The judge then proceeded to apply the  country  guidance  case  to  the
    Appellant and observed that,

         "... whilst I accept that the arrest of the Appellant  in  February
         2010 was a post-conflict one, it related, however, to  the  alleged
         earlier transportation of an LTTE member prior to the resolution of
         the conflict.  There is no evidence before me to suggest  that  the
         Appellant has had a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil separatism or wishes to start or renew hostilities  with  Sri
         Lanka ....". (paragraph 32)

 9. The judge also observed that, "there is no evidence to suggest that the
    Appellant's name appears on a stop list that would be accessible at the
    airport or that there is an outstanding court order or  arrest  warrant
    against him".  The judge  was  prepared  to  accept  that,  "having  no
    original passport and that requiring an emergency travel  document  the
    Appellant will come to the notice of the Sri Lankan authorities  before
    departing from here" but, even though he would be  placed  on  a  watch
    list when he returns, "the objective evidence suggests that this should
    not cause him any real difficulty."  This was  not  least  because  the
    Appellant has been away from Sri Lanka for nearly five years,  has  not
    taken a stand in any post-conflict activities, and  only  assisted  the
    LTTE through coercion" (paragraph 33).

10. Accordingly, given the conclusions reached above, the judge  held  that
    "the Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof to establish that
    he has a well-founded fear of persecution and is entitled to  grant  of
    such" (paragraph 35).

11. The same conclusions  were  reached  with  respect  to  the  claim  for
    humanitarian protection (paragraph 37).

12. With respect to Article 8 and the Human Rights  Convention,  the  judge
    held that the Appellant had no family life in the UK, his wife, younger
    brother and parents remained in Sri Lanka and that the Appellant  could
    not succeed under paragraph 276ADE (see paragraphs 39 to 41).

13. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

14. The grounds of application state that the judge made an arguable  error
    of law by failing to take into account the provisions of paragraph 339K
    of the Immigration Rules, which state that,

         "... the fact that a person has already been subject to persecution
         or serious harm or direct threats of such persecution or such  harm
         would be regarded as a serious indication  of  the  person's  well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good grounds to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated."

15. The grounds state that since the judge had found the  Appellant  to  be
    credible  in  respect  of  serious  ill-treatment   and   torture   the
    conclusions reached were unsustainable.

16. On 23rd February 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

17. On 9th March 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered.

Submissions

18. At the hearing before me on 23rd April 2015, Ms Rothwell, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the judge had erred in law in a
    number of respects.  First, in applying GJ (post-civil war:  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319, the judge had erred in holding that the
    Appellant did  not  fall  under  the  risk  category  which  refers  to
    "individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity
    of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are, or  are  perceived  to
    have a significant role in relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
    ...".  The Appellant, she submitted, was  "perceived  to  be"  such  an
    individual.  The reason for this was that he had been apprehended  with
    a "black tiger" in 2005, and this man was a suicide bomber, and he  was
    found also to carry a parcel which contained  bullets.   The  Appellant
    was only released on the payment of a bribe.  He had to sign  on  until
    2007.  The Appellant was consistent in his statements  in  this  regard
    during his interview (see question 31, question 37,  question  46,  and
    question 86).

19. Second, the Appellant claimed asylum ten days after arrival in the UK.

20. Third, the Appellant's arrest  in  February  2010  was,  as  the  judge
    himself found, "a post-conflict one",  although  it  related,  "to  the
    alleged  earlier  transportation  of  an  LTTE  member  prior  to   the
    resolution of the conflict" (paragraph  32).   Even  so,  the  evidence
    which the judge accepted was  that  the  Appellant  was  "detained  and
    tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities as claimed" and  that  this  was
    corroborated by the medical report prepared by Professor  Lingham  (see
    paragraph 29).  In these circumstances, it did not make  sense  to  say
    that the Appellant was free from any risk in post-conflict Sri Lanka.

21. Finally, there was, an even more important reason why  the  conclusions
    reached by the judge were unsustainable.  These were  to  do  with  the
    recent judgment of the appeal in "MP (Sri Lanka)  and  NT  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 829".  Here Lord Justice Underhill emphasised the  fact
    that it is not the case that,

         "... Diaspora activism is the only basis on which a returning Tamil
         might be regarded as posing such a threat and thus of being at risk
         on return.  ....  There may, though untypically, be other cases ...
         where the evidence shows particular grounds for concluding that the
         government might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of
         evidence that he or she has been  involved  in  Diaspora  activism"
         (paragraph 50)

22. Furthermore, this was consistent, with what was said at  paragraph  290
    of GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319, which
    was that,

         "... previous (real  or  perceived)  links  that  go  beyond  prior
         residency within an area controlled by the LTTE continue to  expose
         individuals to  treatment  which  may  give  rise  to  a  need  for
         international refugee protection, depending on the specifics of the
         individual case"

23. Ms Rothwell submitted that on the facts of this particular case, it was
    evident, given what had happened to the Appellant,  that  such  a  risk
    appertained to his condition.

24. Finally, the UNHCR Guidelines issued on 21st December 2012 reflect  the
    post-conflict changes in Sri Lanka.  In GJ it  was  accepted  that  the
    UNHCR Guidelines description of a person  with  "more  elaborate  links
    with the LTTE" led to a real risk on return (see paragraph 396 of  GJ),
    and this was the situation here.

25. For his part, Mr Clarke submitted that there was no error  because  the
    relevant country guidance case at the time of the decision by the judge
    was not based upon the UNHCR Guidelines of 2012 so that the case of  GJ
    was not strictly relevant.  What was relevant,  and  operative  at  the
    time of the decision by the Tribunal was the older case of TK (Tamils -
    LP updated) Sri Lanka CG [2009] UKAIT 00049.  This was accepted  in  GJ
    itself, where it was said that:

         "In TK, decided soon after the end of the civil war in  Sri  Lanka,
         the AIT upheld the approach in LP but considered that, if anything,
         the  situation  for  returning  failed  Tamil  asylum  seekers  had
         improved.  The onus in TK was current as at 26th October  2009  and
         is therefore now almost three and a half years old.  The civil  war
         has ended and that has of course brought change, not  just  in  the
         circumstances within Sri Lanka but also in the present concerns  of
         the Sri Lankan authorities ..." (paragraph 45)

26. On this basis,  the  judge  in  the  instant  appeal  was  correct  (at
    paragraph 32) to conclude as he did, and it was a false approach to now
    look at the February 2010 events in the light of GJ's assessment of the
    situation.  This is perfectly clear from the case of MP (Sri Lanka) and
    NT (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829, where it was confirmed  that,  "...
    the UT gave due consideration to the UNHCR Guidelines but was  entitled
    to adopt the  less  generous  approach  to  risk  demonstrated  by  its
    guidance ..." (see paragraph 20).

27. In reply, Ms Rothwell  submitted  that  the  background  evidence  from
    August 2014 shows that Sri Lanka is  still  pursuing  people  who  have
    elaborate links with the LTTE, and this is clear from GJ (see paragraph
    396), and if the Appellant was deemed to be such a  person,  which  she
    clearly was given that, even though he returned back to  Sri  Lanka  in
    February 2010 to post-conflict Sri Lanka,  he  was  detained  and  ill-
    treated on account of his involvement with the LTTE in 2005.



Error of Law

28. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

29. First, the judge in this case accepted that "the Appellant was detained
    and tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities as claimed" and that

         "the medical report prepared by  Professor  Lingham,  following  an
         examination of  the  Appellant  on  8th  May  2010,  is  clinically
         corroborative of his account and there is no  evidence  to  suggest
         that  the  Appellant's  injuries  were  self-inflicted  by  proxy."
         (paragraph 29)

30. Second, the judge also accepted that notwithstanding the fact that  the
    civil war had now ceased, "the arrest of the Appellant in February 2010
    was a post-conflict one" ... (paragraph 32).

31. Third, however, where the judge falls in error is that in so concluding
    above, it was a material error to suggest that "there  is  no  evidence
    before me to suggest that the Appellant has had a significant  role  in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism ..." (paragraph  32).   This
    is because it is unnecessary to have had an overt role in post-conflict
    separatism.  It is enough if one is "perceived to be, a threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka ...".  The Appellant was plainly so perceived.

32. Equally, the judge Underhill LJ makes it clear that  Diaspora  activism
    is not the only basis on which a returning Tamil might be  regarded  as
    posing such a threat.  In the Appellant's case, this  was  clearly  the
    situation that he was confronted with.

33. Underhill LJ also makes it clear that the evidence may show  particular
    grounds for concluding that the government might regard  the  applicant
    as posing a current threat.  On the facts of this case,  the  Appellant
    was in 2005 apprehended with a black tiger  and  found  the  parcel  of
    bullets.  He was at risk.  He was taken to court.  He did have to  sign
    on until 2007.  He was released only on the payment of a bribe.

34. But most importantly, in 2010 he was ill-treated and that ill-treatment
    was an account of activities as long  ago  as  2005.   The  failure  to
    consider these matters, in a jurisdiction where "anxious scrutiny" must
    be applied, and must be done on the lower standard, amounts to an error
    of law.

Re-Making the Decision

35. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am remitting this appeal to a judge other than  Judge  Coutts
    for a hearing at Taylor House (though not at Hatton  Cross)  because  I
    set aside the decision of the original judge (see Section 12(2) of TCEA
    2007),  but  I  cannot  proceed   to   remake   the   decision   itself
    substantively.  This is because both Mr Clarke  and  Ms  Rothwell  were
    agreed, that there was considerable evidence that apparently either was
    put before the judge, or was not put before the judge by Counsel below,
    although available, and did require consideration, and most importantly
    testing by way of cross-examination, which could not be done unless the
    matter was reconsidered before a First-tier Tribunal, such  as  not  to
    deprive the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair  hearing
    or  other  opportunity  to  put  their  case   before   the   Tribunal.
    Accordingly, and in these circumstances,  the  appeal  is  remitted  to
    Taylor House Hearing Centre to be heard by a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Coutts.  All favourable findings are to be preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal  is  to  be
remitted to Taylor House under Practice Statement 7.2,  to  be  heard  by  a
judge other than Judge Coutts.

This appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted back to the  First-
tier Tribunal.

No anonymity order is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    14th May 2015

