

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05214/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 September 2016                      |On 17 November 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                  B P W W P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sellwood instructed by the Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a Sri Lankan national. On 11 July  2014  the  Respondent
   made a decision to refuse to recognise him as a refugee and to remove him
   as an illegal entrant under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act
   1999. The Appellant appealed that decision under section 82  (1)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal was dismissed by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Powell in  decision  promulgated  on  14  March
   2016. He found that the Appellant had not given a  credible  account  and
   dismissed his appeal under the Refugee Convention  and  under  Article  3
   ECHR.


2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted  permission  finding  that  the
   grounds identified an arguable error of law.

   The Grounds


3. The grounds state that although the  Judge  found  Dr  Longman,  who  had
   provided a full medico-legal report  regarding  the  Appellant,  to  have
   provided 'powerful evidence' to support the Appellant's account  that  he
   was tortured and his wife  beaten  and  that  the  report  was  'Istanbul
   compliant' he found  at  paragraph  29  of  the  decision  that  doctor's
   expertise and  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  mental  health  was  not
   reliable.  He  based  this  on  the  fact  that  Dr  Longman  was  not  a
   psychiatrist and had no formal qualifications or training in  psychiatry.
   It is asserted on behalf of the Appellant that the reasons give as to why
   the Judge did not accept her evidence  are  merely  superficial  and  not
   sufficient. They did not identify any failings with regard to  procedure,
   process or methodology. It is contended that Dr Longman had carried out a
   critical  and  objective  analysis  of  the  Appellant's   symptom's   in
   accordance with the tenets of the Istanbul Protocol, relying not only  on
   what the Appellant said to her but also on his presentation and behaviour
   during the examination and on the clinical plausibility of  the  symptoms
   he described. She also considered the possibility that  he  was  feigning
   symptoms and explained why she concluded that this was not the case.


4.  It  is  submitted  that  in  the  circumstances  Dr   Longman's   report
   constituted compelling,  independent  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was
   detained and tortured as he described and the Judge erred in  failing  to
   provide adequate reasons why he did not accept her findings.

5. It is further argued that the Judge's finding  at  paragraphs  37  to  39
   that he did not find it credible or plausible that an agent in  a  period
   of eight weeks would be able to make arrangements to securing a place  of
   study at a British University was in error. There was  no  evidence  from
   the University before the Judge  highlighting  when  the  application  to
   study was made and the Appellant was  provided  with  no  opportunity  to
   provide the information.

   The Hearing

6. Mr Sellwood submitted that if the Appellant were found credible he was  a
   refugee. There was independent evidence that corroborated his account  in
   the form of Dr Longman's medico-legal  report.  At  paragraph  29  having
   accepted the scarring aspect the  Judge  disregarded  the  mental  health
   diagnosis because Dr Longman was not an  expert.  It  was  clear  that  a
   mental health assessment was required in combination  with  scarring  and
   that was best practice and paragraph 234 and paragraphs 260  and  261  of
   the Istanbul Protocol stated that psychological evidence was useful.  The
   overall goal of any psychological assessment was to assess the degree  of
   consistency. There was no clear guidance that required  a  mental  health
   assessment  from  a  psychiatrist.  The  Istanbul  Protocol  referred  to
   clinicians and there was more than  enough  to  show  that  she  had  the
   qualifications. In her CV at page 23 she  explained  that  she  regularly
   shadowed consultants. She had been  an  independent  doctor  for  Medical
   Justice for over 5 years. Page 14 of her report in the Appellant's bundle
   noted that she had assessed more than 70 people  and  had  experience  of
   psychiatry in a hospital setting and psychological training. All  doctors
   were required to recognise PTSD and she could do so  with  a  significant
   level of expertise. She applied well-known criteria when determining PTSD
   and checklists and questionnaires and all  was  in  accordance  with  the
   Protocol. There was  also  reference  to  him  receiving  medication  for
   symptoms. Paragraph 3.3 at p4 and pages  6-7  focussed  on  the  physical
   symptoms of trauma. Had that been considered and taken into  account  and
   the same weight given to that aspect of the report as to the scarring the
   result may have been different.


7. With regard to Ground 2 there was never a matter  in  issue  between  the
   parties as  to  the  agent's  ability  to  assist  with  the  Appellant's
   admission to college. At paragraph 37 the Judge  did  not  find  credible
   that the Appellant would have done what the agent said he  did.   It  was
   unclear whether the finding was put to him at the hearing because it  was
   not  a  matter  in  issue.  The  Appellant  did  not  have  a  sufficient
   opportunity to  respond  and  provide  further  evidence  to  rebut  that
   finding. It was a new matter  essentially  and  he  should  have  had  an
   opportunity to get evidence before the decision was made.

8. Mr Richards submitted that there was no material error of law. The First-
   tier Judge took account of relevant evidence and accepted the evidence in
   as much as it dealt with the evidence of scarring and accepted  that  the
   Appellant received injuries but not in the manner which it  was  claimed.
   In respect of mental health the Judge was entitled to place little weight
   on a psychiatric assessment conducted by someone  without  qualifications
   and in any event having accepted that the Appellant had been  subject  to
   some kind of mistreatment it was doubtful what further  could  have  been
   gained given particularly in view of what was said at  paragraph  86.  Dr
   Longman acknowledged that there could be other causes for  the  injuries.
   The Judge had considered the Appellant's account that he left in 2009 and
   considered the risk of  returning  in  2011  and  found  him  not  to  be
   credible. What the Judge had done was weigh the whole of the evidence  in
   the round and he was entitled to reach that conclusion. He  was  entitled
   to form a view  on  the  evidence  on  the  circumstances  in  which  the
   Appellant applied for a student visa and come to the conclusion  that  he
   reached in paragraph 40 that he intended to study in 2009  and  made  the
   application and put in place the arrangements  a  long  time  before  the
   arrest. If the Appellant chose to raise matters then it  was  matter  for
   him to produce whatever evidence he chose to  support  his  account.  The
   Judge was entitled to come to the conclusion he did. He asked me to  find
   that the determination was one that was open to him.


9. Mr Sellwood replied that on the second ground the Judge was  entitled  to
   make a finding but the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  an  opportunity  to
   respond. With regard to paragraph 86 the point was that if the Judge  had
   given weight to mental health aspect the outcome may have been different.
   If there was third party evidence that  was  accepted  then  the  adverse
   findings would have been looked at through a different prism. In  so  far
   as disposal was concerned he agreed that  remittal  was  the  appropriate
   course and it would be difficult to preserve any findings.

   Discussion and Findings

10. The First-tier Tribunal found that Dr Longman had produced  a  balanced,
   clear, reasoned and succinct report and that she set out her approach  in
   accordance with the Istanbul Protocol (paragraph 24). He found  that  her
   opinion that the pattern of lesions was typical of the history  given  by
   the Appellant was significant evidence. He gave weight to her opinion  in
   light of the classification in the Istanbul Protocol (paragraph  28).  Dr
   Longman also had given her opinion on the Appellant's mental  state.  The
   Judge stated at paragraph 29 that he was concerned that she did so  given
   that she acknowledged that she was not a psychiatrist. He stated that she
   had no formal training in psychiatry  or  in  the  professional  clinical
   application of the diagnostic criteria. He concluded that he did not find
   her opinion on the Appellant's mental health, post-traumatic reaction and
   suicidal ideation reliable.

11. Having dealt with the medical evidence he evaluated  the  Appellant  and
   his wife's evidence and considered the inconsistences in the  Appellant's
   account. In a comprehensive evaluation of the evidence he concluded  that
   there were many discrepancies which he found could not be explained away.
   He concluded at paragraph 84 that Dr Longman provided  powerful  evidence
   to support the Appellant's claim of being tortured and his  wife's  claim
   to have been hit by a  rifle  butt  and  that  her  reasoned  conclusions
   carried great weight. He noted  that  her  analysis  indicated  that  the
   Appellant's scarring was typical but not  diagnostic  of  the  causes  he
   attributed to them. He found at paragraph 85 however, that  the  evidence
   of the Appellant was inconsistent, incredible and unreliable and that  he
   was entirely satisfied that the Appellant had invented an elaborate claim
   for asylum, supported by a series of documents fashioned to  bolster  his
   false account in order to remain in the United Kingdom.

12. Dr Longman reported on  the  Appellant's  mental  health  at  paragraphs
   6.3.1 to 6.3.8 of her report in the Appellant's bundle. She stressed that
   she  was  not  a  psychiatrist  but  stated  that  she  had  considerable
   experience in examining patients who claimed they had  been  tortured  in
   their own countries. She set out the basis upon which she  was  qualified
   to offer expertise in relation to mental health namely, her experience of
   assessing people who claimed to have been tortured; experience in working
   in psychiatry in a hospital setting; the psychological training available
   to all GP trainees, the recognition of mental illness being a  core  part
   of the GP training curriculum; the specific training in the diagnosis  of
   mental illness related to torture provided by  Medical  Justice  and  the
   fact that all doctors are required by the National Institute for Clinical
   Excellence to be able to recognise, if not treat, PTSD and depression.

13. She found that the Appellant  showed  clinical  features  of  both  mild
   depression and post-traumatic stress disorder and  so  she  assessed  him
   more formally using the  PHQ-9  depression  questionnaire  and  the  PTSD
   checklist as well as using  the  DSM-IV  diagnostic  criteria  for  these
   conditions. She found that a diagnosis of a major depressive episode  was
   highly compatible with his observed mental state. She set out his  scores
   and noted that  his  GP  had  prescribed  him  with  antidepressants  and
   referred him for EMDR (Eye  Movement  Desensitization  and  Reprocessing)
   treatment for his PTSD symptoms.  She  also  commented  on  his  risk  of
   suicide which she considered to be moderately high. She then commented on
   the clinical reasons why there could be  discrepancies  between  accounts
   and states that people who have been abused and who suffer from PTSD  are
   frequently confused about dates and times. At paragraph 6.4.4.  she  says
   that in her opinion the  factors  she  sets  out  from  the  medical  and
   psychological research on human memory and trauma  are  relevant  to  his
   accounts. He described a highly  traumatic  experience  including  sexual
   assault, had a clinical picture of PTSD and depression, slept poorly  and
   with these condition and according to the  medical  research  on  memory,
   gaps in his memory and between  his  accounts  would  not  be  surprising
   clinically.


14. It is clear that the First-tier Tribunal's  rejection  of  Dr  Longman's
   opinion on the Appellant's mental health due to his conclusion  that  she
   lacked the requisite expertise to give the opinions she did  led  him  to
   disregard that part of her report. He both says so expressly at paragraph
   29 and has no regard to it in his conclusions at paragraphs 84 and 85.  I
   find that his disregard of this evidence was a material error of law.  As
   a GP Dr Longman was  qualified  to  recognise  PTSD  and  depression  and
   trained in psychology. She also had specific training in the diagnosis of
   mental illness related to torture. The Istanbul Protocol also sets out at
   paragraph 234 onwards the central role of  the  psychological  evaluation
   and comments that most clinicians and researchers agree that the  extreme
   nature of the torture event is powerful enough  on  its  own  to  produce
   mental and emotional consequences, regardless of  the  individual's  pre-
   torture. At  paragraph  261  it  states  that  psychological  evaluations
   provide useful  evidence  for  medico-legal  examinations.  The  Protocol
   refers  to  clinicians  and  there  is  no  stated  expectation  that   a
   psychiatrist will carry out the assessment of psychological status.


15. The error was clearly material because it led  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   to  disregard  potentially  relevant  evidence   in   relation   to   the
   discrepancies in the evidence. I preserve no findings of fact.  In  light
   of the fact finding required and taking account of Part 7.2  (a)  of  the
   Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  First-
   tier Tribunal and Upper-Tier Tribunal I remit the matter  to  the  First-
   tier Tribunal.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set the decision aside.

I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order and I continue  that  order  (pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008).  Unless
and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This direction  applies  both  to
the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

