
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05010/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2015                  |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                         Mr Gopalasingam Prashanthan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Physsas, Counsel instructed by CK Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka and a Tamil born  on  31  July
    1984.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 December 2010 and  claimed
    asylum on 1 August 2013 on the basis that he had been  a  supporter  of
    the LTTE, primarily between 2000 and 2004.  He left Sri Lanka  at  that
    time for Dubai and returned in 2008.  He was  then  asked  by  somebody
    called Kandi/Thandi to give his passport to another LTTE member  to  go
    abroad and he complied.

 2. On his return in March 2010 he claims he was questioned at the  airport
    and on 30 June 2010 he said  that  his  home  was  raided  and  he  was
    arrested and tortured.  He was  released  by  payment  of  a  bribe  in
    October 2010 and he then stayed with  a  Deacon  Sister  called  Rohini
    until he fled to the United Kingdom on 7 December 2010.

 3. His application for asylum was refused on 5 March  2015.   He  appealed
    and his appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birrell  for
    hearing on 2  July  2015  at  Stoke,  Bennett  House.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 14 July 2015 she dismissed the appeal.  Essentially  she
    did not find the Appellant to be credible and she did not  accept  that
    he had been detained and tortured in 2010.  She did accept that he  had
    been a supporter of the LTTE.

 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on 28  July  2015
    on the basis that the judge had erred materially in law in  failing  to
    make findings on core issues.  Essentially that was in relation to  the
    Appellant's arrest and detention, the treatment by  the  judge  of  the
    psychiatric report of Dr Balasubramaniam.  It  was  asserted  that  the
    judge had misdirected herself on making adverse  credibility  findings;
    she placed significant weight on the fact that the Appellant's  witness
    statement had been amended prior to the start of the hearing; she erred
    in rejecting the letter from the  Appellant's  attorney  Mr  Sivanthan,
    without considering the fact that it was obtained not by the  Appellant
    but by his instructing solicitor and she completely failed to take into
    account the witness statement of Reverend Sister Rohini at pages 36 and
    37 of the Appellant's bundle.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Verity on
    12 August 2015. Judge Verity said:

         "Having studied the judge's findings which start at paragraph 26 of
         the decision it is clear that the judge does not deal with the core
         aspect of the Appellant's  case.   There  is  no  analysis  of  the
         Appellant's claim that he was detained and tortured  nor  is  there
         any reference to the witness statement as to  the  provision  of  a
         safe house.  The doctor's report is dealt with  in  detail  by  the
         judge.  An arguable error of law has been shown."

 6. At the hearing before me today on 11 November 2015,  I  heard  detailed
    submissions from Ms Physsas, who  drafted  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    support  of  the  application,  and  Ms  Fijiwala  on  behalf  of   the
    Respondent.  Having heard those submissions I find for the reasons  set
    out in the grounds of appeal that the judge did err materially  in  law
    in failing to make any or proper findings on core issues.

 7. Looking at [39] of the decision the judge here states  "taking  all  of
    this evidence into account I do  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was
    detained and tortured as claimed in  2010."   However,  there  were  no
    reasons provided for this finding.

 8. At [30(a) to (d)] the judge looks in detail at the  psychiatric  report
    of Dr Balasubramaniam and whilst she properly raised concerns that  the
    psychiatrist had not had sight of the Asylum Interview Record  and  the
    Respondent's refusal, at 30(b) there is no clear finding as to  whether
    or not  the  judge  accepted  the  psychiatrist's  diagnosis  that  the
    Appellant was suffering from depression and PTSD.  Whilst I accept that
    the diagnosis is referred to at [30(d)] and again at [39] it is not  at
    all clear what position the judge took in respect of that diagnosis and
    that was clearly material to the Appellant's credibility.

 9. At [32] the judge understandably raised concerns about the amendment of
    the witness statement  but  her  view,  in  my  judgment,  is  arguably
    infected by the fact that it is not possible to  ascertain  whether  or
    not she accepted the psychiatrist's diagnosis which again would  impact
    on the Appellant's ability to provide detailed and consistent  evidence
    and may account for  the  fact  that  his  witness  statement  required
    amending.

10. At [37] the judge states that she is very troubled  by  the  attorney's
    letter and holds:

         "He states that he was told that he could not have  copies  of  the
         arrest warrant and I accept that is consistent with the  background
         material but the correspondence in which this  was  stated  by  the
         police and that in which they  state  that  the  Appellant  is  the
         subject of an arrest  warrant  should  have  and  could  have  been
         provided."

    I find  this  a  confusing  and  contradictory  finding  which  is  not
    sustainable in that it was incumbent upon the Judge to make  a  finding
    as to the veracity of the attorney's  letter  whether  or  not  it  was
    supported by further documentation.

11. The last point raised was the fact that the judge failed  to  make  any
    reference to a letter from Sister Deacon Rohini which is at pages 36 to
    37 of the Appellant's bundle in which she confirms that she provided  a
    safe place for him after his release from detention.  I also note  that
    Sister Deacon refers to the Appellant as being vulnerable, very tearful
    and crying for most of the time and that is  arguably  consistent  with
    the psychiatrist's diagnosis as  to  the  fact  that  he  suffers  from
    depression and PTSD. Consequently, this was material  evidence  and  it
    was incumbent upon the Judge to make a finding as to whether or not she
    accepted it as credible.

12. For these reasons I find that the judge made a material error  of  law.
    Had the judge not made the error she did then the outcome of the appeal
    may have been different

    Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted for  a  hearing
    de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge  other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Birrell.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

