
 [pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05148/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr Burrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:   Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 2nd October 1987.   He
    appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  6th  February
    2015, refusing him asylum or other protection in  the  United  Kingdom.
    His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Geraint  Jones
    QC on 19th August 2015.  The appeal was dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 3rd September 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes  on  30th  September
    2015.  The permission states that it is arguable that the judge  failed
    to take into account that the First-tier hearing  had  previously  been
    adjourned because the Presenting Officer had said the Respondent  would
    seek to verify certain documents, being a  solicitor's  letter  and  an
    arrest warrant.  The permission refers to the case of  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 which states that it is for the  court  to  decide
    whether  there  was  an  obligation  on  the  Respondent  to  undertake
    particular enquiries and if the court concludes that that was the  case
    it will resolve  whether  the  Respondent  sustainably  discharged  her
    obligation.  The permission states that the judge erred in  failing  to
    consider this point at all.   The  grounds  state  that  the  Appellant
    relied on the fact that the Respondent was verifying the documents  but
    it is not stated that the Appellant's legal representatives would  have
    sought themselves, to verify the lawyer's credentials  or  verify  that
    the document came from the lawyer, had the Presenting Officer not  said
    the Respondent would verify the documents.  The grounds assume that  it
    has been proven that the document emanated from a lawyer and there  has
    been no  suggestion  that  the  lawyer  had  engaged  in  discreditable
    conduct, however unlike the facts in PJ  it  was  not  the  Appellant's
    representative who had instructed the lawyer but the Appellant's mother
    and there were good reasons given for the judge not accepting that  the
    letter did indeed come from a lawyer.  The permission does not restrict
    the grounds which may be argued.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file opposing  the  Appellant's  appeal.
    This states that  the  Respondent,  having  sought  an  adjournment  to
    attempt to verify the documents, was not giving an undertaking that the
    verification results  would  be  available  to  the  Tribunal  for  the
    substantive hearing.  The response states that the Respondent was doing
    no more than attempting to assist the Tribunal to  reach  a  conclusion
    about the veracity of the documents and the  burden  of  proof  remains
    with the Appellant.  They state that the grounds are nothing more  than
    a disagreement with the reasoned conclusions of the First-tier Judge.

The Hearing

 4.  A  document  has  now  been  produced  by  the  Respondent,  being   a
    verification report on the warrant of arrest provided by the  Appellant
    from Colombo Magistrates' Court.  The date  of  the  document  is  28th
    September 2015 and the date of the hearing was 19th August 2015.   This
    document, therefore, was not before the First-tier Judge.

 5. The Appellant's representative submitted that the  verification  report
    cannot be taken into consideration at this error of  law  hearing.   He
    submitted that what has to be decided is  whether  the  judge  made  an
    error of law based on what was before him.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that the verification report should be
    considered as it goes to the materiality of  the  claim  and  could  be
    relevant to a continuance hearing and it took longer for the Respondent
    to  obtain  this  report  than  anticipated.   He  submitted  that  the
    Respondent had stated that she would get the document verified in  good
    faith.

 7. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Presenting Officer at
    the First-tier hearing had stated that he was prepared to go ahead with
    the appeal without the verification document.  I was asked to  consider
    the terms of the said case  of  PJ  (Sri  Lanka).   The  representative
    submitted that in our case the Appellant had provided documents to  the
    Tribunal which he stated were genuine and what was before the judge was
    not sufficient for him to state that the warrant was not  genuine.   He
    submitted that the First-tier Judge because of this was wrong  to  make
    the comments he did about the solicitor who had provided  the  warrant.
    He submitted that the judge should have taken  into  account  the  fact
    that the Respondent had stated that the documents would be verified for
    the date of the hearing but were not.   He  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the said case of PJ which was  referred  to  at  the
    First-tier hearing.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no material  error.   He
    referred to the Presenting Officer's notes from the First-tier  hearing
    and the fact that the appeal had been adjourned  previously  to  enable
    the Respondent to obtain a verification report relating to the  warrant
    and the solicitor's letter.   He  submitted  that  the  Respondent  was
    entitled to be given an  opportunity  to  verify  the  letter  and  the
    warrant but unfortunately this was not done on time.  He submitted that
    the notes of the Presenting Officer at the First-tier  hearing  do  not
    indicate that there was a  further  adjournment  request  made  by  the
    Appellant  because  the  Respondent  had  been  unable  to  obtain  the
    verification report. He submitted that these documents go to the  heart
    of the case and I was referred to paragraph 30 of the said case  of  PJ
    (Sri  Lanka).   This  states  that  because  a  relevant  document   is
    potentially capable of being verified does not mean that  the  national
    authorities have an  obligation  to  take  this  step  but  it  may  be
    necessary to make an enquiry in order to verify  the  authenticity  and
    reliability of a document, depending always on the particular facts  of
    the case.

 9. I was referred to the original refusal letter which makes it clear that
    these documents were only produced a few days before the hearing so the
    Respondent had not had much time  before  the  first  hearing  date  to
    obtain the report.  In the case of PJ  the  Home  Office  had  had  the
    documents and had made an adverse credibility finding.  There were  two
    independent  lawyers  corroborating   the   evidence   so   there   was
    transparency in the said case of PJ.  I was referred to paragraph 29 of
    PJ which states that the involvement of lawyers  does  not  create  the
    rebuttable presumption that the documents they  produce  are  reliable.
    He submitted that the situation in this case was different from that in
    PJ.  He submitted that the documents cannot  be  viewed  in  isolation.
    All  the  evidence  needs  to  be  considered  in  its  entirety.   The
    Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 31 of PJ which states that the
    consequence of a decision that the national authorities are  in  breach
    of their obligations to undertake a proper process of verification,  is
    that the Secretary of State is unable thereafter to mount  an  argument
    challenging the authenticity of the relevant documents unless and until
    the breach is rectified by a proper enquiry.

10. I established that at the First-tier hearing the Home Office had stated
    that they did not require another adjournment but were prepared  to  go
    ahead with the  hearing  without  the  verification  document  and  the
    Appellant had not asked for an adjournment  for  the  reason  that  the
    Respondent had not produced the verification  report.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted that it had been open for the Appellant  to  ask  for
    this but as he did not and as the Home Office did not  seek  a  further
    adjournment, the judge was entitled to go ahead with the hearing. I  am
    considering this claim based on what was before  the  First-tier  judge
    and I am not taking into account the verification report which has  now
    been produced. The Respondent had not  made  a  formal  undertaking  to
    produce the verification report.

11. The  Presenting  Officer  referred  me  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision which raises serious adverse credibility  issues.   The  judge
    refers to the evidence given at the appeal hearing at paragraphs 17  to
    21 of his decision.  At paragraph 19 the judge refers to the  Appellant
    at interview, stating that there was no arrest warrant against  him  in
    Sri Lanka and then giving confusing information about the  messages  he
    had received from Sri Lanka.  At paragraph 20 the judge refers  to  the
    Appellant stating, when he was cross examined, that an  arrest  warrant
    had been issued in February 2014.  However at  interview  he  had  said
    that the arrest warrant had  been  issued  on  10th  August  2013.   At
    paragraph 19  the  judge  refers  to  the  Appellant's  evidence  about
    messages being given to him from home which he thought were  an  arrest
    warrant but this is not an  explanation  of  why  the  Appellant  said,
    during his screening  interview,  that  there  was  no  arrest  warrant
    against him.  At paragraph 22 of the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  he
    states "I do not accept that any arrest warrant has been issued for the
    Appellant or that the photocopy letter at page 12  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle contains reliable information".  He submitted that this  finding
    of the judge was made based on what was before him and this finding has
    been properly explained in his decision.  He submitted that there is no
    material error of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.

12. The Presenting Officer referred to the grounds  for  permission,  which
    state that it was unfair of the First-tier Judge to  come  to  negative
    credibility  findings  without  examining  the  past  conduct  of   the
    Respondent and this  led  to  unfairness  against  the  Appellant.   He
    submitted that the judge has given adequate reasons  for  his  findings
    about the warrant and the solicitor's letter.  He  submitted  that  the
    facts are different in the case of PJ and the judge  only  required  to
    refer to the case of PJ  if  he  was  making  findings  purely  on  the
    documents but his findings were based on all the evidence in the round,
    not just the warrant and the solicitor's letter.

13. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Appellant was relying
    on the  Respondent  verifying  the  documents,  so  the  Appellant  was
    disadvantaged when she did not do so, as his solicitors had not carried
    out any checks on the documents because  of  this  undertaking  by  the
    Respondent.  He submitted that the Appellant is relying on the case  of
    PJ and because the Respondent had not requested a  further  adjournment
    to enable the verification to take place, this  had  gone  against  the
    Appellant.

14. The Presenting Officer submitted that even if the  case  had  not  been
    adjourned on the first occasion to enable the Respondent to verify  the
    documents, the judge would have come to the same conclusion as he  did,
    so even if I find that there is an error of law in the judge's decision
    it cannot be a material error of law.

Decision and Reasons

15. The  facts  are  clear  in  this  case.   The  First-tier  hearing  was
    originally adjourned to enable  the  Respondent  to  verify  an  arrest
    warrant and solicitor's letter.  There was no formal undertaking by the
    Respondent  and  when  the  new  date  for  the  hearing  arrived   the
    verification report had still not been received.   At  that  stage  the
    judge decided to hear the case without  the  verification  report.   It
    seems that the Appellant's representative did not seek  an  adjournment
    because there was no verification of the documents and  the  Presenting
    Officer felt that he could go ahead without the verification.

16. I have to decide if, based on what was  before  the  First-tier  Judge,
    there is a material error of law in his decision.

17. The permission states that the judge made an error because he failed to
    consider whether there was an obligation on the Respondent to undertake
    this particular enquiry and failed to consider this point at all.

18. Reference has been made to the case  of  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  relating  to
    verification  of  documents.   The  situation  in  this  case  is  very
    different to the factual position in the said case of PJ.  In the  case
    of PJ the Appellant's representatives instructed a lawyer but  in  this
    case the Appellant's mother instructed a lawyer.  In  this  case  there
    were good reasons for the judge  not  accepting  that  the  letter  did
    indeed come from a lawyer.  The First-tier  Judge  refers  to  this  at
    paragraph 22 of his decision.  At  this  paragraph  the  judge  clearly
    explains why he does not accept that an arrest warrant has been  issued
    for the Appellant or that the letter in the Appellant's bundle contains
    reliable information.  The judge has not based his decision  solely  on
    the validity of these documents, he has based his decision on  all  the
    evidence taken in the round and the reasons for his decision have  been
    properly narrated in the determination.

19. The judge finds there are serious credibility  issues  throughout  this
    appellant's  evidence.   At  paragraph  29  he   refers   to   material
    inconsistencies, finds the appellant's sur  place  claim  to  be  self-
    serving, finds that the  appellant's  account  does  not  stand  up  to
    scrutiny at paragraphs 22-24 and at paragraph  28  finds  his  evidence
    about his father's rice mill to lack credibility.

20. As the Respondent did not verify the documents he cannot depend on them
    and cannot state that they are not genuine.  The  Respondent  does  not
    depend on them and the judge does not depend on them  when  making  his
    decision.

21. The judge should have mentioned this issue and could have mentioned the
    said case of PJ but he made his decision based on the Appellant's  lack
    of credibility and on the totality of the evidence before him so he did
    not require to refer to  PJ.  The  respondent  did  not  challenge  the
    authenticity of the documents and had the case not  been  adjourned  to
    enable the Respondent to verify the documents I  find  that  the  judge
    would have reached the same decision.

22. There was no obligation on the Respondent to undertake enquiries  about
    these documents.  The background evidence makes  it  clear  that  false
    documents are widely available in Sri Lanka.  The burden of  proof  was
    on the appellant and he could have made his own  enquiries,  regardless
    of what the respondent said at the First-tier hearing.

23. There is an error of law in that the First-tier judge did  not  mention
    this particular issue but there is no material  error  of  law  in  his
    determination.

Notice of Decision

24. The First-tier Tribunal made no material error of law  and  the  First-
    tier decision must stand.  This appeal is dismissed.

25. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

