
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05049/2015
     Aa/05051/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 August 2016                             |On 12 October 2016            |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                  jJ and GJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Praisoody, Counsel, instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellants.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties.  Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.  I do so in order to avoid a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising from the contents of the protection claim.

 2. This decision is a remaking of the  asylum  claim  of  the  appellants.
    Their appeal was first heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Monson  and
    refused in a decision issued on  25  September  2015.   The  appellants
    challenged the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I found an error of
    law as set out in my decision issued on 19 February 2016 such that  the
    appeal had to be remade entirely save for a preserved finding that  the
    appellant was sexually  assaulted  whilst  still  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
    preserved finding is set out  at  paragraph  27  of  my  error  of  law
    decision.  The error of law decision is attached as an Appendix to this
    decision.

 3. I heard  oral  evidence  through  a  Tamil  interpreter  from  the  two
    appellants and the maternal uncle of the first appellant, Mr T  P.  The
    appellants are husband and wife but the claim of both is  dependent  on
    the first appellant's account. For the  purposes  of  this  decision  I
    refer to her as  the  appellant  without  including  reference  to  the
    dependent claim of her husband.

 4. The appellant's claim is as follows.  She  and  her  husband  are  from
    Tamil families from Jaffna in the north of  Sri  Lanka.   Her  maternal
    uncle, KT, was a fighter for the LTTE and when he was killed in  battle
    in 1999  he  was  declared  an  LTTE  "hero".   The  appellant  had  no
    involvement with political activities, however, and had no difficulties
    in Sri Lanka until 2012.

 5. In November 2012 the appellant married her husband in Sri  Lanka.   She
    remained away from work for a period of time after the marriage by  way
    of a honeymoon.  Her husband returned to the UK  on  11  December  2012
    with ongoing leave as a Tier 1 migrant.

 6. When the appellant returned to work she learned that  a  colleague  had
    been murdered. The appellant and other colleagues were  interviewed  in
    connection with the matter.  The appellant's perception  was  that  she
    was of more serious interest to the authorities  because  of  her  LTTE
    "hero" uncle, and was interviewed at home in addition to interviews  in
    the workplace.

 7. The appellant informed her husband of the  interest  arising  from  the
    murder and he advised her to go  to  stay  with  a  paternal  uncle  in
    Colombo.   The  appellant  travelled  there  in  January  2013.   After
    arriving in Colombo she was travelling on a bus to see another relative
    when she encountered an old college friend, M.  M had  been  at  school
    and college with her and whilst they were at college she had  sometimes
    stayed in the appellant's room.  They  had  lost  contact  after  their
    education ended.  When they met on the bus  in  Colombo  the  appellant
    gave M her telephone number and suggested that she call her.

 8. On 20 January 2013 the appellant was arrested at night from her uncle's
    home in Colombo.  She was taken to an army camp and  detained  for  one
    and a half months.  During her detention she was tortured,  beaten  and
    interrogated.  She was asked about M and initially denied knowing  her.
    M was eventually brought into the room where the  appellant  was  being
    questioned and the appellant was told that M was a member of the  LTTE.
    She denied knowing that M had  any  involvement  with  the  LTTE.   Her
    mistreatment and interrogation about different people  and  involvement
    with the LTTE continued.  On the fifth day of  her  detention  she  was
    also questioned about the murder at her work place.  When the appellant
    denied her knowledge of M's involvement  with  the  LTTE  and  her  own
    involvement and knowledge of anything else to  do  with  the  LTTE  she
    would be beaten and kicked and other forms of mistreatment  were  used.
    One form was putting a plastic bag containing some petrol over her head
    so that she was suffocated by petrol fumes.  On  two  occasions  during
    her detention officers came into her room drunk and she was  held  down
    and raped.

 9. The appellant's uncle managed to  obtain  the  appellant's  release  by
    paying a bribe and obtaining the intervention of an MP. On her  release
    in March 2013, the appellant went to stay with the  PA  of  the  MP  in
    Kandy.  The family were afraid  that  if  she  returned  to  live  with
    relatives she might have further difficulties.  The appellant  remained
    in Kandy  for  two  months  whilst  her  uncle  and  her  husband  made
    arrangements for her to get a visa and leave the UK.  Whilst she was in
    Kandy she did not have difficulties and only left the home in order  to
    seek medical treatment on 8  March  2013.   The  appellant  managed  to
    obtain a visa as the dependant of her husband who had leave as a Tier 1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  She was granted the visa on 16  April  2013
    and arrived in the UK on 6 May 2013.

10. After arriving in the UK the appellant  and  her  husband  looked  into
    other ways of remaining in the UK as  neither  the  appellant  nor  her
    husband wished to disclose her mistreatment, in particular  the  rapes.
    Eventually, five days before the expiry of  her  visa  on  16  December
    2013, the appellant claimed asylum on 11 December 2013 with her husband
    as her dependant.

My Findings

11. The appellant was interviewed on 26 February 2015.  The interview began
    at  11.05  and  concluded  at  15.00.   The  appellant  was  asked  276
    substantive questions about her asylum claim. The appellant  also  gave
    evidence before me, her cross-examination  lasting  in  excess  of  two
    hours. I noted that the evidence that she gave at the hearing before me
    was highly consistent with that given before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    recorded at paragraphs 42 to 51 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
    The details of both of these oral accounts were also highly  consistent
    with that given in her asylum interview.

12. The degree of consistency across these detailed accounts  indicated  to
    me that it was likely that the appellant was a  reliable  witness.  The
    appellant has been consistent as to small details of her  account,  for
    example four officers coming to arrest her on the night of  20  January
    2013 at her uncle's home.  She has been consistent as to the  forms  of
    mistreatment she suffered, the rapes and the nature of the  questioning
    when she was in detention.

13. I also noted her response at question 189 of her  interview  where  she
    gave an extensive  extempore  response  to  the  question  as  to  what
    happened whilst she was in detention.   It  is  possible  that  someone
    could memorise an account of this detail but this appellant  has  given
    the same account twice  more  with  no  significant  differences,  once
    before the First-tier Tribunal and again before me. Before me she  gave
    the same level of consistent detail even though this was in response to
    cross-examination which addressed her account in a different way to the
    questioning in her interview. It is not that the case that  she  merely
    repeated her account  parrot-fashion,  therefore,  but  was  consistent
    despite giving it in a different context and order. These matters added
    to my view that the appellant was a credible witness.

14. The appellant remained consistent in the details of  her  account  even
    when faced with a direct contradiction of  what  she  had  said  in  an
    earlier account. At the hearing before me in cross examination she  was
    asked about the nature of the questioning she was  subjected  to  after
    the murder of a colleague at her work place.  The appellant volunteered
    that as well as being interviewed at work she was questioned  twice  at
    home by the authorities.  It was put to her that this was  not  correct
    and that she  had  never  mentioned  this  before  across  any  of  her
    accounts.   The appellant remained firm that she was certain  that  she
    had mentioned the visits to her home  for  questioning  in  her  asylum
    interview.  The questioning paused  whilst  the  legal  representatives
    checked the asylum interview record as to  whether  the  appellant  was
    correct and it was conceded for the respondent  that  she  was,  as  at
    question 228 she stated "After the murder happened, they  came  to  the
    office and they questioned me and they came to my  house  as  well  and
    then questioned me."

15. Again, it is possible that having learned a false account so  well  and
    studied her interview record so carefully that the appellant could have
    remembered  and  been  certain  that  she  made  this  comment  in  the
    interview.  This did not appear to me to  be  likely.  It  is  a  small
    detail. Neither of the representatives who could be expected to be well
    prepared for the hearing recalled this small aspect of the evidence put
    forward by the appellant  in  her  asylum  interview.  The  appellant's
    evidence on this point again indicated to me that she  was  a  reliable
    witness.

16. The appellant also did not  seek  to  embellish  her  evidence,  in  my
    judgement.   She  has  been  consistent  throughout  that  she  had  no
    difficulties until 2012. She has been consistent that all she has  done
    in the UK is attend Heroes Day celebrations in London and that she  did
    so in order to pay respect to her uncle rather  than  out  of  her  own
    political commitment.  She does not seek to raise  a  sur  place  claim
    based on attendance at events in the UK and nor does her husband.

17. The appellant also relied on  a  medical  report  dated  26  June  2015
    prepared by a Consultant Psychologist, Dr Rozmin  Halari.  The  account
    given by the appellant to Dr Halari in May 2015 was  highly  consistent
    with that given by her in her substantive asylum interview and at  both
    Tribunal hearings. In particular, at paragraphs 40 to 51 she  describes
    her mistreatment whilst in detention. The  details  are  extensive  and
    entirely consistent with those she has given in other accounts, to  the
    extent that different forms of  mistreatment  or  particular  incidents
    across different days of her detention are identical.  She records that
    her concern after her detention was the bleeding and pain she continued
    to experience following the rapes and that it for this that she  sought
    treatment after her detention rather than  the  physical  mistreatment.
    She volunteered the same information before me.

18. Dr  Halari  found  at  paragraph  104  that  the  appellant's  clinical
    presentation  was  consistent  with  the   account   she   had   given,
    characterising it as "typical of those found to  have  been  raped  and
    tortured."  Dr Halari also stated at paragraph 104:

         "This would be the highest level of consistency I would be able  to
         use in an asylum claim, as there  is  not  a  certain  way  from  a
         clinical picture of PTSD the specific details of the torture can be
         'diagnosed'."

19. At paragraph 105 Dr Halari continued:

         "The  intense  emotional  reaction  JJ  had  when  describing   the
         traumatic events, that is freely flowing  tears  and  fine  tremors
         with disassociation following this, would be difficult to feign and
         links symptoms to the account."

20. The appellant has presented in a similar  manner  when  describing  her
    mistreatment in her asylum interview, in the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    before me, remaining calm until the instant she was informed  that  she
    would be asked about her mistreatment in  detention,  when  she  became
    acutely distressed.

21.  At  paragraph  109  Dr  Halari  considered  specifically  whether  the
    appellant was making a false claim and indicates in terms "I  have  not
    accepted  her  account  uncritically".   At  paragraph  112  Dr  Halari
    concluded "In my opinion feigning of symptoms is unlikely."

22. Dr Halari's declaration and experience and qualification set out at the
    end of her report indicate that she is a professional on whose  opinion
    weight can be placed.   Dr  Halari's  report  is  consistent  with  the
    guidance provided in JL (Medical reports -  credibility)  China  [2013]
    UKUT 000145 (IAC) the head note stating at paragraphs 3 and 4:

         "(3)      The  authors  of  such  medical  reports  also  need   to
             understand that what is expected of them  is  a  critical  and
             objective analysis of the injuries and/or symptoms  displayed.
             They  need  to  be  vigilant  that   ultimately   whether   an
             appellant's account of the underlying  events  is  or  is  not
             credible and plausible is a question of legal appraisal and  a
             matter for the tribunal judge,  not  the  expert  doctors  (IY
             [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [17]-[18]).

         (4)  For their part,  judges  should  be  aware  that,  whilst  the
             overall assessment of credibility is for them, medical reports
             may well involve  assessments  of  the  compatibility  of  the
             appellant's account with physical marks or symptoms, or mental
             condition:  (SA  (Somalia)  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1302).  If  the
             position were otherwise, the central tenets  of  the  Istanbul
             Protocol would be misconceived, whenever there was  a  dispute
             about claimed causation of scars, and judges could  not  apply
             its guidance, contrary to what they are enjoined to do  by  SA
             (Somalia). Even where medical  experts  rely  heavily  on  the
             account given by the person  concerned,  that  does  not  mean
             their  reports  lack  or  lose  their  status  as  independent
             evidence, although it may reduce very considerably the  weight
             that can be attached to them."

23. It was my conclusion that weight could be placed  on  the  professional
    opinion of Dr Halari not just that the appellant  was  subjected  to  a
    sexual assault but that this occurred whilst she was in detention as  a
    suspected LTTE sympathiser as detailed across her various accounts.

24. Further, the core of the appellant's account, that she was detained and
    seriously mistreated by the Sri Lankan authorities,  was  supported  by
    the evidence of her husband.  He confirms that he found  out  from  the
    appellant that she was being questioned by the authorities in  relation
    to a murder of a work colleague and that he advised her  to  travel  to
    Colombo to stay with an uncle there.  He has  been  consistent  in  his
    evidence across his different accounts that in January 2013, unable  to
    contact the appellant in the usual way via Skype and or on  her  mobile
    telephone, he contacted her uncle who informed him that  she  had  been
    detained.  He exhorted her uncle to  try  to  obtain  her  release  and
    worked with him to obtain a visa for the appellant. The  appellant  had
    already applied for  a  passport  following  the  marriage  as  it  was
    intended that she would visit him in the UK at some point.

25. The appellant's husband also corroborated the appellant's  evidence  as
    to why she did not claim asylum earlier after coming to the UK. Neither
    of them had wanted her to reveal details of her mistreatment because of
    the shame it brought for them both and he looked for other ways to  try
    to obtain further leave to remain.  After they were unable to find  any
    other way of remaining, the appellant claimed asylum.  The  appellant's
    husband also gave consistent evidence to this effect across his witness
    statement and oral evidence as recorded in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at paragraphs 52 to 55 and in oral  evidence  and  cross-
    examination before me.

26. The appellant relied  upon  another  witness  who  provided  supporting
    evidence for a further aspect of her claim.   In her  asylum  interview
    at questions 123 to 128 she  describes  how  her  maternal  uncle,  TP,
    returned to Sri Lankan in early 2015 in order to attend the funeral  of
    his father, the appellant's maternal grandfather.  In her interview  at
    question 123 the appellant stated that:

         "When he went to Sri Lanka, army and CID went to my house and  made
         enquiry about me and made enquiry about me with him, they  ask  him
         about me".

27. The appellant's uncle has provided his passport showing that he visited
    Sri Lanka at that time and has provided a statement confirming that  on
    his return in early 2015 he was questioned  about  the  appellant.   He
    explained at the hearing that when the CID first  went  to  the  family
    home to question him he was very afraid as he thought  that  they  were
    coming to question him about his  own  situation  and  had  an  adverse
    interest in him.  It was  only  after  they  turned  their  questioning
    towards the appellant that he  realised  that  it  was  because  of  an
    adverse interest in her.

28. The evidence of TP, in my judgement, added to the  reliability  of  the
    appellant's claim and her profile as someone in  whom  the  authorities
    had an adverse and ongoing interest after the end of the civil war.

29. In summary, the consistency of the appellant's evidence, the degree  of
    detail that she provided, the corroboration provided by her husband and
    her uncle and the conclusions of Dr Halari  indicated  strongly  to  me
    that she was a credible witness and that she was detained and  severely
    mistreated as claimed by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  a  suspected
    sympathiser or supporter of the LTTE.

30.  Before  deciding  definitively  whether  the  appellant's  claim   was
    credible, I considered carefully the submissions made  against  her  by
    the respondent.

31. In the refusal letter dated 10 March  2015,  the  respondent  indicated
    that  the  appellant's  account   was   not   accepted   as   she   had
    "substantially" changed her account from  her  screening  interview  to
    that given in the asylum interview.   In  her  screening  interview  at
    question 4.2 she stated as follows:

         "My life is in danger.  I was arrested by the  army  but  my  uncle
         paid the bribe to get me out.

         The army are after me because I worked in a company  and  a  murder
         took place there.

         The person who was murdered was a Singhalese person and because  my
         uncle was an LTTE hero they suspect that I  have  something  to  do
         with this murder.

         After I was released I went to Colombo and met a  friend.   At  the
         time of meeting her I did not know she was a former member  of  the
         LTTE, we exchanged numbers ands she found out my address. The  army
         arrested her and gave them all of my details and told them  that  I
         was also former member of the LTTE.  If  I  return  the  army  will
         arrest me and my life will be over."

32. It is not my view that this account is different from that provided  by
    the appellant in her asylum interview, statements or oral evidence.  It
    can easily be read consistently with her later more detailed  accounts.
    The only possible objection to that being so is the use  of  "released"
    before she went to Colombo in the  fourth  paragraph  as  she  has  not
    otherwise claimed to have been detained and released at  that  time.  I
    did not find this to be sufficient to allow this response to be read as
    a clear inconsistent statement of an arrest or  detention  and  release
    prior to going to Colombo. It appeared  to  me  to  be  really  only  a
    reference to the appellant being able to get away from the  questioning
    in her home area by going to her uncle in Colombo.

33. The respondent also maintained  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant would become of such adverse interest in  2012/3  if  it  was
    partly because of her connection to her LTTE uncle who had been  killed
    in 1999.  It is not my view that this was sufficient to  undermine  the
    appellant's claim. She has always been clear that she did not know  why
    she was of more interest than other colleagues in 2012 or even  certain
    that she was rather than this being  merely  her  perception.  She  has
    never maintained that the detention arose solely from her connection to
    her uncle but attributed it to her connection with M.

34. The respondent also maintained in the refusal letter that  it  was  not
    credible that the authorities would have an  adverse  interest  in  the
    appellant merely because she had a friend who was an LTTE  member.  The
    respondent  considered  that  the  sophisticated  intelligence  systems
    available to the authorities, identified in the country  guidance  case
    of GJ and Others, would  have  shown  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    sympathiser or supporter. One difficulty with  that  argument  is  that
    whether or not the authorities had sufficient information  to  identify
    that there was nothing previously identifying the appellant as being of
    any interest, it is possible  that  an  encounter  and  exchange  of  a
    telephone number with M, someone who may have  a  significant  profile,
    was sufficient to merit arrest. Further, even if the respondent's point
    is taken as valid, it still has to be weighed  alongside  the  specific
    facts of this case and the considerable weight of the evidence  of  the
    appellant and her witnesses. It appeared to me that it  was  reasonable
    to conclude that notwithstanding the guidance on the sophistication  of
    the intelligence systems, this appellant was detained and mistreated as
    claimed.

35. The respondent also raised a number of  concerns  about  the  documents
    relied upon  by  the  applicant  but  to  the  effect  that  they  were
    insufficiently probative and not  that  they  actively  undermined  her
    credibility. At worst, therefore, they are neutral and  not  sufficient
    to undermine the force of the evidence as discussed above.

36. An important aspect of the respondent's case against the  appellant  in
    the refusal letter is the delay in claiming asylum after she arrived in
    the UK as the dependant of her husband on 6 May 2013.  I have  referred
    to Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
    etc) Act 2004 when considering this aspect of  the  appellant's  claim.
    The respondent submits that it is not credible that  the  couple  would
    have waited to claim asylum even for the  reasons  that  they  set  out
    across their various accounts. The respondent maintained that the delay
    damaged the appellant's credibility.

37. Certainly, there was a delay and I assessed this in line with  s.8  and
    the against the evidence as a whole.  I  come  back,  however,  to  the
    consistency and detail of the appellant's  account  and  that  in  this
    specific aspect of her claim her husband has corroborated  her  reasons
    as to why the claim was not made earlier. My conclusion was that albeit
    this was an unusual feature of the claim,  it  was  not  sufficient  to
    undermine it. In the context of the evidence as a whole it was credible
    that the shame and trauma arising from the  appellant's  history  would
    lead to attempts to find a  way  of  remaining  that  did  not  require
    disclosure of what had happened and to a delay in claiming.

38. Ms Isherwood also pointed out the coincidence of the appellant becoming
    of interest to the authorities in late 2012 because of the  murder  and
    then, by chance, meeting M again on a bus in Colombo in  January  2013,
    those events also occurring just after  she  had  married,  obtained  a
    passport.

39. I have given some thought to  this  aspect  of  the  submissions  which
    appeared to me to carry some force. The  appellant's  claim  is  not  a
    straightforward one, arising,  for  example,  from  her  own  political
    activities but relies on a number of indirect features coming together,
    her uncle's profile, the murder of a colleague at her  work  place  and
    meeting M in Colombo. It remained my view, however, that  any  concerns
    in this regard were still outweighed by the weight of the  evidence  in
    favour of the appellant.

40. The respondent's case was also that even  if  the  appellant  had  been
    detained in 2013 as she claimed, she could not show that she  would  be
    of adverse interest if she returned now, the  sophistication  of  their
    intelligence systems again being raised in this regard. That submission
    has less force when placed against  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    uncle as to his being approached about  her  on  his  return  in  2015,
    mentioned by her in her asylum interview and confirmed by  him  in  his
    written and oral evidence.  His evidence of ongoing  interest  and  the
    high degree of credibility in the appellant's account also indicated to
    me that her oral evidence as to the  authorities  also  contacting  her
    mother was credible and showed an ongoing interest.

41. This is therefore not a case where the appellant relies on her  profile
    prior to the end of the civil war and it can properly be said that this
    would not be sufficient for there to be  further  adverse  interest  on
    return now. Her mistreatment occurred after the end of the  civil  war.
    There has been ongoing interest in her since her release and  departure
    from Sri Lanka. The  appellant  has  a  profile  as  a  sympathiser  or
    supporter of the LTTE that led to detention and significant  abuse  and
    ongoing interest from 2013 onwards.

42. The respondent's Country Information and Guidance document from  August
    2016 confirms the risk of harm for  someone  such  as  this  appellant,
    stating at paragraph 2.33:

         "However, there are reports that security personnel continued to be
         responsible for the detention and abuse  of  civilians  accused  of
         LTTE  connections  in  2015  and  the  intelligence  services  have
         continued to  show  detainees  who  have  returning  to  Sri  Lanka
         photographs of themselves attending Heroes' Day  events  and  other
         commemorations  abroad,  suggesting   that   there   is   continued
         surveillance of diaspora events."

    and at 2.38:

         "Persons perceived to sympathise with  the  LTTE  continue  to  be
         intimidated, harassed, arrested, detained and tortured. Tamil women
         in Northern Sri Lanka still face the risk of rape and harassment by
         the security forces present throughout the region."

    and at 2.3.10:

         "Despite the improvements made  to  date,  there  continue  to  be
         reports - albeit at much lower numbers  -  of  abductions,  torture
         complaints  and  police  use  of  excessive  force  against  Tamils
         perceived to support the LTTE."

43. For all of these reasons I found that the appellant had shown that  she
    faced a real risk of mistreatment on return as a result of her  imputed
    political opinion and that she is entitled to protection in  line  with
    the Refugee Convention and Article 3 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

44. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside.

45. The appeals are re-made  as  allowed  on  asylum  and  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 27 September 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                  APPENDIX

               ERROR OF LAW DECISION ISSUED ON 19 FEBRUARY 2016



|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2016                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                  JJ AND JJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms P Solanki, instructed by Biruntha Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellants. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to avoid a  likelihood
    of serious harm arising from the contents of the protection claim.

 2. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 25 September 2015
    of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monson.   The  decision  refused   the
    protection claim of the first appellant (the appellant)  and  also  the
    claim of both appellants under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The challenge  before  me  was  to  the  decision  on  the  appellant's
    protection claim.  In summary, the appellant maintained that she  is  a
    relative of an LTTE "hero", that she came under suspicion in Sri  Lanka
    because of murders of people at  her  workplace  and  was  subsequently
    detained by the Sri Lankan authorities from 20 January 2013 for one and
    a half months.   During  her  detention  she  maintains  that  she  was
    seriously mistreated including multiple rapes. Her family assisted  her
    to leave detention and  she  came  to  join  her  husband  (the  second
    appellant) who was already in the UK with limited leave.

    Challenge to Refusal to Adjourn

 4. The first ground of challenge was that a procedural error  occurred  as
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge refused an adjournment  application  made
    on the day of the hearing. Judge Monson's comments on this  matter  are
    at [40]-[41]:

          "40.    At the outset of the hearing Ms Solanki on behalf  of  the
             appellant  applied  for  an  adjournment  on  three   grounds.
             Firstly, her lay client  would  be  more  comfortable  with  a
             female interpreter and a female judge.  Secondly, her uncle in
             the UK was, according to the appellant,  willing  to  come  to
             court to give evidence in support of her claim, but there  was
             no statement from him in the appellant's bundle and he was not
             present.  Thirdly, she  wished  to  produce  evidence  of  the
             medication that the appellant was currently taking in  support
             of an alternative claim under Article 3 (mental health/suicide
             risk)  that  had  been  successfully  pursued  by  the   third
             appellant ("MP") in GJ and Others.

          41. After hearing from Ms Ibe, I refused the adjournment  request.
             In respect of ground 1, I was sympathetic but a  female  court
             had not been requested, despite there being ample  opportunity
             to make such a request well in advance of the appeal  hearing.
             I also obtained confirmation from Ms  Ibe  that  she  was  not
             proposing to cross-examine the appellant  on  the  details  of
             what had happened to her in detention, but only to ask  her  a
             tangential question on the medical  treatment  which  she  had
             sought and received, with specific reference  to  the  medical
             report of 8  March  2015.   With  respect  to  ground  2,  the
             appellant had been represented by solicitors  throughout,  and
             it would have been obvious to them that the appellant's  uncle
             in  the  UK  was  a  potential  witness  in  support  of   the
             appellant's asylum claim, as the  appellant  had  specifically
             relied on her uncle's alleged experiences  on  return  to  Sri
             Lanka in her asylum interview.  If he was willing to  come  to
             court to give the evidence attributed to him by the  appellant
             at interview,  there  was  no  good  reason  why  the  witness
             statement had not been  taken  from  him  in  advance  of  the
             hearing, nor as to why he was not present at court to be cross-
             examined on such evidence.  As to the third ground, there  was
             no need for an adjournment if the appellant  could  give  oral
             evidence about the medication and treatment she was  currently
             receiving."

 1. The grounds challenging the refusal to adjourn followed  the  threefold
    application that was  made  on  the  day  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing. Firstly, it was submitted that an adjournment should have been
    granted in order to allow for the evidence of the appellant's uncle  to
    be given.  His evidence was material as, according to the appellant, on
    a return visit to Sri Lanka in January 2015 he had been  questioned  by
    the authorities about her and her involvement with the LTTE in the  UK.
    The appellant had referred to these events in her asylum  interview  at
    questions 123 to 129 and  produced  a  copy  of  the  uncle's  passport
    showing a visit to Sri Lanka consistent with her evidence.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal judge was told at the hearing that the uncle was  willing
    to attend as a witness. The failure to provide a witness statement from
    the uncle was stated to be the responsibility of the appellant's  legal
    advisers not the appellant. The grounds also assert at [20] that:

         "Counsel explained at the hearing  that  the  appellants  were  not
         advised as to the relevance of this witness by their solicitor. The
         appellant confirmed this in her evidence."

 2. Secondly, the grounds maintained  that  the  appeal  should  have  been
    adjourned in order for the applicant to obtain her medical  records  as
    they could provide objective evidence of  her  mental  health  problems
    following her experiences in Sri Lanka,  including  a  suicide  attempt
    after coming to the UK. At [67], having  refused  the  adjournment  for
    medical evidence, the First-tier Tribunal took an  unfair  approach  in
    finding that the appellant's evidence was not  credible  because  there
    was "no  independent  medical  evidence,  and  indeed  no  third  party
    evidence at all, which is supportive of the appellant's claim that  she
    has tried to commit suicide."

 3. Thirdly, it was argued that the hearing should have been  adjourned  in
    order for the appellant to have her case heard by an  all-female  court
    because of her difficulties in giving evidence where the  core  of  her
    case concerned serious sexual assaults.

 4. Turning to the first part of this ground, in my judgement Judge  Monson
    gave sustainable reasons at [41] for not adjourning in  order  for  the
    uncle to give evidence. As he  pointed  out,  the  appellant  had  been
    legally represented and the legal representatives could be expected  to
    have taken into account the uncle's part in her  claim  when  preparing
    the case. As also  indicated  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  no  "good
    reason" was given for the uncle not having made a witness statement  or
    attended court if he was willing to give evidence.

 5. The assertion in the grounds that Judge Monson was told by counsel  and
    the appellant that the appellant's legal representatives had failed  to
    advise her as to the relevance of the uncle's evidence is not made  out
    by a supporting witness  statement  from  counsel  or  in  the  witness
    statement dated 20 January 2016 of the appellant provided for the Upper
    Tribunal error of law hearing.

 6. The correct approach where an  allegation  of  this  kind  is  made  is
    considered by the President of the Tribunal in the reported case of  BW
    (Witness statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 00568  (IAC).
    The head note of that case states:

         "(i)     It is  timely  to  recall  the  golden  rule  of  judicial
             adjudication that justice must  not  only  be  done  but  must
             manifestly be seen to be done.

         (ii)     In certain cases, likely to be rare, evidence presented to
             the Upper Tribunal may include a witness statement compiled by
             a representative involved in the hearing before the First-tier
             Tribunal ("FtT"). In practice, this is most likely to occur in
             cases  where  such  evidence  is   considered   necessary   to
             demonstrate that the appellant was deprived of his right to  a
             fair hearing at first instance.

         (iii)    Evidence  of  this  kind  will  not  be  required  if  the
             determination of the FtT speaks for  itself  on  the  relevant
             issue.

         (iv)     In applications for permission to appeal, the  distinction
             between legal submissions and arguments (on the one hand)  and
             evidence about events at the hearing (on the  other)  must  be
             carefully observed.

         (v)   Where  an  advocate  makes  a  witness   statement   in   the
             circumstances outlined above, a  change  of  advocate  may  be
             necessary,  since  the  roles  of  advocate  and  witness  are
             distinct, separated by a bright  luminous  line.  An  advocate
             must never assume the role of witness.

         (vi)     The respondent's rule 24 response must engage specifically
             with additional evidence of this kind."

    BW provides further, at paragraph 5(iv) that if

         "... it is decided that a  witness  statement  of  the  kind  which
         materialised  in  the  present  case  must  be  made,   the   legal
         representative concerned should, as a general rule, not present the
         appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  The roles  of  an  advocate  and
         witness are distinct, separated by  a  bright  luminous  line.   An
         advocate must never assume the role of witness."

 7. There is no witness statement from Ms Solanki who  was  counsel  before
    the First-tier Tribunal or from the appellant stating that Judge Monson
    was  told  that  the  absence  of  evidence  of  the  uncle   was   the
    responsibility of the legal advisers. There is nothing from  the  legal
    advisers commenting on this (or any other) matter. There is nothing  to
    confirm that the appellant has raised a concern about this  potentially
    negligent  conduct  with  the  legal  advisers,  either  informally  or
    formally. The materials are not sufficient to show that this matter was
    put before the First-tier Tribunal. There can be no error of law  where
    that is so.

 8. Turning to the second limb of the first ground, it cannot be correct to
    say that the appellant was "prevented" from bringing evidence from  her
    GP or other medical evidence  as  suggested  at  [28]  of  the  written
    grounds. The appellants were legally represented and had proper  notice
    of the hearing, that notice including a direction to provide  "all  the
    documents to be relied on". If the  absence  of  GP  records  or  other
    medical evidence was a result of the inaction of the legal advisers, as
    in the previous paragraph, nothing shows this was  suggested  to  Judge
    Monson and no error can arise for his failing to take that  explanation
    into account.

 9. The final part of the first ground of appeal concerns  the  refusal  to
    adjourn for an all-female court.  It is useful at this point to set out
    exactly what the grounds state in this regard:

         "All Female Court

         29.  The appellant requested an all female court on the basis  that
             she would feel more comfortable discussing her case  and  give
             her best evidence.  The respondent agreed to  the  adjournment
             on this  basis.   The  Tribunal  refused  this  request  after
             confirming and saying to the respondent's representatives that
             it was not appropriate to cross-examine on the sexual assault.
              This was agreed.

         31.  The respondent's representative later changed her  mind  after
             speaking to a senior caseworker about this and  said  she  did
             intend to cross-examine on this issue.

         32.  The application was renewed on the basis that the  adjournment
             was first refused on the basis that the sexual  assault  would
             not be a cross-examination issue but it now was and so clearly
             right to adjourn to allow for the best evidence.  This was  in
             line with the vulnerable appellant's guidelines and it was not
             fair or in her best interests to proceed when the arrangements
             could be made.  The respondent's  representative  agreed  with
             the adjournment request on this basis.

         33.  It is surprising that paragraph 41 of the  determination  does
             not accurately reflect what happened at the  hearing  and  the
             respondent's agreement to adjourn on this basis.

         34.  The IJ said that there was no need to adjourn as it 'makes  no
             difference whether she is asked or not' and  'it  may  not  be
             ideal, but there it is.'  This demonstrated a lack  of  regard
             for the vulnerable appellant guidelines and the sensitivity of
             the issues in this case.  The appellant was  asked  about  her
             current treatment by her Counsel and was in  floods  of  tears
             and required a break.  At that stage it was  once  again  said
             that she would be best served with an all female  court.   The
             judge declined.  This request is again not  reflected  in  the
             determination.

         36.  In all the circumstances the refusal of  the  adjournment  was
             unfair and unreasonable.  The appellant has been denied a fair
             hearing and has been prejudiced by the refusal to adjourn."

14. In addition, the  appellant  provided  a  witness  statement  dated  20
    January 2016 for the error  of  law  hearing  before  me  which  states
    (verbatim) at [5] and [6],:

          "5. I felt so uncomfortable whilst I was being cross examining  on
          the  sexual  assault.  To  begin  with,  even  the   Home   Office
          representative agreed not  to  cross  examine  me  on  the  sexual
          assault because the Judge asked her. However, she  later  asked  a
          more senior person in her office and they came  back  and  said  I
          must be asked.

          6. I was crying so much when being asked and I felt very  ashamed.
          However, the Judge just said it would make no difference. I  don't
          think that was correct and this is a question of my life and I was
          not happy about that. I was in the court first  time,  because  of
          that I was already scared about my court case.  I  found  it  very
          difficult to explain because of the circumstances surrounding. "

15. The summary of the appellant's oral evidence at the  hearing  at  [42]-
    [51] of the determination, however, does  not  indicate  that  she  was
    questioned at all about the sexual assault or the detention itself. The
    First-tier Tribunal judge does record at [46] that the appellant  broke
    down in tears when  asked  about  her  current  medical  treatment  but
    nothing indicates that cross-examination on that aspect of her evidence
    had been opposed. The grounds at [34] show that, quite properly,  there
    was a short adjournment at that point.

16. Following BW, the challenge set out at [31] - [34] of  the  grounds  of
    appeal calls for a witness statement from counsel who appeared  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal. When this was put to Ms Solanki  she  stated  that
    she had raised the matter with the appellant but she had not felt  able
    to recuse herself in order  to  provide  a  witness  statement  as  the
    appellant had shown a strong preference for her remaining  as  counsel.
    She also confirmed that a copy of her written note of the  hearing  was
    not available. No explanation for that was proffered.

17. As it stands, without more, I did not  find  the  materials  before  me
    showed that Judge Monson erred in  declining  to  adjourn  for  an  all
    female court or that procedural unfairness arose because of  particular
    questions being put to the appellant.  As  in  5.3  (i)  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Notes Number 2 of 2010, Child,  Vulnerable  Adult
    Guidance, Judge Monson established at [41] that the appellant  did  not
    need to be questioned on the sensitive aspects of her account, that is,
    the sexual assault. As in [30] of the grounds, it was agreed  that  the
    appeal could proceed in that manner. The judge did not show a "lack  of
    regard" for the Guidelines, as suggested at [34] of the grounds.

18. If an appellant is questioned on highly sensitive  matters  such  as  a
    sexual assault when an express indication has been  given  by  a  judge
    that this should not happen, or, having given such  an  indication  the
    judge then allows for a  different  approach  during  the  hearing,  an
    appellant's legal  representatives  and  counsel  can  be  expected  to
    support a challenge on that basis with cogent evidence,  including  the
    specific inappropriate questions put and doing so in witness statements
    in line with BW. That has not been done here.

Challenge to Credibility Finding

19. The First-tier Tribunal finds at [74] that although the  appellant  may
    have been the victim of a sexual assault,  it  did  not  occur  in  the
    context of detention by the Sri Lankan authorities. The conclusion that
    followed from that finding is that she had not shown  a  real  risk  of
    mistreatment at the hands of the authorities on return.

20. The main challenge to the credibility findings in the  written  grounds
    of appeal was a failure to take into account the particular evidence on
    the risk of sexual assault of Tamil women and guidance of the Court  of
    Appeal in PP (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1828 on the approach to
    that evidence. The grounds also referred to a misdirection  in  law  as
    regards the medical evidence which included a psychiatric report and  a
    mistake of fact  concerning  newspaper  articles  relied  upon  by  the
    applicant describing murders of co-workers.

21. At the hearing, Ms Solanki applied  to  vary  the  written  grounds  of
    appeal. The  amended  ground  concerned  the  evidence  of  the  second
    appellant,  the  first  appellant's  husband.  He  provided  a  witness
    statement dated 21 August 2015 and  gave  evidence  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. His oral evidence is summarised at [52]-[55] of the decision.
    The oral evidence is in line with  the  witness  statement  at  [5]-[7]
    which recounts that in January 2013 he kept trying to contact his  wife
    but could not do so, telephoned other family members in Sri  Lanka  and
    was told that she had been detained. He was  informed  of  her  release
    from  detention  and  described  the  difficulties   the   couple   had
    experienced in their relationship as a result of  the  sexual  assaults
    experienced by his wife.

22. It was common ground before me that the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    does not indicate specifically that the husband's  evidence  was  taken
    into account when finding  that  the  appellant  was  not  credible  as
    regards the detention in January 2013 and does not make any findings on
    that part of the evidence.

23. When deciding whether to allow the variation to the written grounds,  I
    referred to the Presidential Guidance Note No 1: Permission  to  appeal
    to UTIAC which provides at [9]:

        "9. It is reasonable to expect a professional representative to set
        out the basis of the application for PTA with an appropriate degree
        of particularity and legibility, but lack of skill or pressure of
        time may lead to a clear point not being identified. Where there
        may be a duty to consider points that are "Robinson obvious" (see R
        v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p Robinson [1997]
        3 WLR 1162) there is power to consider any other point arising from
        the decision if the interests of justice so require."

24. It is my judgement that, here, the determination  does  not  show  that
    potentially highly material evidence,  a  second  witness  specifically
    corroborating the core of the appellant's account of detention  by  the
    authorities, came within the ratio of Robinson. I allowed  the  grounds
    to be varied and granted permission to appeal on the new ground.  Where
    the potentially highly probative evidence of the husband is  not  shown
    to have been taken  into  account  at  any  point  in  the  credibility
    assessment, I concluded that it was fatally undermined thereby and  had
    to be set aside to be remade.

25. In addition, where it was accepted that the appellant was a victim of a
    sexual assault, it was also my view  that  the  credibility  assessment
    that this did not occur after detention by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    could not stand where nothing showed that the  account  was  considered
    against the country evidence on sexual assaults  on  Tamil  women,  the
    skeleton  argument  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  showing  that  the
    specific evidence and correct approach to it set out in PP was  brought
    to the judge's attention.

Decision

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

27. There is no challenge to the finding that the  appellant  was  sexually
    assaulted. That  finding  remains  extant  and  the  re-making  of  the
    decision will proceed on that basis.

28. The parties will file with the Tribunal  and  serve  on  each  other  a
    paginated, indexed bundle of all materials on which they wish  to  rely
    NO LATER than 15 April 2016.

29. A female Tamil interpreter will be provided.

30. An all-female court will be convened.


Signed   [pic]                               Date 18 February 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt



