
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05181/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                   F N M A
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Rothwell, Counsel, instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pirotta (the judge), promulgated on  31  July  2015,  in
    which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against the
    Respondent's decision of 27 February  2015,  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.

 2. The Appellant's  protection  claim  was  somewhat  convoluted,  but  in
    essence concerned assertions that a  family  member  had  been  a  drug
    dealer in Sri  Lanka.  This  individual  caused  difficulties  for  the
    Appellant and her  marriage  to  her  husband.  In  2012  these  matter
    resulted in the Appellant being  falsely  suspected  of  assisting  the
    LTTE. In fear of being arrested, the Appellant left Sri Lanka.

The judge's decision

 3. The first hearing of the appeal was adjourned  part-heard  because  the
    Appellant was fasting for  Ramadan  and  appeared  not  to  have  taken
    certain medication (paragraphs 7-9). There were initial problems at the
    resumed  hearing  on  10  July  2015  because  different  counsel   was
    instructed and she had not been provided with  notes  of  the  previous
    hearing (paragraph 10-13). The hearing  proceeded,  and  no  issue  has
    arisen from this.

 4. The judge considers the Appellant's health and  the  evidence  relating
    thereto at paragraphs 32-33  and  39-54.  In  summary,  she  found  the
    following:

          a) The Appellant had been fit and able to give  evidence  at  the
             hearing;

          b) There were inconsistencies in  respect  of  her  claimed  ill-
             health in Sri Lanka and this country;

          c) No application had been made to adjourn  for  a  full  medical
             report;

          d) There were factual errors and discrepancies within the medical
             evidence;

          e) Little weight was placed upon a preliminary diagnosis of PTSD;

          f) There was as distinct contrast between the Appellant's ability
             to give detailed evidence to her solicitors and her  inability
             to do so at interview or the hearing;

          g) No problems with interpreters  had  been  highlighted  at  any
             stage.

 5. As a result of the above, the judge effectively found  that  vagueness,
    discrepancies and  contradictions  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  were
    unexplained by reason of ill-health. The  judge  therefore  held  these
    matters against the Appellant's credibility.

 6. The substance of the Appellant's account is considered at paragraphs 55-
    75. The judge found  that  there  were  inherent  implausibilities  and
    inconsistencies in the evidence.  In  particular,  the  judge  did  not
    believe:

          a) The Appellant's evidence on the claimed interest in  her  from
             the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and  their  dealings  with  her
             (paragraphs 57-59 and 66);

          b) Her account of leaving Sri Lanka and arriving  in  the  United
             Kingdom (paragraph 62);

          c) The claim that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  would  have  any
             interest in the Appellant (paragraphs 65 and 69);

          d) The evidence of a witness (paragraph 67);

          e) The claim that the Appellant was a threat to the alleged drug-
             dealing relative (paragraph 75).

 7. In addition to the above, the judge placed little or no weight upon the
    country report of Dr  C  Smith  (paragraphs  60-61).  His  opinions  on
    questions posed were said to be too speculative  and  did  not  in  any
    event  go  to  address  the  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence.

 8. As a result of the negative credibility assessment, the judge concluded
    that there would be no risk on return. The appeal was duly dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The grounds are fairly lengthy  but  in  essence  seek  to  attack  the
    judge's findings on  the  medical  evidence,  Dr  Smith's  report,  the
    Appellant's own evidence, and the assessment of risk on return.

10. Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal.  On  renewal,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Bruce grated permission on all grounds, commenting  that
    the judge may not have provided adequate  reasons  in  support  of  her
    repeated use of the terms "vague", "evasive",  and  "discrepancies  and
    contradictions" when referring to the Appellant's account.

The hearing before me

11. Ms Rothwell (who did not appear before the First-tier Tribunal)  relied
    on the grounds and candidly accepted that proceedings before the  judge
    seemed to have been difficult. The Appellant's ill-health had not  been
    adequately  addressed  by  the  judge.  The  Respondent  had  in   fact
    recognised some difficulties at the asylum interview. Dr Smith's report
    had not been dealt with properly at all, and  the  witnesses'  evidence
    had been rejected without any  reasoning.  It  was  said  that  at  its
    highest the claim could succeed and so any errors were material.

12. Ms Sreeraman relied on the rule 24 response. She asked me  to  look  at
    the judge's decision as a whole. There was insufficient evidence on the
    health issue and the judge was entitled to find as she did.  There  are
    in fact a number of findings in support of the phrases referred  to  in
    the grant of permission. Dr Smith's report had, in the context of  this
    case,  been  dealt  with  adequately.  In  respect  of  the  witnesses'
    evidence, if an error had occurred it was immaterial.

Decision on error of law

13. Ms Rothwell has said all that could properly be said on the Appellant's
    behalf.  She  acknowledged  that  the   evidence   before   the   judge
    (particularly that relating to medical issues) might not have been  all
    that it could have.

14. Having considered the judge's decision as  a  whole,  as  I  must,  and
    acknowledging that a different  judge  may  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion, I find that there are no material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision under appeal.

15. I readily accept that repeating phrases such as those used by the judge
    in numerous paragraphs of her decision can be  unhelpful  and,  without
    more, may well give rise to errors of law. However, in this case  there
    is more.

16. With reference to the paragraphs referred to previously, the judge  has
    made concrete findings on the health issue, all of  which  were  in  my
    view open to her on the evidence. It was open to her to find  that  the
    medical evidence (such as it was) was problematic and  inadequate,  and
    she properly took into account that fact that there had been no attempt
    to seek an adjournment to obtain better evidence. It was also  open  to
    the judge to find  that  inconsistencies  within  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence on this issue counted against her. Taken cumulatively, it  was
    then open to the  judge  to  conclude  that  the  absence  of  reliable
    evidence on the health  issue  had  an  impact  on  the  assessment  of
    credibility  as  a  whole,  both   in   terms   of   explaining   other
    inconsistencies and/or vagueness and  whether  claimed  past  traumatic
    events were more likely to have in fact occurred.

17. In respect of the substance of the  Appellant's  account,  the  adverse
    findings in paragraphs 57-59 and 66 were clearly  open  to  the  judge.
    They relate to very specific elements of the Appellant's claim and  are
    not materially affected by what Dr Smith had  to  say  in  his  report.
    Similarly, the finding in paragraph 66 is perfectly sound.

18. The two issues that have given me cause for concern are  the  treatment
    of Dr Smith's report and the evidence of the witness. In respect of the
    former, at first glance it appears as though the judge  has  failed  to
    give proper consideration to the report. However, on further reflection
    I conclude that the judge was entitled to find that the aspects of  the
    report relating to matters material to the Appellant's case were indeed
    highly speculative and in addition that his  evidence  did  not  go  to
    explain particular inconsistences within her account.  This  is  not  a
    criticism  by  me  of  Dr  Smith,  but  simply  my  conclusion  on  the
    sustainability of the judge's findings.

19. Even there was an error in the consideration of the report, it was  not
    material. The judge's core findings  were  not  sufficiently  dependent
    upon matters which Dr Smith had addressed  in  his  evidence.  In  this
    regard I refer to the  passages  on  the  Appellant's  health  and  the
    findings at paragraphs 55-59, 65-66 and 75.

20. Turning to the evidence  of  the  witness.  The  judge  does  not  give
    adequate reasons for finding that his evidence was untruthful. That  is
    an error. Having considered the  witnesses'  statement  (H1-H3  of  the
    Appellant's bundle), I conclude that it is not material to the  outcome
    of the appeal. The witness was not able  to  give  direct  evidence  of
    claimed events in Sri  Lanka.  His  evidence  about  contact  with  the
    Appellant and/or her family related in the main to travel to the United
    Kingdom and arrangements thereafter. It cannot be  properly  said  that
    this could have materially  affected  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's claim as a whole. He mentions that the  Appellant's  mother
    informed him that she (the Appellant) had divorced her husband and  was
    "in trouble" (no detail is provided). However, I cannot see  that  this
    alone could have had a sufficient impact on the rest of the evidence so
    as to materially undermine the judge's overall findings.  Finally,  the
    point stated in paragraph 11 of the statement does not take matters any
    further. The Appellant did in fact tell someone else about her  claimed
    problems, namely her solicitors. It was the  ability  to  do  so,  when
    contrasted with the inability to answer questions at interview and  the
    hearing, which led the judge to one of her adverse findings.

21. In light of the above and having regard  to  paragraphs  69-76  of  her
    decision, there was no error in respect of the  judge's  assessment  of
    risk on return.

22. The Appellant's appeal fails.

Anonymity

23. I maintain the direction made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed      Date: 12 February 2016


H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 12 February 2016
Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

