
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05617/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th July 2013                               |On 26th July 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                iftikhar ali
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Afzal of IIAS (Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Bagral
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th July 2012.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  25th  July  1972.   His
    wife and two children are dependants on his claim.  He arrived  in  the
    UK in May 2007 with entry clearance as a student  conferring  leave  to
    enter until 29th September 2010 and was joined by his wife and  son  on
    21st November 2009.  During the currency of his leave  he  applied  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant which was refused
    as a consequence of the submission of a certificate from the  Cambridge
    College of Learning.  He then made a  second  application  for  further
    leave as a Tier  4  (General)  Migrant  which  was  again  refused  and
    subsequent appeal dismissed on 11th March 2011.

 3. On 23rd April 2012 he claimed asylum on the basis of his  fear  of  his
    wife's family who disapproved of their  marriage.   He  said  that  his
    wife's family had recorded a kidnapping case against him and an  arrest
    warrant had been issued.  He feared that he would be  arrested  by  the
    police on return and that he  and  his  wife  will  be  killed  by  her
    brothers in an honour killing.  The judge  considered  the  Appellant's
    claim and the evidence and found it  not  to  be  credible.   She  also
    considered the claim to remain here on  the  basis  of  Article  8  and
    concluded that removal would be proportionate.

The Grounds of Application

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    did not give any weight to the arrest warrant and  had  overlooked  the
    objective evidence which indicated that the authorities were unable and
    unwilling to offer effective protection.

 5. Permission to appeal was refused by a First-tier Judge on  23rd  August
    2012.

 6. The Appellant then renewed his application in a  detailed  critique  of
    the determination and permission was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley on 19th November 2012.

Submissions

 7. Mr Afzal said that his  main  argument  was  that  the  judge  had  not
    properly applied the correct standard of proof.  She had made a  number
    of favourable findings which outweighed the adverse ones.

 8. The judge had made insubstantial criticisms of the evidence and had not
    taken proper account of the wife's evidence.  In  particular,  she  had
    found it not credible that the couple would have  voluntarily  returned
    to their home town of Bahawalpur  if  they  had  genuinely  feared  his
    wife's family as claimed, but the evidence was that  the  marriage  had
    taken place in the chamber of the lawyer  concerned  and  not  in  open
    court. There was nothing to negate the documents  which  the  Appellant
    had produced in good faith, and the Appellant's account was  consistent
    with the objective evidence.  He also said that she should  have  found
    that removal would not be proportionate.

 9. Mrs Pettersen submitted that it  was  not  clear  what  the  judge  was
    supposed to have done wrong.  In his written  statement  the  Appellant
    had said that the marriage had taken place in Bahawalpur because it was
    the tradition and because his friend had engaged an advocate to help to
    arrange the court marriage. Both the Appellant and his  wife  had  said
    that they had had a marriage in the district court  in  Bahawalpur  and
    had not said that they simply went to the lawyer's office. There was no
    evidence to support the present  submission  that  there  had  been  no
    public appearance.

10. The fact that the Appellant's account was  not  inconsistent  with  the
    objective evidence of honour killings did not mean that  it  was  true.
    The judge plainly had the objective evidence in her mind.  With respect
    to Article 8 the judge gave sustainable reasons for making the decision
    that she did.

11. With respect to the criticisms in the grounds, it was open to the judge
    to find that if the Appellant's wife and child were in danger he  would
    not have left them behind when he came to the UK.  She was entitled  to
    find the fact that the Appellant's wife and  son  applied  for  a  visa
    giving an address in Bahawalpur strongly contradicted  the  Appellant's
    claim that at all material times they had relocated to live in  Lahore.
    She was also entitled to place little weight on the arrest  warrant  in
    the light of the fact that the Appellant had only ever produced  copies
    which were easily obtained and to state that it was curious that all of
    the documentation was dated after the appeal  was  dismissed  in  March
    2011, given that the Appellant said that he had had problems from 2006.
     Finally it was open to her to comment on the fact that the letter from
    the Appellant's wife's doctor was that her family had tried  to  kidnap
    the Appellant's brother who had fled to Dubai but this was not a matter
    which had been mentioned  either  by  the  Appellant  or  his  wife  in
    evidence.

Findings and Conclusions

12. This is an exemplary determination.  In a clear  and  careful  decision
    the judge properly addressed all relevant issues and made findings open
    to her on the evidence.

13. There is no misapplication of the standard of proof.   The  judge  gave
    credit to the Appellant in respect of  a  number  of  matters  and  was
    prepared to accept his explanation that he was suffering from the  side
    effects of medication for confused answers at interview.  This does not
    demonstrate that this experienced judge was either unaware of the lower
    standard of proof to be applied or that she  did  not  do  so.   It  is
    indicative of the fairness of her approach.

14. It was plainly open to her to find that the Appellant's account  of  an
    elopement and a flight to Lodhran was inconsistent with their  decision
    to return to Bahawalpur the following day to marry in Bahawalpur Court.
     She was entitled to find that it was not credible that, less than four
    weeks after their marriage, the Appellant applied for  entry  clearance
    to come to the UK and left his wife and son behind, claiming that  they
    were in hiding in Lahore.  That claim in itself is not consistent  with
    the fact that both the Appellant and his wife gave their address on the
    Visa Application Form as Bahawalpur.

15. In these circumstances, the judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the  copy
    arrest warrant as not reliable  properly  considering  the  documentary
    evidence, in the light of the evidence as a whole as she  was  required
    to do.

16. It is simply untrue to say that the judge did not take into account the
    wife's  evidence  which  she  referred  to  in  detail  throughout  the
    determination.

17. Having found the core of the Appellant's claim not to be  credible  the
    fact that it was not inconsistent  with  the  objective  evidence  adds
    little to his case but in any event the judge considered the submission
    and referred to it in the determination.

18. With respect to Article 8 the determination  is  again,  unimpeachable.
    The judge gave careful consideration to the  primary  consideration  of
    the best interests of the Appellant's children, one of whom was born in
    the UK.  The Appellant's history and conduct in immigration matters has
    been poor but the judge reminded herself that the children could not be
    blamed for his actions. Their best interests however lay with remaining
    with their parents in Pakistan, bearing in mind that they were familiar
    with the lifestyle and culture in Pakistan having spent most  of  their
    lives there and they would have contact with family members  with  whom
    they could form new relationships.

19. This is an unmeritorious challenge to the judge's decision.

Decision

20. The decision of the judge  shall  stand.   The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
