
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05549/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25th March 2015                   |On 27th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                     BZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Knorr, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION and REMITTAL

 1. The appellant is a female citizen of Albania, born  24  February  1979.
    She arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  with  her  son  in  August  2012,
    illegally concealed  in  a  lorry  and  claimed  asylum  upon  arrival.
    Following interview the respondent refused her application  for  asylum
    and humanitarian protection, and made  a  decision  to  remove  her  to
    Albania as an illegal entrant.  In summary, the Secretary of State  did
    not accept that the appellant had been subjected to sexual exploitation
    in Italy and that she was not at risk from  persecution  on  return  to
    Albania as  the  authorities  there  would  provide  a  sufficiency  of
    protection.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-Tier Tribunal and  her  appeal  was
    heard in July 2013 by Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Waygood,  who
    dismissed her appeal on all grounds and  made  an  adverse  credibility
    finding.

 3. The appellant sought and obtained leave to appeal and that appeal  came
    before Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 12 November 2013.  For reasons set
    out  in  Judge  Grubb's  determination  dated  4  December  2013,   the
    appellant's appeal was  dismissed  as  Judge  Grubb  found  that  Judge
    Waygood had not made a material error of law in his decision to dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant then sought leave to appeal to the Court of  Appeal,  but
    such application was refused  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  on  13
    January 2014.

 5.  The  appellant  renewed  her  application  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.
    Permission was granted by that court.

 6. When the matter came before the Court of Appeal, a  consent  order  was
    requested by both parties. As a consequence the Court of Appeal did not
    determine the merits of the appeal, but ordered:

         "That the appeal is hereby allowed to the extent that the appeal be
         remitted to the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) for
         the Upper Tribunal  to  determine  whether  it  or  the  First-Tier
         Tribunal will conduct  a  de  novo  hearing  of  the  appeal  by  a
         differently-constituted Tribunal".

 7. Thus the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal to decide the very
    limited issue as to whether the de novo hearing should  be  before  the
    Upper Tribunal or the First-Tier Tribunal. The effect of  the  decision
    of the Court of Appeal being that a material error of law was contained
    in Judge Waygood's determination.

 8. It was Miss Knorr's submission that the matter should  be  remitted  to
    the First-Tier Tribunal.  I indicated that my preliminary view was that
    should be the appropriate  course  of  action.   Miss  Knorr  correctly
    indicated that credibility had been originally at issue  and  that  the
    findings of the original First-Tier Tribunal Judge were  considered  to
    be flawed, and that accordingly the First-Tier Tribunal  would  be  the
    appropriate venue.  Mr Richards acknowledged the submission and did not
    argue against that outcome.

 9. An error of law having been determined elsewhere, I therefore  consider
    that this case falls within the  Senior  President's  direction  and  I
    accordingly remit this appeal to be re-heard de novo  before  a  First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Waygood.

10. I direct that the case be listed before the First-Tier  Tribunal  on  a
    date not before 1 August 2015, as it is  likely  that  the  appellant's
    representatives will seek an up to date medical report.



Signed        Date 25th March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

