
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05839/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 November 2014                           |On 16 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                           THE HONORARY LORD BURNS
                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                 HUSEYIN ER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Rhuanno, Trott & Gentry LLP, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Turkey  born  on  10  April  1991.    He
    appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated  29  July  2014
    refusing to grant him asylum and/or humanitarian/subsidiary  protection
    and/or on human rights grounds.  The appeal was heard by Judge  of  the
    First Tier Tribunal M A Khan on 16  September  2014.   The  appeal  was
    dismissed and a determination promulgated on 1 October 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal P J G White on  21  October
    2014.  The grounds of application are that the Judge  in  finding  that
    the Appellant lacked credibility, failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    stating that the Appellant's  evidence  was  "vague  and  evasive"  and
    "contradictory  and  inconsistent"  and  that  there   was   procedural
    unfairness in the Judge hearing this appeal, as he  relied  extensively
    on his own determination in the Appellant's previous appeal,  which  he
    had dismissed.

 3. The Appellant's representative submitted that it  was  not  appropriate
    for the First Tier Judge to hear this case, as he had already heard and
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent
    refusing him entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a student.   That
    determination was promulgated on 27 October 2009.

 4. The representative submitted that the Judge did not raise  this  matter
    at the Hearing.  We pointed out that the  Judge  referred  to  this  in
    paragraph 44 of his determination, stating that no one had an objection
    on this issue. It transpired that the  Appellant's  representative  did
    not know if this had  been  raised  at  the  First-tier  hearing.   The
    Presenting Officer did not know if it had been raised. We  pointed  out
    that the actual determination in the student appeal had been  presented
    to the First-tier Tribunal and to the Appellant's representative at the
    start of the Hearing by the Presenting Officer and  Judge  M  A  Khan's
    name was at the  top  of  this  determination  so  the  Judge  and  the
    Appellant's representative must have been aware of this at the Hearing.

 5. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Judge  made  findings
    in his Asylum determination that the evidence of the Appellant and  his
    witness was inconsistent.  This was when he was comparing the  evidence
    at  the  First-tier  hearing  with  the  student  determination.    The
    representative submitted that the judge made no  express  reference  to
    any other inconsistencies and that the  Judge  did  not  give  adequate
    reasons for his credibility findings or his findings relating to  these
    inconsistencies.

 6. We asked the representative if he was  contending  that  this  produced
    unfairness and asked if he believed this was a procedural irregularity.
     We also asked if the representative had had notice of  this  would  it
    have been a problem? The representative stated that it would only  have
    been a problem if there had been an objection and the Judge had carried
    on with the Hearing in spite of this.  We  put  to  the  representative
    that  there  is  no  way  we  can  know  if  the  Appellant's  previous
    representative would have objected.  The representative submitted  that
    the Judge should have raised this matter.

 7. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph  44  of  the  Asylum
    determination the Judge  states  that  no  objection  was  raised.   He
    submitted that as the determination  was  handed  to  him  and  to  the
    appellant's representative on the day and  was  in  the  hands  of  the
    Presenting Officer then  the  parties  must  have  been  aware  of  the
    situation.

 8. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is only  one  inconsistency
    based on the student determination and this is the basis on  which  the
    Appellant was expelled from  school.    Paragraph  26  of  the  refusal
    letter refers to this, "Your brother provides a  contradictory  account
    as to why you left school which damages the credibility of your claim".
     He submitted that the Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  the  refusal
    letter  and  we  were  referred  to  paragraphs  30  and  31   of   the
    determination where this inconsistency is  highlighted.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant had the opportunity to address this inconsistency at
    the Asylum Hearing. This could have been dealt with in  oral  evidence,
    so it cannot be said that the Appellant has been prejudiced because  of
    this.  He submitted that this was  a  deficiency  brought  out  at  the
    student Hearing and then at the Asylum Hearing.   It  was  pointed  out
    that in the record of proceedings on the Tribunal's file the  Appellant
    admitted lying to his brother about the reason why he was expelled from
    school.

 9. The Presenting Officer referred to the ground of appeal relating to the
    standard of proof and whether the  Judge  misapplied  the  standard  of
    proof.  He referred to paragraph 15 of the Asylum  determination  which
    narrates the correct burden and standard of proof and submitted that we
    have not been alerted to any paragraph in the  determination  where  he
    has erred on this issue.

10. The Presenting Officer then dealt with the credibility issues raised in
    the Asylum determination and the oral evidence given  at  the  Hearing.
    The reason for the Appellant being expelled from school is referred  to
    at  paragraph  46  as  a  credibility  issue.  He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's father's injuries, referred to  at  paragraphs  48  and  50
    raise credibility issues, as it is not clear whether his father had  an
    accident in 2009 or was tortured and beaten  up  by  the  Police.  With
    regard to the Judge stating that  the  Appellant  has  been  vague  and
    evasive, this was in relation to the  Appellant's  evidence  about  the
    football match at paragraph 49 and his evidence at paragraph  32  about
    what happened to his father.  He submitted that the judge has  given  a
    sufficient explanation for all these credibility findings.   These  are
    based on the content of the oral evidence at the 2014  Hearing  and  do
    not relate to the student Hearing.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that there is no material error in the
    Judge's determination.

12. The Appellant's representative submitted that the degree  of  reasoning
    by the Judge is inadequate.  He submitted that some of the  issues  are
    more central than others but when the core of the  evidence  is  looked
    at, more detailed reasoning is required.  He submitted that  there  are
    material errors of law in the Judge's determination.

Determination

13. We have to decide whether there  are  errors  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision promulgated on 1 October 2014.

14. With regard to the procedural unfairness issue it is not clear  whether
    this matter was  raised  at  the  Hearing.   In  paragraph  44  of  the
    determination the Judge states that there were  no  objections  to  him
    hearing the appeal.  Based on the evidence on  file  the  determination
    promulgated by Judge  Khan  on  27  October  2009  was  handed  to  the
    appellant's representative and the Judge by the Presenting  Officer  at
    the start of the Hearing.  Judge Khan's name is  at  the  top  of  this
    determination and it must have been evident to the parties and  to  the
    Judge that he had already dealt  with  an  appeal  by  this  Appellant.
    There was ample opportunity for an objection to be made.   It  was  not
    necessary for the Judge to refer  to  this.   There  is  no  procedural
    unfairness because Judge Khan  had  already  heard  an  appeal  by  the
    appellant on a different issue.

15. If the student application had been dealt with by  another  Judge  that
    determination would have been on file and its terms would have  had  to
    be  considered  by  Judge  Khan.   The  only  matter  in  his  previous
    determination which was referred to by the Judge in his asylum decision
    was the issue of why the Appellant was expelled from his  high  school.
    This matter was dealt with at the Asylum Hearing in oral  evidence  and
    based on the record of proceedings the Appellant admitted that  he  had
    lied to his brother about this.

16. With regard to the standard of proof and burden of proof the Judge  has
    referred to the correct standard and burden of proof at paragraph 15 of
    the determination and there is nothing in his determination which makes
    us believe that the Judge used the wrong standard or burden of proof.

17. With regard to the credibility issues the Judge dealt with  credibility
    on the evidence before him, in particular the  oral  evidence.   He  is
    entitled to state that the evidence was vague and evasive.  He  has  in
    fact specified the particular parts of  the  evidence  which  he  found
    vague and evasive, in the determination.

18. We find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    determination.   There  is  purely  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    decision.

19. Judge Khan's decision, promulgated on 1 October 2014 must stand.





Signed        Date 16 December 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




