
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05489/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 May 2016                                |On 1 July 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


                                   Between

                                     as
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

1.   This is an appeal remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  for  redetermination
    by the Court of Appeal following a consent order dated 5 June 2013.  It
    concerns a claim for asylum made by the appellant,  a  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka born on [ ] 1985.  He made an illegal entry into  the  UK  on  31
    January 2011 claiming asylum on arrival.  His application  was  refused
    on 19 April 2011 and directions were set for his removal.

2.   He claimed that he would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka  because  of
    his actual or perceived activities and support for the LTTE.   In  very
    brief outline the appellant said that he was approached by  the  LTTE's
    recruitment team in about 2000.  As his father had passed away  and  he
    was an only child, he was responsible for looking after his mother.  He
    explained this to the recruitment team and they asked him to work at  a
    newspaper company belonging to the LTTE.  The appellant did so.  He was
    also trained to help the LTTE by providing first aid to injured  cadres
    and taking them to hospital when requested to do so.  He claims that he
    was arrested by the  Sri  Lankan  CID  in  January  2004  when  he  was
    travelling to Vavuniya and detained for around six  hours  in  an  army
    camp.  During his detention he was questioned and ill-treated as he had
    failed to disclose at the checkpoint that he was  working  at  an  LTTE
    owned newspaper.  He was  subsequently  released  and  he  returned  to
    Kilinochchi and continued working for the LTTE until March 2009.

3.   In 2008 the war between the LTTE and the Sri Lankan Army escalated  and
    he was given basic self-defence training to safeguard himself whilst he
    was working with the LTTE in the battlefield which he  did  by  digging
    bunkers and sandbanks for fighters during 2008 and 2009 in addition  to
    helping injured LTTE cadres.  In March 2009  he  and  his  mother  with
    other civilians went to a Sri Lankan Army controlled  area  along  with
    other civilians due to heavy fighting and they were detained at an army
    camp.  They were  helped  to  escape  from  detention  by  someone  who
    belonged to a Tamil paramilitary group and they were then able to go to
    Colombo.  They stayed in hiding at Kotahena  without  registering  with
    the Sri Lankan police because of the appellant's fears arising from his
    work with the LTTE and his escape from the army detention camp  without
    registering as detainees.

4.   The appellant claimed that he was  arrested  on  10  November  2010  in
    Colombo.  He was taken to Kotahena police station for inquires and then
    taken to an unknown place where he  was  detained  for  thirteen  days.
    Following initial inquiry he was  questioned  and  tortured  about  his
    links with the LTTE and his back was burned using a hot object.  He was
    kicked, beaten with pipes and slapped hard.  During  his  detention  he
    told the army officials about his involvement with  the  LTTE  and  the
    work he had done.  He signed a document written in  Sinhalese  and  was
    also fingerprinted after photos and videos were taken.  On 23  November
    2010 he was taken from where he was detained, blindfolded and driven to
    the side of a road where he was dropped off.  He was then approached by
    a Tamil man and taken to his home.  His uncle in Canada  was  mentioned
    and it was confirmed that he had paid money to the CID to take him  out
    of detention.  Arrangements were then made for the appellant to  travel
    to Chennai.  He then travelled on to Doha  arriving  in  London  on  31
    January 2011 when he claimed asylum.

5.   The respondent accepted that the appellant's identity  and  nationality
    were as claimed but it was not accepted that he would be of any adverse
    interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka.  Accordingly his  application
    was refused.

6.   His appeal against  this  decision  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision issued on 8 June  2011.   The  designated  judge
    referred in his decision to the fact that the  appellant  had  admitted
    that he had lied extensively during his two screening interviews and in
    the judge's view these were serious distortions of material  facts  not
    likely to have  been  memory  lapses.   The  striking  feature  of  the
    interview record was that the appellant made no mention of his  alleged
    detention and torture in 2010.  He relied on a medical report  prepared
    by Mr Martin but the judge said that it added little  probative  value.
    The older scars were reasonably likely to have been caused by  shrapnel
    wounds as the appellant had claimed and the scars on his back were said
    to be typical of intentional burns but an accidental cause could not be
    excluded.  He commented that Mr  Martin  was  not  asked  to  give  his
    opinion on how readily the appellant  could  have  travelled  to  India
    without medical attention and, if the wounds leading to the  scars  had
    been inflicted just  days  before  his  flight  in  the  context  of  a
    terrifying and brutal ordeal during  which  the  appellant  claimed  he
    feared for his life, it was not easy to see how he could have been  fit
    to travel at all if his wounds were not treated until he reached India.
     The judge found that the appellant had failed to  prove  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that the wounds he ascribed to  torture  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities were inflicted in the circumstances he described.

7.   The appellant was granted permission to appeal against  this  decision.
    The Upper Tribunal found that the determination was flawed.   The  fact
    that  Mr  Martin  had  only  had  the  appellant's   account   of   his
    circumstances had little probative value and whether  he  was  able  to
    travel  to  India  without  medical  attention  was  not   a   relevant
    consideration unless the judge had been able  to  reach  a  sustainable
    conclusion that the claim was not credible.  In addition, the  evidence
    fell short of establishing that a person suffering  from  the  injuries
    sustained by the appellant could not have travelled.

8.   The appeal was reheard by the Upper Tribunal on  19  April  2012.   The
    judge accepted that the appellant had been arrested in 2004 or 2005 and
    held for a period of about two days whilst inquiries  were  made  about
    him.  He also accepted the evidence that he had been placed in an  army
    camp and then been able to obtain his release perhaps by the payment of
    a bribe and make his way with his mother to  Colombo.   He  noted  that
    there was no substantial challenge to the fact that he  had  spent  the
    next eighteen months or so  in  Colombo  in  a  relative's  house.   He
    identified as the crux of the claim  whether  the  appellant  had  been
    arrested on 10 November 2010 as he claimed and then held for  a  period
    of thirteen to fifteen days, tortured as a  suspected  LTTE  terrorist,
    released as a result of arrangements made by an  uncle  in  Canada  who
    found out about the appellant's detention and arranged an agent to meet
    him in the space of two days and managed to  secure  a  valid  passport
    thereby permitting the appellant to leave Sri Lanka.

9.   During the hearing of the  evidence  the  judge  had  raised  with  the
    Presenting Officer the fact that he had not put to  the  appellant  the
    challenges to his account made by the respondent in the decision letter
    and a number of further matters were then put.   However,  it  was  not
    directly put to the appellant  that  the  scarring  identified  in  the
    report of Mr Martin had been self-inflicted.

10.  Having reviewed the evidence the judge found  that  the  appellant  had
    not been arrested in November 2010, was not subjected to torture and he
    comprehensively disbelieved his account of the circumstances  in  which
    he left Sri Lanka.  He accepted that Mr Martin's evidence was that  the
    appellant had been subjected to the intentional infliction of  injuries
    with the result that scarring had been caused but,  acknowledging  that
    it was no light matter to reach his conclusion, he found that the scars
    had not been inflicted as described by the appellant.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted by the Court of  Appeal  (Sir  Richard
    Buxton), on the sole ground of whether it was open to the judge to find
    that the appellant had inflicted the wounds  on  himself  without  that
    allegation having been put to him.  The grant comments that it might be
    said in the context of this case that  that  would  have  been  only  a
    formal exercise because the appellant could be  expected  to  deny  the
    allegation and the judge to have as much difficulty in  believing  that
    denial as he had in believing the rest of the  evidence.   However,  it
    was not possible to escape from the fact that the  allegation  involved
    painful and difficult acts  not  therefore  obviously  likely  to  have
    occurred and was extremely  serious  as  it  alleged  active  steps  to
    deceive not only the immigration authorities but also  the  court.   It
    was arguable that as a matter of principle the conclusion as  to  self-
    infliction should not have been reached without  the  applicant  having
    been questioned on it.  The appeal did not proceed to a  full  hearing.
    The respondent conceded that there was an error of law  to  the  extent
    outlined in the grant of permission and the appeal was remitted to  the
    Upper Tribunal for reconsideration with  the  issues  of  fact  already
    established being preserved (para 5 of the Statement of Reasons).

12.  There was a directions hearing on 8 April 2016 at which the  issue  was
    raised  about  the  interpretation  of  para  5  and  what  facts  were
    preserved.  However, at the hearing before me it was accepted  by  both
    representatives that the intention was to retain the positive  findings
    of fact up to the events of 2010 and to reconsider in the light of  the
    evidence and submissions the appellant's  evidence  about  his  claimed
    detention and ill-treatment in November 2010 and whether in  the  light
    of the evidence as a whole he was able to show a reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood or a real risk that he would be subject  to  persecution  or
    serious harm on return to Sri Lanka.

13.  At the hearing before me the appellant relied on a  bundle  1A  indexed
    and paginated 1-198 and a supplementary bundle 2A indexed and paginated
    1-39.  In addition to the appeal papers  the  respondent  produced  the
    Home  Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance  Sri   Lanka:   Tamil
    Separatism Version 2.0 May 2016.


The Oral Evidence of the Appellant

14.  The appellant gave oral  evidence  through  a  Tamil  interpreter.   He
    confirmed that his statements of 1 April 2016 1A 1-6 and of 24 May 2016
    2A 1-8 were correct.  He said that he did not know why the  CID  wanted
    to interview him in 2010.  They had not told him anything  and  he  had
    been very scared.  He was taken away in a vehicle and was  blindfolded.
    He was questioned initially in Sinhalese and then in a  bit  of  Tamil.
    He was asked how he got to Colombo, why he had not reported and why  he
    was in hiding.  He thought someone must  have  given  some  information
    about him to the authorities.  He said they suspected that he might  be
    a suicide bomber or seeking to put a bomb somewhere.   His  mother  had
    been arrested at the same time and he had not seen her after that.   He
    accepted that none of his family members had otherwise had to leave Sri
    Lanka because of helping him.  He confirmed that his  uncle  in  Canada
    had helped him but he did not know how this had happened.

15.  In cross-examination he accepted that he had gone to Colombo  with  his
    mother on about 23 March 2009.  They had been able to get  out  of  the
    camp because his mother had some jewellery and used it to bribe people.
     He accepted he had been in Colombo for more than a year.  He said that
    he had not  left  the  house  very  much  and  his  mother  had  sorted
    everything out.  He said again that the authorities might have  thought
    that he was a suicide bomber.  They told him that he was lying.  He was
    beaten and had sustained injuries.  They came when they felt  like  it.
    He said that he was beaten and tortured and did not want to be reminded
    of the ill-treatment.  His uncle  had  paid  a  bribe  for  him  to  be
    released and he had left on a passport in his own name.  His uncle  had
    arranged everything.  After he came here he learnt that his  neighbours
    in Colombo had told his uncle.  The appellant was  directly  asked  how
    the scars on his back were inflicted.  He said  that  as  he  told  the
    doctor he was beaten with sticks and iron bars.  It had been by the CID
    when he had been detained.  It was put to him that this account was not
    accepted by the respondent on the basis that there was no reason why he
    should have been detained in 2010 and that the injuries must have  been
    inflicted by a third party.  The appellant replied that he had told the
    truth and had no reason to lie.  He did not want  to  go  back  to  Sri
    Lanka and be tortured but would rather die here.  He said that he still
    did not know what had happened to his mother.  He was asked whether his
    uncle had been able to locate her but he said that his  uncle  had  not
    given him any information and that he was not talking to him.

Submissions

16.  Mr Kandola maintained his reliance  on  the  original  refusal  letter.
    There was no longer any challenge to the appellant's previous detention
    but that was a historic event which by itself would not  give  rise  to
    any risk of persecution on return.  He submitted that the appellant had
    failed to give any reason why he had been picked up six years after his
    previous arrest or after staying for about eighteen months trouble free
    in Colombo.  He argued that the appellant had sought to  embellish  his
    claim by saying that he was thought to be a suicide bomber.  No mention
    had been made of this before.  It was not credible that his uncle would
    have been able to track him down  as  described  and  then  secure  his
    release and arrange for his travel to the UK via India.  The  appellant
    had left on his own passport: this was indicative that he was not on  a
    stop list.  It was not credible that he did not know the whereabouts of
    his mother or that his uncle would not be able to locate her.

17.  Mr Kandola accepted that there was some  support  for  the  appellant's
    account in the medical evidence.  The scarring was consistent with  the
    incidents described but this did not exclude injuries  being  inflicted
    by a third party.  A recent psychiatric medical report from  Dr  Dhumad
    again provided some corroboration.   However,  when  the  evidence  was
    looked at in the round the appellant had failed to substantiate that he
    was arrested and detained as claimed.  He further submitted  that  even
    if the appellant had been detained in 2010 he had been released and not
    formally charged.  He was someone with a  very  low  profile  and  very
    unlikely now to be on a watch list.  There was nothing in  his  profile
    that  brought  him  within  the  categories  in  GJ  (post-civil   war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319.  He referred to the CIG Report
    and in particulars paras 3.1.1-9 which set out the Secretary of State's
    position as to those likely to be at risk.  In  summary  the  appellant
    was unable to bring himself within the risk categories set out in GJ.

18.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the  appellant  should  be  regarded  as  a
    vulnerable person within the Presidential Guidance Note of 2010 and  in
    these circumstances greater weight should be  given  to  the  objective
    evidence.  The psychiatric evidence confirmed a diagnosis of PTSD which
    taken with the medical evidence now provided  a  strong  case  for  the
    appellant's claim to have been tortured in 2010.  In the light  of  the
    appellant's evidence and his answers at  interview  and  in  particular
    Q73, 80-81 and 102  it  was  not  surprising  that  the  appellant  was
    arrested in Colombo.  The country guidance cases referred  to  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities relying on sophisticated and  targeted  intelligence
    but that did not mean that their intelligence was  necessarily  correct
    and, in any event, would be based on the perception of the authorities.

19.  Ms Jegarajah argued that the appellant would be  subject  to  suspicion
    as someone who had escaped from internment but who  had  not  left  the
    country.  The authorities would be interested in  what  he  was  doing,
    particularly as he had not registered.  It was reasonably  likely  that
    he would have been tortured in an attempt to obtain evidence from  him.
    The authorities would have hoped for a signed confession.  She referred
    to the most recent COIS Report noting that it showed continuing reports
    of torture and also that those returning could be at risk  of  torture.
    The appellant would be at real risk on return, so she  argued,  because
    of the perception that he was an escapee.  She submitted that,  in  the
    light of the evidence as a whole, the appellant was someone  who  would
    still be at real risk from the authorities on return.

The Medical Evidence

20.  In addition to the report of Mr Martin of 31 May 2011  (1A  124-138)  a
    further medical-legal report has been obtained from Dr Arnold following
    an examination on 20 January 2016.  He confirms that the appellant  has
    six scars on his back and left flank (identified as S6-S10)  which  are
    hyperpigmented and slightly mottled.  In his  opinion  S6-11  have  the
    precise appearance to be expected after contact thermal burns sustained
    by the application of a hot  object.   Their  appearance  and  location
    accord  with  the  examination  findings  of  Mr  Martin  allowing  for
    reduction in pigmentation to be expected  in  the  years  between  that
    examination and the present one.  The self similarity  of  the  lesions
    strongly suggested that all were inflicted with the same or  a  similar
    object such as a hot metal rod and very probably  at  around  the  same
    time.  His view is that their location on the back  is  not  consistent
    with self infliction.  He noted that the issue of  self  infliction  by
    proxy (SIBP) was raised in the earlier legal proceedings but not put to
    the appellant.  He refers to the fact that he gave expert  evidence  in
    KV (Scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230 explaining
    what medical expertise could and could not add to the totality  of  the
    information available to the courts.

21.  Where there was gross discordance between the given ages  of  scars  or
    wounds and their actual appearances, medical  expertise  could  support
    the contention that the lesions were not  inflicted  at  the  time  the
    subject claimed but this was not the case so far as the  appellant  was
    concerned as the quiescent nature of the appellant's scars  meant  that
    the causative injuries had occurred more  than  six  to  twelve  months
    before the examination.  There was no other characteristic of the scars
    which could serve to distinguish between  torture  and  SIBP.   In  the
    present case the appellant was  careful  to  distinguish  the  injuries
    arising from other causes scars, S1-4 and S12-15, and made  no  attempt
    to pass them off as caused by torture.

22.  It was Mr Arnold's view that scars S6-11 were diagnostic of torture  by
    branding.  The appellant had attributed  scars  S1  to  12  and  13  to
    shrapnel wounds and injuries sustained while digging  bunkers  for  the
    LTTE, S5 to vaccination and S3, 4 and  14-15  to  accidental  injuries.
    These scars were consistent with those causes and S5 was diagnostic  of
    vaccination.  The  appellant  had  also  reported  low  back  pain  and
    physical signs in the lumbar region  and  limitation  of  straight  leg
    raising which were consistent with the results of blows  to  the  lower
    back.  It was also his opinion that the appellant  was  suffering  from
    post traumatic stress disorder and the medical evidence as a whole made
    it more probable than otherwise that he had been tortured in  the  ways
    he described and has scarring and psychological damage as a result.

23.  The appellant was seen by a consultant psychiatrist on 19 May 2016  and
    the report by Dr Saleh Dhumad is dated 23 March 2016.  He recorded  the
    appellant  denied  any  psychological  difficulties  or  mental  health
    problems prior to his  alleged  torture  and  detention  in  2010.   He
    reported a deterioration of his mental health after the events of 2010.
     He did not sleep due to nightmares saying that he  saw  army  officers
    blindfolding him and he could hear them speaking in Sinhalese.  He went
    to see his GP within a couple of days after arrival in the UK  and  was
    prescribed antidepressant medication and referred to the mental  health
    team.  He was assessed by mental  health  services  but  he  could  not
    engage with them as he was too scared to talk  about  his  experiences.
    He reported strong thoughts of suicide saying that  he  feels  helpless
    about his safety in Sri Lanka, that he would be killed there and  would
    rather end his life.

24.  In his opinion Dr Dhumad says  that  the  appellant's  presentation  is
    consistent with a diagnosis of moderate depressive episode with somatic
    systems.   He  also  suffers  from  post  traumatic  symptoms  such  as
    avoidance, flashbacks and nightmare.  His symptoms  meet  the  criteria
    defined in the International Classification of Diseases  10th  Edition,
    Mental  and  Behavioural  Disorder.   He  describes  the  appellant  as
    depressed, hopeless and his concentration is poor and  unlikely  to  be
    worse if he were to be cross-examined but otherwise he is fit to attend
    court to give oral evidence.  Dr Dhumad considered the possibility that
    the appellant might be feigning or exaggerating his mental illness.  He
    has not taken his story  at  face  value  but  carefully  examined  his
    symptomatology and his emotional reactions during the interview.  It is
    his clinical opinion that his clinical presentation is consistent  with
    a diagnosis of depression and post traumatic stress disorder.   In  his
    experience it is extremely difficult  to  feign  a  full  blown  mental
    illness as opposed to individual  symptoms.   So  far  as  whether  the
    appellant might have requested someone to create the  injuries  causing
    scarring it is his view there is no presenting evidence to suggest that
    the scars were caused with his consent and the nature  and  details  of
    his  symptoms  are  consistent  with  a  psychological  reaction  to  a
    traumatic experience such as  torture.   Injuries  inflicted  with  the
    individual's  permission  by  a  proxy  are  not  perceived   as   life
    threatening and therefore they lack the essential criteria for PTSD.

Conclusions

25.  I am satisfied  that  this  further  medical  evidence  not  previously
    before the Tribunal casts a different light on whether the  appellant's
    injuries were caused as he describes.   Mr  Arnold  has  described  the
    injuries  as  diagnostic  which  under  the  hierarchy  of  degrees  of
    consistency set out in the Istanbul Protocol is an indication that  the
    injuries could not have been caused in any way other than as described.
     The  further  evidence  about  the  appellant's  mental  condition  in
    relation to  his  depression  and  post  traumatic  stress  provides  a
    different context in which to assess what weight should be given to the
    many inconsistencies in the  appellant's  evidence  identified  in  the
    respondent's decision letter and the previous Tribunal  decisions.   In
    the appellant's oral evidence before me he was asked directly about the
    infliction of the injuries and whether they had been  conflicted  by  a
    third party.  He said that he had told the truth and  had  no  need  to
    lie.  He did not want to go back and be tortured and would  rather  die
    here.  It seems to me that that answer  is  consistent  with  what  the
    appellant had said to Dr  Dhumad.   Having  heard  the  appellant  give
    evidence and assessing it in the light of the evidence as a  whole  and
    in particular the recent medical and psychiatric  evaluations,  I  find
    that to the lower standard of proof he has shown there is a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that his injuries occurred  as  he  described  and
    were not received in some other way or self-inflicted by proxy.

26.  This leads to consideration of whether in the light of  those  findings
    the appellant would have a well-founded fear of persecution  on  return
    to Sri Lanka.  When the matter was reconsidered by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in April 2012 it was accepted by the Presenting  Officer  that  if  the
    appellant's account were true, he was entitled  to  succeed.   However,
    events have moved on in Sri Lanka and it  is  Mr  Kandola's  submission
    that in the light of the passage of time and  the  further  documentary
    evidence that the appellant's profile is such that he will no longer be
    of any interest to the authorities.  GJ issued in July 2013  held  that
    the focus of the Sri Lankan Government's concern had changed since  the
    civil war ended and that the government's  objective  was  to  identify
    Tamil activists in the diaspora who are working  for  Tamil  separatism
    and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state.  However, if a  person
    was detained by the Sri Lankan security services there remained a  real
    risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring international protection.   The
    Tribunal identified four risk categories.  The only two relevant to the
    appellant are:

    (i)  individuals who are or  are  perceived  to  be  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  are  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation to  post  conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka; or


    (iv) a  person  whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"  list
         accessible at the airport comprising a list of those  against  whom
         there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.


    The CIG confirms at 3.1.4 that if a person is detained, there remains a
    real risk of ill-treatment or harm requiring  international  protection
    if falling within category 1 of GJ.

27.  In respect of evidence arising since the country guidance in  GJ,  para
    6.4.1 of the CIG refers to an Amnesty International Report  2015/16  of
    Tamils suspected of links to the LTTE being arrested and detained under
    the Prevention of Terrorism Act and 6.5.3 to a report in May 2015  that
    at least sixteen  Tamil  men  from  the  Batticola  district  had  been
    arrested at Katunayake International Airport over a period of a hundred
    days after returning from working abroad in Middle  Eastern  countries.
    The International Crisis Group (6.5.5) noted in August 2015 that Tamils
    returning from abroad  continued  to  be  arrested  under  the  PTA  on
    suspicion of old LTTE involvement.  According to some reports many were
    sent to  military  run  rehabilitation  programmes  although  officials
    denied this.

28.  At 6.6.1 there is a reference to  the  US  State  Department's  Country
    Report on Human Rights 2015 referring to credible reports  that  police
    and military forces  abducted,  tortured,  raped  and  sexually  abused
    citizens and the Prevention of Terrorism Act allowed courts to admit as
    evidence confessions extracted by torture.  There is reference at 6.6.3
    to the International Truth and Justice Project which  includes  reports
    of human rights violations and that Tamils with tenuous  links  to  the
    LTTE or low level cadres continue  to  be  targeted  along  with  their
    families.

29.  In the light firstly,  of  the  evidence  that  the  appellant  was  of
    interest to the authorities in 2010 and there was concern about what he
    had been doing in Colombo and whether he might be a suicide bomber  and
    secondly, the further evidence of continuing human rights violations in
    Sri Lanka and the attitude towards those perceived to be  still  active
    in support of the LTTE, I am satisfied to the lower standard  of  proof
    that the appellant would still be at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  on
    return to Sri Lanka from the  authorities  and  accordingly,  that  the
    appeal should be allowed on asylum grounds.

Decision

30.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside as  erroneous  in
    law.  Remaking the decision in the light of the further evidence, I  am
    satisfied to the lower standard of proof that the appellant is entitled
    to asylum.  The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal remains
    in force until further order.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 30 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter




