







UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05383/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 October 2015                    |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A H
                        anonymity direction continued
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding, counsel (instructed by A Seelhoff
Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the "Secretary of State" and  to  the
    respondent as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Iran, born  on  23  September  1981.  His
    appeal against the decision of the respondent  dated  28  May  2013  to
    remove him under s.47 of the 2002 Act  following  the  refusal  of  his
    application for asylum was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in
    a determination promulgated on 1 July 2015.

 3. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  A  Cox
    found that the grounds disclosed an arguable material error of law.  He
    stated that through no-one's fault, the date when the appeal was  heard
    turned out to be a somewhat chaotic day  from  the  point  of  view  of
    listings, with the result that the Home Office Presenting Officer found
    herself servicing two courts.

 4. It appears that there was also some failure of  communication  in  that
    the Judge thought his options were either  to  adjourn  or  to  proceed
    without a presenting officer, whereas the presenting officer was always
    willing and able to proceed, given time to complete her  commitment  in
    the other court room. It was contended that the Secretary of State  was
    deprived of the opportunity of cross examining the claimant with regard
    to various discrepancies said to  exist  in  his  account.  The  appeal
    turned on the credibility.

 5. Judge Cox emphasised in granting  permission,  that  this  was  not  to
    criticise the Judge who acted according to  his  understanding  of  the
    position at the time and also took advice from a Designated Judge,  but
    rather a recognition of the need for fairness for both sides and of the
    fact that the secretary of state had wanted  and  had  arranged  to  be
    represented at the hearing, but the presenting officer, who was in fact
    fully prepared, was prevented from  doing  so  by  the  Tribunal's  own
    administrative problems on the day.

 6. In his determination, the Judge noted that the case came before him  as
    a "float". The assigned presenting officer had another asylum  case  to
    present in a different court.  It  became  apparent  that  for  another
    presenting officer to "read themselves into  the  case"  could  take  a
    considerable time [19]. This is a case that had been adjourned  before.
    He considered that in the interests of justice  the  matter  should  be
    dealt with speedily. He notified the senior Duty Judge, indicating that
    he wished to deal with the case in the absence of a presenting  officer
    because of the logistical problems that had been  created,  through  no
    fault of the presenting officer. It was agreed that he  should  proceed
    with the hearing in the circumstances.

 7. The presenting officer concerned has subsequently provided a  "response
    statement" to the claimant's solicitor's assertion  dated  4  September
    2015. The Rule 24 response opposed the grounds of appeal.

 8. It is asserted in the statement that what took place that day  differed
    significantly from the account put forward by  the  presenting  officer
    who was supposed to present the matter before the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. In the grounds seeking permission to appeal, the presenting officer was
    said to have insisted that she wished to present the case, and  it  was
    requested that the Judge  accordingly  wait  until  she  was  available
    before proceeding.  She  also  produced  what  she  referred  to  as  a
    contemporaneous hearing minute, setting out the chronology.

10. In that note, prepared on 23 June 2015, the date of  the  hearing,  she
    set out 'the confusion' that arose in Court between her  list  and  the
    usher's. There was confusion as to  whether  the  claimant's  case  was
    actually being heard or not. She stated that they were all confused. In
    due course, the usher spoke to the manager to resolve the matter.

11. The presenting officer was informed that the claimant's case was  going
    ahead. She discovered that another Judge was not  coming  in,  so  that
    they had decided to float the cases to  available  Judges.  There  were
    then clashes with start times and the two Judges who were to  hear  her
    cases. When the usher attempted to coordinate these times, she returned
    and told the presenting officer that the Judge had begun the claimant's
    asylum appeal and had made a judicial decision for the case  to  go  on
    without a presenting officer.

12. She stated that she strongly objected and asked the usher  to  let  the
    Judge know that she has been in Court since 9 am and was "very ready to
    go." She did not have the claimant's bundle before her but has used the
    time effectively to read the "reps" bundle so that there  would  be  no
    further delays.

13. She was then informed that the Judge had decided that it  would  go  on
    without a presenting officer. Rather than creating a scene, she decided
    to present another case before another Judge.

14. As part of the Rule 24 response, a witness statement was provided  from
    counsel, who represented the claimant at the hearing. This is dated  31
    July 2015. The Rule 24 response was  received  by  the  Tribunal  on  8
    September 2015.

15. In her witness statement, she asserts that it is not correct  that  the
    presenting officer was "fully prepared" to conduct the appeal. She  had
    told counsel that she did not have a file, or the  appellant's  bundle.
    She had received the refusal letter and asylum  interview  record  that
    morning.  She  states  that  the  presenting  officer  became  "visibly
    irritated" stating that it would be for the Judge to come to a view  on
    whether or not she could proceed on the day.  At  that  point,  neither
    knew whether the case would ultimately be floated out  of  that  court.
    She offered the bundles to the presenting officer, who remained reading
    them in court.

16. Counsel also notes that according to her note and her recollection, the
    presenting officer "did actually state that she was happy for the  case
    to proceed in her absence."  She  said  to  counsel  in  front  of  the
    instructing solicitor's  interpreter  that  she  would  not  manage  to
    prepare the claimant's appeal in  the  time  given  that  she  was  now
    dealing with a second asylum appeal, and that the case would have to go
    ahead without her.

17. When they were called into Court, the  Judge  stated  that  the  appeal
    would proceed and there was no presenting officer ready to present  the
    appeal, and he would not consent to an adjournment.  The  Judge  stated
    that waiting for a presenting officer to  become  available  after  the
    other asylum  appeal  had  been  concluded  could  lead  to  a  further
    adjournment. That accords with her contemporaneous note of the  hearing
    which she has submitted.

18. The Rule 24 response  to  which  I  have  referred  elicited  a  strong
    rebuttal,  dated  30  September  2015,  from  the  presenting   officer
    concerned. In  particular,  she  denies  that  she  had  at  any  stage
    indicated through the usher that she was happy for the case to  proceed
    in her absence. She at no point said this to the usher. Nor did she ask
    for this message to be conveyed to the Judge. Whilst  she  was  in  the
    presenting officer's room where she had been reading,  the  usher  told
    her that the case was going to be heard by the Judge. She assumed  that
    she was being called to attend  the  hearing,  but  was  told  that  "a
    judicial decision" had been made.

19. She strongly objected to  the  usher  explaining  that  she  could  not
    present this case as it is a priority case  and  it  could  not  go  on
    without a representative. Furthermore, she states that  she  had  fully
    prepared the case and had finished 'prepping' the claimant's bundle  to
    include the objective  material.  There  was  no-one  else  apart  from
    herself and the usher who was present at the time.

20. In fact, she instructed the usher to go and tell the Judge that she was
    ready to present the case and that " ... I must present the  case  that
    day." She insisted that the usher tell the Judge the  specifics  so  he
    could understand. She had been in court since 9 am and was prepared and
    ready to present. Each time the usher  returned  with  a  message,  she
    insisted that she had to present the case.

21. Given the decision that had been made, she went to the other  court  to
    present an Article 8 case, and mentioned her concern to  the  Judge  in
    that court.

22. In a fax sent to the Upper Tribunal on 30 September 2015, Ms Savage, as
    the presenting officer, requested an  adjournment  of  the  hearing  as
    scheduled the following day, i.e. on 1 October 2015.

23. In the light of the Rule 24 response, she declared that  the  Secretary
    of State intends to call  the  presenting  officer  to  give  evidence.
    However, as she was not available to attend  the  Tribunal  "tomorrow",
    the Secretary of State requested an adjournment to enable her  to  give
    evidence.

24. In their letter dated 4 September 2015 to the Tribunal, the  claimant's
    solicitors had also stated at paragraph 3 that they proposed to call as
    witnesses on the day of any permission hearing,  both  counsel  and  an
    interpreter. It was also  requested  that  the  presenting  officer  be
    called if the Secretary of State continued  to  maintain  her  position
    regarding the appeal.

25. From the above, it is clearly evident therefore that there  is  a  very
    substantial conflict between  the  accounts  given  by  the  presenting
    officer and counsel who represented the claimant before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

26. Ms Savage pursued her application at the outset of  the  hearing  on  1
    October, that the appeal be adjourned in order to enable the presenting
    officer to  give  evidence.  Mr  Harding  on  behalf  of  the  claimant
    submitted that the secretary of state had had ample time to ensure  her
    availability. No proper  arrangements  had  been  made  to  ensure  her
    presence. In the circumstances, he objected to the adjournment sought.

27. I stood the appeal down for a short period and considered the competing
    assertions in the statements.

28. I gave an extempore decision on return as set out below.

29. I had considered the request for an adjournment but had decided that it
    would not be appropriate in this case to conduct  what  amounted  to  a
    "trial within a trial" in order to resolve what took place on  23  June
    2015 before the First-tier Tribunal.

30. In any event, I would not, on the basis of  the  competing  statements,
    have come to a conclusion that either deponent  had  in  any  way  been
    dishonest. Having stood back and  considered  the  documentation  as  a
    whole, including the problems identified at the hearing  centre  on  23
    June 2015, there was room for genuine misunderstanding.

31. I noted that if the shoe were on the other  foot,  and  the  claimant's
    counsel had been double booked in another court resulting in  the  case
    being  presented  in  the  representative's  absence,  the   subsequent
    dismissal of his appeal would give rise  to  a  genuine  perception  of
    injustice.

32. In this case the Secretary of State has  not  had  the  opportunity  of
    being heard arising from the circumstances that day. I have  no  reason
    to suppose that the presenting officer's assertion that she  was  ready
    and prepared to present the respondent's  case  that  day  is  anything
    other than genuine.

33. In the circumstances, the same perception of injustice arises  in  this
    case. Moreover, it is in the public interest that the case for the Home
    Secretary be advanced and that the  claimant's  version  of  events  be
    tested.  The  appeal,  I  was  informed,  turned  on  the  question  of
    credibility.

34. I therefore found for the reasons referred to that, through no fault of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,   there   has   been   a   procedural
    irregularity.

35. In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I have had regard to the Senior  President's  guidelines  and
    find that this is an appropriate case for the appeal  to  be  remitted.
    The secretary of state has not had a proper opportunity of  having  her
    case fully considered.

36. I accordingly directed that the case  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Taylor  House).  A  complete  re-hearing  will  take   place
    requiring substantial fact finding.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for  a
    fresh decision to be made before another Judge. The date arranged is  2
    December 2015.

    Anonymity direction continued.




    Signed   Date 7 October 2015


    Judge C R Mailer
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
