

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA057232015
      AA057242015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke (Bennett House)           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 May 2016                           |On 23 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                          N.G.L (1) & S.C.A.N. (2)
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:     Ms G. Thomas of Compass Immigration Law Ltd
For the Respondent:     Ms C. Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                  DECISION

   1. The second appellant, born on [ ] 2012, is the minor  dependent  child
      of the first appellant, who arrived in the United Kingdom in  December
      2011 and was admitted as a student with leave to remain until 29  July
      2013. Both are citizens of  Cameroon.   The  first  appellant  claimed
      asylum on 17 February 2014. The second  appellant's  claim  is  wholly
      dependent upon that of her mother and so in this  decision  references
      to the appellant are to the first appellant, as was the  case  in  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The appellant has been granted permission to appeal against a decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever who, by a decision  promulgated  on
      26 November 2015, dismissed her appeal against  the  decision  of  the
      respondent, made on 17 March 2015, to refuse her  claims  advanced  on
      asylum and human rights grounds. The main thrust of the challenge  now
      pursued is that the judge had misunderstood the  evidence  before  him
      provided by the appellant. An important part of the reasoning  leading
      the judge to reach adverse credibility  findings  was  his  conclusion
      that there  was  an  inexplicable  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
      evidence as to whether or not she had attended a demonstration in 2008
      at which she had been arrested and detained. In granting permission to
      appeal, Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald  summarise  the
      grounds as follows:


           "It is said that the judge erroneously concluded that it was the
           appellant's evidence that she had not been arrested in 2008 but,
           according to the grounds, the judge overlooked  the  corrections
           made by the appellant to her witness statement. The  judge  made
           no reference to this evidence and concluded, wrongly,  that  she
           had not been arrested in May 2008. As a result  the  judge  then
           misunderstood the evidence from the  National  Chairman  of  the
           SCNC.


           Furthermore, given the medical evidence, it  is  said  that  the
           judge failed to make a clear finding  on  why  he  rejected  the
           appellant's claimed detention  and  torture  in  2010  which  is
           plainly a material matter. "


   3. The case advanced by the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal  is,
      of course, well known to both parties and summarised  in  considerable
      detail in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal now under challenge.
      It has to be said that the appellant's evidence has been presented  in
      a way that requires some considerable concentration to  understand  it
      correctly. In order to  make  sense  of  that  which  follows,  it  is
      important  to  recognise  that  the  appellant's   evidence   of   her
      experiences in Cameroon discloses an account of two demonstrations  in
      2008, one in May and one in October, as well as one in  October  2010.
      The  appellant's  evidence,  it  is  submitted  on  her  behalf,  when
      correctly understood, is  that  she  was  arrested  at  the  May  2008
      demonstration as well as the October 2010 demonstration but  that  she
      did not attend the demonstration in October 2008.

   4. At paragraph 17 of his decision, Judge Lever observed that:


           "The appellant's claim for asylum is essentially based upon  two
           factors, firstly her involvement with the SCNC for some years in
           Cameroon that involved her detention and ill-treatment  at  some
           point and secondly the fact that she has been  disowned  by  her
           father and family".


      And, having recorded her evidence of being arrested and detained as  a
      result of her participation in a  demonstration  on  1  October  2010,
      during which detention she was raped  by  soldiers,  the  judge  said,
      later at paragraph 24:


           "The issue is whether, when judging  all  the  evidence  in  the
           round and paying careful regard  to  the  medical  evidence  her
           account of detention and ill-treatment in 2010  because  of  her
           SCNC activities is credible and if so whether there is a risk on
           return."


   5. The judge identified a  number  of  difficulties  in  the  appellant's
      evidence. This had to be seen in the context of her being, plainly,  a
      capable and intelligent woman. The judge noted that:


           "... she was educated to university level, gaining a  degree  in
           law from the University of Yaounde in Sao in  2006  and  further
           obtaining a master's degree in business law in 2007...


           The appellant applied successfully  to  come  to  the  UK  as  a
           student in 2011, and entered the UK in December 2011. Her  claim
           for asylum was  only  made  in  2014  over  three  years  later.
           However, the  political  involvement,  detention  and  fears  of
           persecution that allegedly form the basis of  her  asylum  claim
           were events that took place prior to her arrival in the  UK  and
           her lengthy delay in claiming  asylum  needs  to  be  considered
           against that fact."


      The judge noted significant contradiction disclosed in the account  of
      her domestic circumstances as they were described in  her  application
      for entry clearance as a student,  made  on  16  November  2011.  That
      application had failed to disclose that she had  then  one  child  and
      gave also an incorrect address. She had said also that she was  single
      and made no reference to her relationship with her partner who was the
      father of her child. The judge rejected her explanation that  she  was
      not responsible for these errors  because  she  had  paid  someone  to
      complete the application on her behalf because the judge was not  able
      to accept that a person such as the appellant,  a  well-educated  lady
      who was being sponsored by her father to pursue further studies in the
      United Kingdom, would not have personally checked the accuracy of  the
      information set out in her application. The judge noted also that  the
      appellant, who has described having attracted adverse  attention  from
      the authorities on account of her  politically  motivated  activities,
      had been able to obtain a passport on 8 February 2010 on the basis  of
      which she was able to leave  Cameroon  on  11  December  2011  despite
      having been arrested, detained and ill-treated in October 2010.

   6. As we shall see when I examine below the grounds of appeal now pursued
      before the Upper Tribunal, the reasoning  of  the  judge  set  out  at
      paragraphs 27 and 28 of his decision is of central importance  to  the
      challenge to his decision now brought before the Upper Tribunal:


           "It was said by the appellant's solicitor in their letter  dated
           28 April 2014 that the appellant had been arrested in  2008  and
           held for a few hours  following  a  demonstration  implying  her
           involvement. The appellant made no reference to  being  involved
           in  a  demonstration  in  2008  and  indeed  in  oral   evidence
           specifically  stated  that  she  had  not  taken  part  in  that
           demonstration. It is difficult to know therefore the  source  of
           that assertion by solicitors.


           The appellant had her  first  child  with  Stephen  born  on  18
           September 2009. In evidence to the doctor she  stated  that  her
           involvement  with  the  SCNC  was  less  following   the   birth
           (paragraph 18). There is no evidence  therefore  that  up  until
           October 2010 the authorities  had  ever  arrested,  detained  or
           questioned the appellant regarding any alleged SCNC  activities.
           Indeed, there is no evidence that she was known adversely to the
           authorities. Although the appellant claims she had been involved
           in demonstrations in Yaounde, there is no evidence in support of
           that either in evidence given in her interview record or to  the
           doctor. I find no credible evidence therefore in relation to any
           involvement in demonstrations prior to October 2010."


      It should be noted that references to "the doctor" are to  the  author
      of the Medical Foundation report, a 23 page long document  written  by
      Dr Rosemary Lennard containing an extremely detailed  account  of  the
      appellant's experiences, after series of interviews lasting a total of
      9 hours over six days.


   7. The grounds assert that the judge was simply wrong  to  say  that  the
      evidence of the appellant was to the effect  that  she  had  not  been
      arrested in 2008 and that she had not told the doctor who prepared the
      report that she had attended the  demonstration  in  2008.  Ms  Thomas
      submitted that the error fed into the assessment made by the judge  of
      documentary evidence relied upon  by  the  appellant,  which  on  that
      account had been rejected, and into the assessment made by  the  judge
      of the credibility of the appellant's account of the event at the core
      of her claim to be at risk on  return  to  Cameroon,  that  being  the
      claimed arrest and detention in 2010.


   8. The grounds draw attention to the appellant's witness statement and to
      an amendment she made to it at the beginning of the hearing. Paragraph
      12.(a) of that statement, as typed, stated  that  SCNC  demonstrations
      were usually held once a year on 30 September or 1 October  but  would
      be held on other dates if events arose to require that. The  statement
      continued:


           "... However I only attended the 2 that I have  mentioned.  That
           notwithstanding, a proactive activist like myself do  not  limit
           their activities just to such demonstrations but also show their
           commitment to the cause by constantly propagating the  cause  of
           the movement. This is exactly what I was doing  in  2008  during
           supposed national day celebrations to sensitise the students  of
           the truth behind this history.  So  I  did  contribute  in  2008
           despite not attending the demonstration."


      That paragraph, like much of the appellant's written evidence, is  not
      altogether easy to follow because it is not immediately apparent  what
      are the "two that I have mentioned". The amendments, in manuscript are
      to the final sentence which as a consequence now reads as follows:


           "This is exactly what  I  was  doing  in  2008  during  supposed
           national day celebrations to sensitise the students of the truth
           behind this history. So I did contribute in May 2008 despite not
           attending the demonstration, in October 2008."

      In her submissions, Ms Thomas said that the comma  immediately  before
      "October 2008" was inserted in error so that the appellant  is  saying
      that she did not attend the demonstration in October  2008.  She  said
      also that when the appellant said that she  did  "contribute"  in  May
      2008  that  should  be  taken  to  mean  that  she  did   attend   the
      demonstration in May 2008.


   9. That should be read together with the account of events  in  May  2008
      provided by the appellant to the doctor who prepared  the  report.  At
      paragraph 12 of the report:


           "... [the appellant] did not take part in  the  procession,  but
           stood at the end of the march route talking to students as  they
           stopped and fell out of the procession..."


      After which an account is set out of her being arrested  and  detained
      before released about an hour later. Names of those arrested were  not
      taken.


  10. For the respondent, Ms Johnston submitted that the judge was  entitled
      to make of the evidence what he did. She points  to  the  inconsistent
      and contradictory account of events the appellant has put forward.  In
      particular she referred to what had been said at paragraphs  30/31  of
      the witness statement; paragraph 12 of the Medical  Foundation  report
      and what was not said  in  the  SCNC  letter,  all  of  which  I  have
      considered.


  11. Despite that, there is some difficulty with the judge's  understanding
      of the evidence as set out at paragraph 27. It is not hard to see  why
      the appellant considers that in saying that she was not "involved"  in
      the May 2008 demonstration and had not been arrested the judge  had  a
      mistaken understanding of her evidence, even if the judge was  correct
      to say, given that the appellant's own account was that her  name  was
      not taken and there was no formal interview or  investigation  carried
      out that she had not been "questioned" about her  SCNC  activities  on
      that occasion. Further, the grounds assert that in  cross  examination
      the appellant spoke of the encounter  with  police  in  May  2008,  Ms
      Thomas pointing to the contemporaneous note taken by  the  appellant's
      representative at the hearing. There is, though, no mention of that in
      the decision of the judge. Having said that, it is not hard either  to
      have sympathy for the judge as he had to navigate his way through  the
      written evidence that had been prepared in a way  that  seemed  almost
      bound  to  confuse  the  reader.  As  Ms  Johnston  has  pointed  out,
      immediately after the paragraph of the witness statement I  have  just
      set out, speaking of the appellant standing at the end  of  the  march
      route and being arrested when speaking to those "falling out"  of  the
      procession, the appellant said this at 31.12.b of her statement  about
      that very event:


           "... in fact it was not  a  demonstration  at  all.  It  was  my
           personal conviction and initiative to go out and  propagate  the
           cause of the SCNC..."


  12. The significance  of  this  apparent  misunderstanding  is  reinforced
      because  the judge went on to reject as unreliable a letter  from  the
      SCNC Council dated April 2015, relied upon by the appellant in support
      of her claim to be at risk on return, because:


           "... it refers to the appellant being arrested and  detained  in
           May 2008 which again is not the appellant's evidence..."


      Once again, although the written evidence of the  appellant  has  been
      assembled and presented in a clumsy and unhelpful manner,  it  appears
      tolerably clear that the appellant's evidence before the judge was  to
      the effect that she had been arrested and detained in May 2008 and  so
      the judge was not correct to reject the SCNC letter for  that  reason.
      Although he did give another reason for doubting  the  reliability  of
      the letter, being that it made no mention  of  an  arrest  warrant  or
      summons claimed to have been issued in respect of  the  appellant,  it
      cannot be assumed that he would  have  rejected  it  for  that  reason
      alone.


  13. Drawing all of this together, I am persuaded that the judge  proceeded
      upon a mistaken understanding of the evidence given and relied upon by
      the appellant in respect of  events  in  2008  and,  although  he  was
      entitled to  conclude  that  the  central  question  was  whether  the
      appellant had been arrested and detained  in  2010,  his  findings  in
      respect of that were informed by his mistaken  view  of  the  evidence
      concerning the events in 2008. For that reason alone, his decision  to
      dismiss the appeal is  not  a  safe  one  and  so  cannot  stand.  The
      determination of an appeal on the basis of a mistaken understanding of
      the evidence offered is such as to disclose an error of law and it  is
      impossible  to  say  that  such  error  must  necessarily  have   been
      immaterial to the outcome.


  14. A further challenge raised in the grounds  is pursued  by  Ms  Thomas,
      that being a complaint that the judge:


            "fails to make a clear finding on whether  accepts  or  rejects
           that appellant's claimed detention and torture in 2010"


      However, the judge has in fact made a clear finding of  fact  that  he
      did not accept to be true the account of the appellant  that  she  was
      detained and raped by soldiers in 2010, saying at paragraph 38:


           "... when balanced with all of the evidence in  the  round  does
           not lead me to conclude that the totality of evidence points  to
           the detention/rape in October 2010 as claimed..."


      Although, therefore, that ground considered alone  does  not  succeed,
      the finding made is itself infected by  the  misunderstanding  of  the
      evidence relating to the 2008 arrest, discussed above.






Summary of decision:

  15. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law material to  the  outcome
      of the appeal.


  16. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever is set aside.


  17. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent  that  the
      appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.





      Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    19 May 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


