
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05016/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Date Sent                  |
|On 26th October 2011 and 7th August 2013        |On 19th August 2013        |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     H R
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Hooper of Counsel.
                                          Mr J Walsh of Counsel, instructed
                    by Luqmani Thompson & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Tanner.
                                          Mr L Tarlow, Home Office
Presenting Officers




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Monson made following a hearing  on  17th  June  2010  at  Taylor
    House.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on  10th  August  1992.
    He left Afghanistan in April 2006 and claimed asylum in the UK  on  7th
    June 2007 having been encountered in the back of a lorry in  Liverpool.
    On 10th September 2008 he was granted  discretionary  leave  until  9th
    February 2010 due  to  his  age  but  refused  asylum.   The  Appellant
    appealed against the decision to refuse him asylum and his  appeal  was
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 1st December 2008.  On  the
    5th February 2010 he made a further application  for  leave  to  remain
    which was refused on 25th March 2010 and this refusal is the subject of
    the appeal before Immigration Judge Monson.

 3. Immigration Judge Monson recited the  Appellant's  immigration  history
    and recorded that the determination  of  the  first  Immigration  Judge
    although challenged had been found not to contain any material error of
    law.  He cited the case of Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702 and considered
    the additional evidence in support of  the  appeal  before  him.   That
    evidence  consisted  of  statements,  objective  evidence  including  a
    country expert report from Dr Giustozzi dated  25th  May  2010  and  a
    considerable bundle of further medical evidence  and  assessments  from
    the Appellant's social workers.

 4. The Immigration Judge recorded that the "new" medical evidence did  not
    materially  advance  the  Appellant's  case  on  credibility   and   he
    considered that there were two significant alternative possible  causes
    of the mental health problems experienced by the Appellant  other  than
    the cause which he himself advanced, namely the events which took place
    in Afghanistan which preceded his departure to the UK.

 5. The Immigration Judge dismissed the appeal on  asylum  grounds  and  on
    Article 8  grounds.   It  was  conceded  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    established a family life in the UK and the Immigration Judge concluded
    that it would not be disproportionate  to  the  potential  interference
    with his private life were the Appellant to be removed.

The Appellant's Case

 6. The Appellant claimed that his step-uncle, a Shia Muslim fundamentalist
    who was head of the family, worked for the Hizb-e-Wahdat Party and also
    held a position  in  the  government  although  he  believed  that  the
    government was wrong to collaborate with foreign forces.  Approximately
    six months before the Appellant left Afghanistan, his step-uncle forced
    him to begin classes in how to be a strict Muslim and he  was  required
    to distribute leaflets in mosques or  other  public  places  expressing
    opposition to the presence of  foreign  forces  in  the  country.   His
    teachers began to try and brainwash the  class  into  becoming  suicide
    bombers and he and his fellow  classmates  were  encouraged  to  become
    martyrs by using bombs against  foreign  troops.   A  priest  told  the
    Appellant that he was soon going to  be  a  martyr  and  the  Appellant
    informed his mother that he was being groomed to be a  suicide  bomber.
    When she interceded with his step-uncle he beat her, told  her  not  to
    interfere and said that if the Appellant did not  become  a  martyr  he
    would kill him together with his mother and brother.  The  family  went
    to his maternal uncle who took them to Herat on the  border  with  Iran
    and the Appellant was handed over to an agent.  His  mother  said  that
    she and his brother would follow later.  Once they left the country the
    agent became very aggressive and in effect he became the agent's slave.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant's representatives filed extensive  grounds.  Firstly,  it
    was argued that the first Immigration Judge clearly  erred  in  law  in
    respect of whether she had considered the Appellant's  case  as  if  he
    were a minor child notwithstanding that  it  was  recognised  that  the
    Appellant was not granted an order  for  reconsideration  against  that
    determination.  The Immigration Judge in this  appeal  compounded  that
    error by failing to  consider  the  evidence  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant was still a minor at the time of the hearing before  him  and
    he was recollecting events which took place when he was a child of  13.
    The Immigration Judge did not consider the impact of the  complex  post
    traumatic stress disorder on the likely quality of the  evidence  given
    by the Appellant who was still a child.

 8. Secondly, the Immigration Judge failed to consider the Appellant's case
    as at the date of the hearing.  He appeared to focus his attention on a
    future point in time when the Secretary of State might choose to remove
    him.

 9. Thirdly, the Immigration Judge made irrational findings of fact in  the
    light of the detailed evidence from all professionals involved with the
    care of the Appellant when he stated that  there  were  no  substantial
    grounds for believing that the Appellant would retain the vulnerability
    of a child and if there was no prospect of the Appellant being able  to
    live independently at the age of 18, the pathway plan would not provide
    for this objective.  At the date of the hearing the  evidence  recorded
    by the Immigration Judge was that the Appellant was in a  high  support
    semi-independent placement by Lambeth Social  Services  with  overnight
    staff seven nights a week and an additional fifteen hours of one-to-one
    key work support a week.  He had complex  needs  and  required  ongoing
    access to mental health and care services.  There was no indication  in
    the evidence at all that the professionals expected  the  situation  to
    change between the  date  of  the  hearing  and  the  Appellant's  18th
    birthday, which was two months later.

10. With respect to Article 8, the Immigration Judge  failed  to  make  any
    findings of fact in relation to the situation which the Appellant would
    actually encounter if returned to Afghanistan and  separated  from  his
    support network.  He failed to state what parts of the medical evidence
    were accepted and what impact the Appellant's removal would  have  upon
    him were he to be returned to Kabul.  Neither was  there  any  adequate
    consideration of the reliance by the Appellant on the  support  of  his
    brother in the UK  which forms an important aspect of his private life.

11. It was also argued that the Immigration Judge erred in  relying  on  HE
    (DRC) v SSHD  UKAIT  00321  which  was  of  limited  relevance  to  the
    Appellant's case since he had been under the consistent  and  intensive
    care of  mental  health  professionals  in  circumstances  where  those
    professionals have had cause to investigate the veracity of his account
    because they were concerned that the Appellant was a potential risk  in
    the UK.

12. Next it was argued that the Immigration Judge failed  to  consider  the
    objective material adequately.  There was extensive objective  evidence
    submitted by the Appellant in his bundle to which the Immigration Judge
    was specifically directed.  The objective evidence showed that the Hizb-
    e-Wahdat Party was co-operating with  the  Taliban  and  the  strongest
    support base for this wing was Bamyan, the place where the  family  had
    fled to.  The leader of the group  obtained  a  seat  in  the  national
    assembly between 2005 to 2007. He was based in Kabul. The party was the
    main Shiite group aligning itself with the  Taliban  there.   They  and
    other armed groups were forcibly  recruiting  children  mainly  through
    relatives and training them in the manner described by  the  Appellant.
    The Immigration Judge's finding that the Appellant's family  would  not
    become involved with a party supporting the Taliban, as they  had  been
    persecuted by the Taliban in the past, failed to take into account  the
    objective evidence which  demonstrated  that  such  people  did  become
    supporters of the Taliban.

13. Finally, the Immigration Judge failed to consider Rule 395  at  all  in
    the determination which was relevant in itself and also relevant to the
    issue of proportionality.

14. Permission to appeal was granted by Senior  Immigration  Judge  Nichols
    for the reasons stated in the grounds on 23rd July 2010.

Submissions

15. Ms Hooper submitted that the first Immigration Judge  plainly  did  not
    take the correct approach to cases involving children.  She  recognised
    that even if the second Immigration Judge was not entitled to  find  an
    error of law in the unchallenged determination of the first Immigration
    Judge, he was required  not  to  fall  into  the  same  error.   In  AA
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 12 the Court stated that the brief
    and general reference by  the  Adjudicator  in  that  case  was  not  a
    sufficient recognition  of  the  inherent  dangers  in  relying  on  an
    interview  with  an  unaccompanied  minor  child,  and   the   apparent
    unawareness of the  general  prohibition  on  such  interviews  is  not
    remedied by a brief reference to the Appellant's age because it did not
    take adequate account  of  those  dangers.   In  this  case  the  first
    Immigration Judge had relied on a note made  at  the  asylum  screening
    desk which was not even signed or dated nor read back nor  approved  by
    the Appellant. She plainly erred in doing so and the second Immigration
    Judge was similarly wrong to follow her determination.

16. She accepted that the first  determination  was  the  correct  starting
    point for the second Immigration Judge's  determination  but  submitted
    that the second Immigration Judge  was  required  to  assess  the  case
    holistically.  He had set out in his determination the  principles  for
    the determination of  asylum  claims  but  had  made  no  reference  to
    unaccompanied minors, namely that in such cases there  was  a  need  to
    give children the benefit of the doubt and more weight should be  given
    to objective factors.  He simply made a brief  reference  to  the  fact
    that the original Immigration Judge had said that she  had  taken  into
    account the fact that the  Appellant  was  a  minor  and  that  he  was
    suffering  form  mental  health  problems.  But  he  had  given  it  no
    substantive consideration and had not stated  how  the  effect  of  the
    Appellant's age and mental condition related to his assessment  of  the
    findings  of  fact  on  the  evidence  before  him.   Nothing  in   the
    determination recognised that the Appellant was recounting events which
    took place when he was 13, this was  a  point  of  real  importance  as
    recognised by the High Court between R (on the application of)  TS  and
    the SSHD and Northamptonshire Country Council [2010] EWHC 2614  (Admin)
    which emphasised the importance of treating a child as a child.

17. Ms Hooper reminded the Tribunal that the Appellant was a minor  at  the
    date of the hearing and submitted that the Immigration Judge was  wrong
    to base his finding on a future state of  affairs  when  the  Appellant
    would be 18.

18. Thirdly,  Ms Hooper turned to the mental health evidence.  She accepted
    that there was limited evidence before  the  first  Immigration  Judge.
    However, she submitted that the second  Immigration  Judge  was  wholly
    wrong to rely on the case of HE for the proposition that the part which
    psychiatric reports can  play  in  the  assessment  of  credibility  is
    usually very limited indeed.  In that case  there  had  been  a  single
    report from a psychiatrist following a one and a  half  hour  interview
    conducted for the purpose of the hearing.  Here there  was  substantial
    evidence of a high level of involvement by the psychiatric services who
    were concerned that the Appellant might pose a terrorist  risk  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was explicitly considered whether  the  Appellant's
    symptoms were psychotic or auditory hallucinations  stemming  from  the
    reliving of past events.  The psychiatric evidence concluded  that  the
    most likely cause was past events.  The  medical  evidence,  which  had
    never been challenged, in specifically assessing whether the  Appellant
    was a terrorist risk,  was  wholly  differing  in  character  from  the
    evidence in HE.  She relied on the case of Y and Z (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362 which stated  that  care  was  required  where  the
    factual basis of the psychiatric findings is sought to be undermined by
    suggesting that an Appellant might have been exaggerating his  symptoms
    and in the first instance this was a matter for the experts themselves.
     It is  only  if  the  Tribunal  had  good  and  objective  reason  for
    discounting that evaluation that it could be modified  or  disregarded.
    The Tribunal was obliged to give acceptable reasons for  rejecting  any
    such evidence, and there was only one reasonable conclusion open to the
    Immigration Judge which was that the  Appellant  had  been  subject  to
    terrorist training in Afghanistan which had resulted in a diagnosis  of
    PTSD which was so severe that it required involuntary hospitalisation.

19. Next, Ms Hooper submitted that the  Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to
    refer to the objective evidence which was supportive of the Appellant's
    case as outlined in the grounds. The Immigration Judge  had  also  made
    factual errors in paragraph 80 of the determination,  failing  to  take
    into account that the objective evidence gave details  of  exactly  the
    circumstances claimed by the Appellant in the  place  that  the  family
    fled to.

20. Finally, she addressed Article 8.  All the  evidence  from  the  mental
    health professionals was  that  the  Appellant  was  not  fit  to  live
    independently.  It was not open to the Immigration Judge to  find  that
    the situation would be different in two months time when the  Appellant
    turned 18.  There was  no  assessment  of  what  would  happen  to  the
    Appellant if his support structure was removed and he  was  exposed  to
    the difficult conditions in Kabul.

21. Mrs Tanner submitted that the Immigration Judge had rightly  relied  on
    the asylum interview which had been properly  conducted  in  accordance
    with  the  proper  procedures  for  children.   He  did  not  rely   on
    inadmissible evidence but on the evidence from that interview and  from
    his witness statement.  She submitted that there was no  error  in  the
    second Immigration Judge's application of the case of Devaseelan.

22. She argued that the Immigration Judge had correctly taken into  account
    all of the evidence including the medical evidence in the round and was
    entitled to rely on the case of HE as he did.  The mere  repetition  of
    evidence did not make it any more credible.  There  were  a  number  of
    other factors which could have caused  the  Appellant's  mental  health
    problems, for example the treatment which he was subjected to whilst in
    the hands of the agent.  He was entitled to rely on the expert evidence
    of Dr Giustozzi which  was  that  the  Appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to be able to evade pressure from his step-uncle once  he  had
    turned 18 and would not be vulnerable  to  enforced  recruitment  as  a
    suicide bomber.  She accepted that  the Immigration Judge may have made
    factual errors in the  determination  with  respect  to  the  objective
    evidence but submitted that they were not material.

23. By way of reply Ms Hooper maintained that the first  Immigration  Judge
    had relied on the informal note at paragraph 6.2 of  her  determination
    and held it against the Appellant  that  in  that  so-called  interview
    there was no mention at all of the Appellant claiming to be a potential
    suicide bomber.  She submitted that the  expert  had  in  fact  made  a
    distinction in his report between forced recruitment which  took  place
    against the wishes of the family and  forced  recruitment,  which  took
    place against the wishes of the child and his definition, which was the
    latter, was in effect the risk of abduction. She submitted  that  there
    was no evidence that the Appellant's symptoms were caused by  a  trauma
    other than the one  identified  by  the  health  professionals  and  to
    suggest that it was merely speculative.  She  was  concerned  that  the
    Immigration Judge wrote that the Appellant "was perceived as  having  a
    mental health problem"  which  was  not  a  proper  reflection  of  his
    condition.



Consideration of Whether there is a Material Error of Law

24. The Immigration Judge did err in law.

25. Firstly he stated that Ms Hooper's  attack  on  the  first  Immigration
    Judge's approach to the assessment of evidence from a minor was made in
    extensive grounds for reconsideration of her  decision.  The  criticism
    was not upheld and therefore was not a matter which could be  re-opened
    now.  That must be right. The second Immigration Judge was not  hearing
    an appeal against the decision of the first Immigration Judge.  On  the
    other hand the second Immigration Judge was required not to  fall  into
    the same alleged error and himself rely upon inadmissible evidence.  He
    did not mention the note relied upon by the first Immigration Judge and
    therefore did not rely on it directly. However he did  not  demonstrate
    in the determination his awareness of the fact that the  Appellant  was
    recounting events which took place when he was 13  years  old.  Neither
    did he refer to the appropriate guidelines nor to paragraph 352 of  the
    Immigration Rules which relate to the interviewing of children.  Indeed
    there is no recognition in  the  determination  of  the  importance  of
    treating the Appellant at all material times as a child.

26. The Immigration Judge also fell into error  in  his  treatment  of  the
    mental health issues and the psychiatric evidence.  The  mental  health
    evidence in this appeal  was  extensive  and  the  Immigration  Judge's
    conclusion that the fact that the episodes took place was not probative
    of underlying cause, is insufficiently reasoned given the  strength  of
    that evidence and the fact that the health professionals concerned were
    specifically looking at whether the Appellant was himself a risk to the
    UK as a suicide bomber. The clear evidence from a  variety  of  sources
    was that the dissociative episodes experienced by  the  Appellant  were
    brought on by stresses linked to his experiences in  Afghanistan.   The
    strength of the medical evidence is not reflected in the determination.

27. Ms Hooper's criticism of  the  Immigration  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    objective evidence which again is extensive, is also born out.   Whilst
    circumstantial, it is apparently broadly supportive of the  Appellant's
    case.  Moreover  it  seems  that  there  are  factual  errors  in  this
    determination.

28. If the Immigration Judge's conclusions in respect of the credibility of
    the claim are flawed then even if the Immigration Judge was entitled to
    rely on the expert view that the Appellant would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return as a potential suicide bomber recruit, it does have an impact on
    the assessment of the risk to the  Appellant  more  generally,  and  in
    respect of internal relocation and of course is relevant to Article 8.

29. The appeal was adjourned for a rehearing before a panel of  two  Senior
    Immigration Judges.

The Adjourned Hearing

30. After an inordinate and inexplicable delay this matter came  before  me
    on 7th August 2013.

31. At the adjourned hearing the Appellant produced a  consolidated  bundle
    including statements relating to the asylum  claim,  a  country  expert
    report dated May 2010, extensive documents relating to the  Appellant's
    mental health, evidence of his  private  life  and  objective  evidence
    relating to the present situation in Afghanistan.  I also had an up-to-
    date detailed report from  Dr  Bell,  consultant  psychiatrist,  and  a
    skeleton argument produced by Mr Walsh.

32. I heard oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant  who  confirmed  that  the
    contents of his witness statements were true.  He said that he had  not
    had contact with  his  family  since  he  left  Afghanistan.  They  had
    travelled with him to the border  and  told  him  that  they  would  be
    following him but the Red Cross had checked across Europe and had  been
    unable to trace them. He had been in touch with  the  Red  Cross  on  a
    regular basis since 2009.

33. He confirmed that he was continuing to take the medication referred  to
    in the reports, namely an anti-psychotic drug and  an  anti-depressant,
    and was currently under the care of mental  health  professionals.   He
    said that he tried to keep busy and the  therapist  had  helped  him  a
    great deal. He spent his time during the day at college or doing  other
    activities and had no-one to return to in Afghanistan and  he  did  not
    know how his life would be.

Submissions

34. Mr Tarlow did not seek to challenge the Appellant's  evidence  that  he
    had no one in Afghanistan who would be  able  to  support  him  on  his
    return. He relied on the refusal  letter  dated  25th  March  2010  and
    submitted, rather half heartedly that, whilst services  in  Afghanistan
    were not as good as they might be, he would be able to access treatment
    there. According  to  the  latest  medical  report  the  Appellant  was
    presently under the care of his GP. He said  that,  having  acquired  a
    number of skills in the UK would  be  able  to  make  his  own  way  in
    Afghanistan.  The threshold to establish a breach of Article  3  was  a
    very high one and the argument lay in favour of the Secretary of  State
    so far as the proportionality balance was concerned.

  35. Mr Tarlow did not pursue  with  any  enthusiasm  his  submission  that
      services would be available for the Appellant.   Indeed  he  helpfully
      drew the Tribunal's attention to a passage in AK which states that

         "In addition, whilst the overall picture is of aid and humanitarian
         organisations  struggling  unequally  to  deal  with  the  manifold
         problems of the urban poor and ID population and whilst we  do  not
         seek to minimise the significant incidence of physical  and  mental
         health problems and food insecurity, there is  little  evidence  of
         significant numbers of such persons in Kabul suffering  destitution
         or inability to survive at  subsistence  levels.   These  are  cold
         words  for  those  actually  living  in  these  conditions  but  we
         reiterate our opening observation that our task in this case  is  a
         limited  one  of  assessing  country  condition  by  reference   to
         established  legal  criteria,   Article   15(c)   in   particular."
         (paragraph 225)

36. He observed that Afghanistan was clearly struggling to cope and  relied
    upon the country guidance case of AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
    (2012) UKUT 00163 for the proposition that around 60% of the population
    in Afghanistan suffer from mental health problems.

37. Mr Walsh said that he was not going to argue that the Appellant  had  a
    well-founded fear of persecution on return from the Taliban or from his
    uncle but said that the authorities would have an interest in  him  and
    the account of events which he had given of the events  which  referred
    to his departure from Afghanistan  was  plausible.  He  submitted  that
    there would be no prospect of the Appellant being able to access mental
    health treatment  in  Afghanistan  and  relied  upon  the  Respondent's
    evidence in the COIS report of February 2013.  This  Appellant  suffers
    from a severe mental illness and is dependent on anti-psychotic  drugs.
    He took me through the medical evidence in detail  and  submitted  that
    the Appellant's health was extremely  precarious  and  if  the  support
    network which he presently enjoyed was removed he would become very ill
    indeed. The appeal ought to be allowed on Article 3 grounds but if  not
    on Article 8 since the Appellant had been in the UK for a  long  period
    of time, had made significant efforts to integrate here and the UK  had
    put a significant investment in his mental health.

Findings and Conclusions

The Medical Evidence

  38. The Appellant arrival in the UK at the age of 14 in 2007.  He attended
      accident and  emergency  departments  on  various  occasions  and  was
      sectioned under Section 3 of the Mental Heath  Act  and  held  at  the
      Snowfields Adolescence Unit and subsequently transferred to  The  Bill
      Yule Unit Adolescence Secure Unit at the Bethlem Royal Hospital.   The
      senior clinical psychologist who prepared a report  for  the  original
      hearing  said  that  his  presentation  varied  from  threatening  and
      aggressive to withdrawn and catatonic. He has had a number  of  spells
      in the intensive care setting describing auditory  hallucinations  and
      regular dissociative states.

  39. He was an inpatient for about a year, and was discharged  in  February
      2009 and then managed by the mental health services  for  Lambeth  who
      saw him on a regular basis. However, the psychologist noted that since
      his discharge HR continued to present with acute  dissociative  states
      when he became unresponsive, mute and did not initiate  any  movement.
      Since his discharge he attended A&E on many occasions and by  February
      2010 there had been three further inpatient admissions.

  40. A further report was provided by Dr Bradley Hillier in  January  2011.
      HR was asked to complete a trauma symptom checklist and he  scored  an
      overall relatively high  score  with  scores  clustering  on  anxiety,
      dissociative,  depressive   and   sleep   disturbance   subscales   in
      particular.  Dr Hillier diagnosed post-traumatic stress  disorder  but
      said that it was  not  possible  to  exclude  psychotic  illness.  The
      presence of the features which he identified may be  indicative  of  a
      high risk of him developing it in the future. He  scored  particularly
      highly on the dissociative subscale.

  41. At that time HR was taking anti depressant medication Sertraialine and
      the anti-psychotic drug Risperidone.

  42. The latest report is from Dr Bell who interviewed HR in June 2013.  He
      recorded him as saying that he had hallucinations and he heard  voices
      a lot of the time.  Dr Bell said that he saw scars on his  arms  which
      were typical of self-harm.  HR said that he had been  cutting  himself
      and drinking his blood since 2010, the last occasion being  two  weeks
      ago.

  43. Dr Bell said that it was clear that HR suffers from paranoid ideation.
      He said that it was clear that he suffered from a  severe  psychiatric
      disorder and  this  had  been  the  case  at  least  since  his  first
      presentation  in  2008.   A  more  appropriate  diagnosis  than  post-
      traumatic stress disorder would be of chronic traumatised  state.  The
      boundary  line  between  chronic  traumatised  state  and  personality
      disorder is not  clearly  defined  and  it  would  be  appropriate  to
      consider him as suffering from a disorder of  personality  development
      resulting from traumatic  experiences  and  this  in  turn  makes  him
      vulnerable to  psychiatric  breakdown.  He  said  that  he  had  given
      consideration to the possibility  that  HR  was  feigning  psychiatric
      disorder and he felt very confident that this was  not  the  case.  It
      would not be possible to do so over such a long period  of  time  with
      such a consistency  of  symptomatology,  having  seen  many  different
      psychiatrists who had made similar diagnoses.

  44. Dr Bell said that his psychiatric disorder  was  very  highly  context
      dependent which was typical of such cases. Within the bands of certain
      environmental contexts, individuals can be relatively stable  although
      very vulnerable to breakdown. There had been periods in his life  when
      he was relatively stable.

  45. He said that HR clearly had symptoms of psychosis  including  auditory
      and  visual   hallucinations   typical   of   psychotic   states   and
      schizophrenia. On balance he considered that the symptoms were part of
      the combination of personality disorder and traumatised  state  rather
      than being suggestive of schizophrenia but this would need to be  kept
      under review.  HR should be managed by the  appropriate  local  mental
      health  services  and  would  need  regular  review.   Medication  was
      important but the core part of treatment involved the establishment of
      secure,  enduring  and  trusting  relationships  with  mental   health
      personnel who are skilled in their management of  complex  traumatised
      states associated with personality disorder.

  46. Dr Bell said that his diagnosis did not depend on the truthfulness  of
      the  historical  picture  and  was  largely  derived  from  a  careful
      examination of the current mental state and review of records. If  the
      Appellant was found not credible as regards his personal history  this
      would not undermine the diagnosis although it would raise questions as
      to its itology.

  47. It was clear to him that if HR  were  returned  to  Afghanistan  there
      would  be  a  serious  and  rapid  deterioration  in  his  psychiatric
      disorder.   Although  chronologically  an  adult,   because   of   his
      psychiatric illness, he functioned in a regressed  child-like  manner.
      He was an extremely vulnerable young man and easy prey to exploitation
      by others. Disruption to his immediate environmental context would  be
      a potent stressor and the belief that he would be in danger would  act
      as a future potent stressor. The disruption would increase his  degree
      of paranoid ideation to such an extent that he would find it extremely
      difficult to distinguish  between  the  ideation  and  events  in  the
      external world.  Being returned to the place in which he believed that
      he had suffered traumatic experiences would  be  likely  to  have  the
      effect  of  his  becoming  overwhelmed  with  thoughts,  memories  and
      feelings such that he would not be able  to  manage  and  would  be  a
      further cause of his deterioration.   His  risk  of  suicide/self-harm
      would be elevated from mild to moderate to very high.

  48. With respect to medical treatment in Afghanistan, Dr Bell said that he
      did not have expert knowledge but it was  very  highly  unlikely  that
      there would be appropriate psychiatric facilities available  to  treat
      his disorder.  In any event  the  treatment  which  he  needs  is  not
      restricted to medication and involves secure,  enduring  and  trusting
      relationships with mental health personnel. It  was  not  likely  that
      there would be resources available to him.

Evidence of available treatment in Afghanistan

  49. The information as to the treatment  available  to  the  Appellant  in
      Afghanistan comes from the COIS Report and the report of Dr  Giustozzi
      dated May 2010.

  50. Dr Giustozzi wrote as follows:

         "The provision of mental health care in Afghanistan is  almost  non
         existent.  The country's only mental health hospital (Kabul) is  in
         bad  condition  due  to  war  damage  and  lack   of   maintenance.
         Furthermore it lacks equipment.  The  hospital  has  50  beds.   In
         2003 some patients were reported to be permanently chained  to  the
         beds while violent and  schizophrenic  patients  were  confined  to
         darkened cells. In 1998 there were another 44  beds  available  for
         mental health care in the rest  of  the  country  with  specialised
         departments in the hospitals of Jalalabad and Shiberghan but it  is
         not clear how many (if any) are effectively available today.  There
         is a problem of understaffing as many of the already limited number
         of trained mental  health  professionals  have  left  the  country.
         According to the latest World Health Organisation's figures  (2001)
         there are just eight psychiatrists, eighteen psychiatric nurses and
         twenty psychologists in the whole country  and  some  of  them  are
         thought to have actually left the country.   If  we  consider  that
         according to the World Health Organisation about  4,000,000  people
         in Afghanistan suffer from various some of mental  health  problems
         it is obvious that the chances of having access  to  care  for  the
         average Afghan patient  with  mental  health  conditions  are  slim
         indeed.  The opportunities for psycho-social support are almost non-
         existent in Afghanistan mainly because of the extreme  shortage  of
         trained mental health professionals. Although  the  government  had
         made mental health one of its priorities in the  reconstruction  of
         the health system, in practice little was done not even in terms of
         starting training programmes for  mental  health  specialists.  The
         situation led a doctor to define the mental health care  system  of
         Afghanistan  as  almost  non-existent  during  a  briefing  to  the
         Congress of the US.  Counselling  is  available  in  small  clinics
         thinly distributed around the country.  Even in Kabul they are  few
         and  far  between  and  attending  them  could  seriously   disrupt
         attending school or presence at the job place.

         During one of my trips to Afghanistan in 2006 I visited two chemist
         stores in Kabul and asked  about  the  availability  of  specialist
         treatments of various kinds.  In the stores which  I  visited  such
         drugs were not available.  International  medical  sources  confirm
         that specialist drugs such as psychotropic drugs are  reported  not
         to be available.  The mental health hospital in Kabul receives only
         $100 worth of medicines monthly for 2,500 patients."

  51. The other source of information comes from the COIS report.  It quotes
      Radio  Free  Europe/Radio  Liberty's  article  "Little   Succour   for
      Afghanistan's Mentally Ill" 3rd May 2012  which states:

         "Among the mental illnesses affecting Afghans most are  depression,
         ....  anxiety  and  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  but   precise
         statistics are difficult to pin  down.   One  frequently  mentioned
         figure estimates about 60% of the population is  affected  by  some
         form of mental illness.  Other  estimates  range  from  around  15%
         range to as high as 98%.

         Even one of the leading authorities in the field of  mental  health
         in Afghanistan, the World Health Organisation, expresses scepticism
         and attempts to quantify the problem.  Ahmad Assadi,  communication
         and advocacy officer of the WHO in Afghanistan,  cites  a  lack  of
         recorded data and mental health professionals to properly  diagnose
         patients. In an email he simply says that Afghans are in great need
         when it comes to mental  healthy  treatment.   That  conclusion  is
         difficult to dispute. With some 30,000 inhabitants Afghanistan  has
         only a handful of mental health treatment facilities nationwide."

  52. COIS also reports the Huffington Post article of 16th May 2012 on  the
      use of "shrines" to treat the mentally ill.   It  says  that  for  300
      years shrine keepers have been  taking in the mentally ill.

         "The prescription is drastic. Those sent here are  chained  to  the
         walls of the small windowless rooms. They are fed only water, black
         pepper and bread. They are not allowed  to  bathe  anything  except
         their faces, hands and feet. Speaking with  others  is  prohibited.
         If a shrine keeper decides their situation is improving they may be
         unchained for a few minutes so they can pray, walk outside or visit
         a proper bathroom."

The asylum claim

53. The Appellant says that his father was killed in 1999 with his  brother
    and his step- uncle, a Shia Muslim Fundamentalist then became  head  of
    the family.  About six months before the Appellant left Afghanistan  he
    was forced to begin attending classes in how to be a strict Muslim  and
    required to distribute leaflets in mosques expressing opposition to the
    presence of  foreign  forces  in  the  country.   With  others  he  was
    encouraged by the teachers to become a martyr by  using  bombs  against
    the foreign troops. When he informed  his  mother  that  he  was  being
    groomed to be a suicide bomber  she  arranged  with  the  help  of  his
    maternal uncle, for his departure from Afghanistan.

  54. The evidence is that this is an Appellant who suffers from  delusions.
      Indeed he told Dr Bell that he saw  the  jihadi  school  teachers  and
      hears them telling him things.  He also saw a friend in the  room  who
      used to come with him to the madrassa.  Dr Bell noted that during  the
      interview he often looks towards the (empty) chair where he could  see
      Abass in a perplexed way.

  55. The overwhelming probability therefore is that the Appellant's account
      of being sent to the madrassa and  being  prepared  to  be  a  suicide
      bomber is an expression of his illness and not  grounded  in  reality.
      There is no reasonable degree of likelihood that  the  authorities  in
      Afghanistan would perceive him as of any interest to them at  all.  He
      would not be at risk for a Convention reason.

The Article 3 claim

56. The undisputed evidence in this case is an Appellant who  has  suffered
    and continues to suffer from complex and severe mental health  illness.
    According to Dr Bell he was continuing to cut himself and drink his own
    blood only two weeks ago. Although Dr Bell said that he  was  presently
    under the care of his GP  it  is  clear  that  this  is  not  a  proper
    characterisation of the treatment which he presently received. HR  told
    me and I accept that in fact he is currently under the care of a number
    of mental health professionals.

  57. HR's unchallenged evidence is that he had made efforts since  2009  to
      trace his family through the Red Cross and whilst he did  not  provide
      documentary evidence he was clear that it existed. I accept  that  had
      his representatives told him to produce it he would have been able  to
      do so.  He has no one to return to in Kabul.

  58. The unchallenged evidence from Dr Bell is that, on return, HR's mental
      state  would  rapidly  deteriorate.  The  only  evidence   about   the
      availability of medication comes  from  Dr  Giustozzi  whose  evidence
      again was not challenged, that psychotropic drugs are not available.

  59. The COIS Report refers to the State's main facility  to  treat  mental
      health patients in Kabul  as  having  a  capacity  to  treat  just  60
      patients at a time.  It refers to the use of  traditional  treatments,
      employing mullahs to cure people by means of exorcisms  and  sufferers
      turning to holy shrines. The report refers to a  private  hospital  in
      the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif which  has  modern  equipment  and
      which over the past  twelve  months  has  treated  964  patients  from
      different provinces,  but  there  is  no  realistic  prospect  of  the
      Appellant, unaided, being able to go there.

  60. Appellants will only succeed in medical cases on Article 3 grounds  in
      very exceptional circumstances since the suffering is not  the  result
      of an intentional act or omission of a  state  or  a  non-state  body.
      Article 3 cannot be relied upon to address the  disparity  in  medical
      care between the UK and Afghanistan and the fact that  an  Appellant's
      circumstances would be significantly  reduced  is  not  sufficient  in
      itself to give rise to a breach.

  61. This  Appellant  has  a  significant  history  of  self-harm  and  the
      unchallenged view of the psychiatrist is that his removal would  bring
      the elevation of risk to very high. However this is not the basis upon
      which I conclude that  he  meets  the  exceptional  and  extreme  test
      required in the assessment of whether  there  would  be  a  breach  of
      Article 3 by his removal. What brings his case within  the  protection
      of Article 3 is the likely treatment that he  would  get  rather  than
      that which he would be denied. There is  a  causal  link  between  his
      removal and the treatment which he would suffer as a person  with  his
      degree of illness without family support to protect him.

  62.  The Appellant  would  be  returning  to  Afghanistan  without  family
      support, as an adult, but one who functions in a childlike manner.  He
      is dependent on anti-psychotic medication which would not be available
      to him.  It is therefore extremely likely  that  his  psychosis  would
      rapidly  deteriorate.  He  would  suffer  from  visual  and   auditory
      hallucination.  It is most unlikely that he would be  able  to  access
      appropriate care.  The  likely  treatment  would  be  the  traditional
      treatment, including the shrines referred to in the  Respondent's  own
      evidence i.e. being chained to walls in the dark, being given  minimal
      food and prevented from bathing and speaking to others.   It  was  not
      argued that would not be a breach of Article 3.

Decision

  63. The original decision has been  set aside. It is  remade  as  follows.
      The Appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds.  It is  allowed
      on human rights grounds.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


