
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/05398/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On September 3, 2015                 |On September 7, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   mr MKBM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ficklin, Counsel, instructed by Broudie, Jackson
                    & Cantor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Libya. The appellant  first  entered  the
    United Kingdom as a student on December 13, 2009 with  leave  to  enter
    until December 30, 2010. He applied for further  leave  to  remain  but
    this was refused and on July 20, 2011 he claimed asylum. The respondent
    refused this claim on June 30, 2014 under paragraph 336 HC 395  and  at
    the same time took a decision to remove him under  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  July  17,  2014  arguing  that  if
    returned he was at risk or persecution and relocation was not possible.
    He also sought to remain under Articles 2, 3 and 8 ECHR.

 3. The matter came before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  De  Haney
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on October 13, 2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on November 3, 2014  he  refused  the  asylum  and
    humanitarian claims but allowed the  appeal  under  Article  15(c)  and
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on  November  5,  2014  and  on
    November  14,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly   gave
    permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that the  FtTJ
    had erred by failing to give adequate reasons for  departing  from  the
    country guidance case of AT and others (Article  15c:  Risk  Categories
    Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC).

 5. The appellant's representative filed a Rule 24  response  and  accepted
    the FtTJ's findings were deficient and invited the Tribunal to list the
    matter for a full re-hearing of the Article 15(c) claim with each party
    being permitted to file further evidence as to the current situation in
    Libya.

 6. This case originally came before me on  March  26,  2015  and  on  that
    occasion the representatives invited me to find  an  error  in  law  in
    respect of the Article 15c issue  and  to  adjourn  the  matter  for  a
    further mention date on the basis that AT and others (Article 15c: Risk
    Categories Libya) CG [2014] UKUT 318 (IAC) was supposed  to  be  before
    the Court of Appeal on April 30,  2015  and  further  country  evidence
    would have to be served due to  the  fluid  circumstances  existing  in
    Libya.

 7. The appellant's representative on that first  occasion  suggested  this
    appeal could form the basis of a further country guidance  case  but  I
    indicated that more information would  have  to  be  submitted  to  the
    appropriate senior Judge before any decision could  be  taken  on  that
    submission. Upper Tribunal Judge Allen indicated on July 28, 2015  that
    there was no need to list this appeal as a country  guidance  case  and
    the matter has now been listed before me for disposal today.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 8. I was handed a  large  bundle  of  documents  that  contained  numerous
    reports, case law and a skeleton argument.  Mr  Ficklin  confirmed  the
    appellant was not in attendance and he was authorised to deal with this
    matter in his absence.

 9. Mr Ficklin indicated that he would be inviting me to  depart  from  the
    existing country guidance decision of AT and he would  be  arguing  the
    respondent had failed to identify any safe method of return  and  there
    was a tangible risk of indiscriminate violence.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Harrison relied on the existing Foreign Office Policy on travel  and
    submitted that whilst there were currently no enforced returns to Libya
    this was not the same as saying there  was  a  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence to the appellant. As an employer, the respondent had  to  have
    regard to employees' safety bearing  in  mind  they  would  be  foreign
    nationals in uniform in a  foreign  country.  Although  there  were  no
    flights to Libya  from  the  United  Kingdom  this  did  not  mean  the
    appellant could not fly back to Libya as it  was  possible  to  fly  to
    another country and then a connecting flight could be taken to  a  city
    in Libya. Voluntary returns are taking place on  a  regular  basis  and
    whilst no route had been identified he submitted the evidence submitted
    on behalf of the appellant was not sufficient to allow the Tribunal  to
    depart from the country guidance decision of AT.

11. Mr Ficklin adopted his skeleton argument and submitted:

      a. I should depart from the country guidance decision  of  AT  because
         the evidence provided demonstrated that the matters  considered  in
         July 2014 were different from the current position.

      b. An appeal under Article 15(c)  has  to  be  considered  as  at  the
         current date.

      c. There was clear evidence that there were no  international  flights
         into  Libyan  and  the  main  airports  formerly  utilised  by  the
         respondent were now closed (Tripoli International airport closed in
         August 2014 and Benghazi airport closed in  May  2014).  There  was
         evidence of regular air strikes on airports  and  these  airstrikes
         ultimately led to  the  last  foreign  airline,  Turkish  airlines,
         ceasing operations in January 2015 when missiles landed around  the
         airport  30  minutes  after  a  flight  left.  Whilst  there   were
         functioning airports none of these were under the  control  of  the
         internationally recognised  government  save  for  the  airport  at
         Bayda.  However, the fact  all  airports  were  vulnerable  to  air
         strikes meant there was a real risk of serious harm to civilians.

      d. There was no method to return the appellant to Libya and bearing in
         mind the Tribunal in AT were considering the position when  Tripoli
         International airport was open he submitted  that  I  could  depart
         from the earlier findings as long as I was satisfied  there  was  a
         real risk of indiscriminate violence.

      e. Accordingly, returning the appellant to Libya by plane was  neither
         feasible nor possible and even if a flight via Tunisia was arranged
         there was still a real risk that the plane could be  struck  during
         an air strike.

      f. The fact the respondent claimed there were voluntary returns was of
         no significance.

      g. The only other method of returning the appellant was  overland  and
         it was only possible to travel into Libya from  certain  areas.  If
         the appellant were returned to Tunisia  he  would  have  to  travel
         through areas controlled by the Tuareg militia and the  Libya  Dawn
         Militia Alliance- such travel was contrary to foreign office advice
         and there was evidence contained in the appellants bundle that  the
         population as  a  whole  were  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence. The UNHCR had not altered its position that were set  out
         in December 2014. Various militia were carrying out  indiscriminate
         violence and there  was  no  way  of  returning  to  Libya  without
         travelling through a contested area.

      h. Libya had 434,000 internally displaced  persons  and  he  submitted
         that  based  on  the  numbers  that  had  left  Libya  this  figure
         represented 10% of the population.

      i. The threshold of risk was lower than the threshold  for  Article  3
         ECHR and if the appellant cannot return  because  of  the  risk  of
         indiscriminate  violence  then  he  was  entitled  to  humanitarian
         protection.

      j. The Court of Appeal made clear in J1-v-SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  279
         that it was unlawful for the respondent to delay making a  decision
         on return. The respondent had failed to identify any proposed route
         to return the appellant.  The  respondent  cannot  wait  until  the
         conflict was over to identify a route. If the respondent wishes  to
         return the appellant she must set out how  their  return  would  be
         possible. To merely say we are unsure how the  appellant  would  be
         returned is unlawful.

      k. In the circumstances the appellant's  appeal  under  Article  15(c)
         should be granted.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

12. I am solely concerned  with  an  appeal  under  Article  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC).  All  of  the  appellant's  other
    appeals have been previously dealt  with  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    including his applications for asylum, Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

13. Although the respondent  has  yet  to  issue  the  appellant  with  the
    appropriate leave under Article 8 ECHR Mr Harrison, on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, assured me that this would be done  when  this  appeal  had
    been concluded.

14. I have been assisted by the appellant's representatives  who  submitted
    an extremely detailed bundle of country evidence  and  in  reaching  my
    decision I have had full regard to that evidence.

15. The current situation in Libya is described by both representatives  as
    "fluid' because the situation on the  ground  changes  as  one  faction
    gains or regains control of areas. However,  before  an  assessment  of
    this appeal can be undertaken it is necessary to  understand  what  the
    Tribunal has to consider and the approach it must take when looking  at
    this issue.

16. Mr Ficklin has included a number of relevant cases in  the  appellant's
    bundle  and these cases include Sufi and Elmi v UK  (Applications  nos.
    8319/07 and 11449/07), Elgafaji v. Staatssecretaris  van  Justitie, C-
    465/07 and AMM and others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;
    FGM) [2011] UKUT 445.

17. Article 15(c)  of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  ("the  Qualification
    Directive") defines serious harm within the Directive as:

         "serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person  by
         reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
         internal armed conflict."

  18. The Court of Justice of the European Union ("CJEU") gave  judgment  in
      Diakit� (Case C-285/12) in which it was held that:

         "on a proper construction of Article 15(c) of Directive 2004/83, it
         must be acknowledged that an internal armed  conflict  exists,  for
         the purposes of applying that provision, if a State's armed  forces
         confront one or more armed groups or if two or  more  armed  groups
         confront each other. It is not necessary for that  conflict  to  be
         categorised as 'armed conflict not of an  international  character'
         under international humanitarian law; nor is it necessary to  carry
         out, in addition to an appraisal of the level of  violence  present
         in the territory concerned, a separate assessment of the  intensity
         of the armed confrontations, the level of organisation of the armed
         forces involved or the duration of the conflict."

19. The CJEU has highlighted the 'exceptional situation' needed for Article
    15(c) to apply to civilians generally. In Elgafaji v.  Staatssecretaris
    van Justitie, C-465/07 at paragraph 37, the Court made clear that, for
    this to be the case-

         '[...] the degree of  indiscriminate  violence  characterising  the
         armed conflict taking place ... [must reach] such a high level that
         substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a  civilian,
         returned to the relevant country or, as the case  may  be,  to  the
         relevant region, would, solely on account of his  presence  on  the
         territory of that country or region, face  a  real  risk  of  being
         subject to the serious threat referred  in  Article  15(c)  of  the
         Directive.'

20. The level of violence has to be assessed by its quantity as well as  by
    its quality. There can be no  doubt  that  a  substantial  quantity  of
    violence is a necessity without which subsidiary protection  shall  not
    be granted. However, defining the threshold of Article 15(c) is  not  a
    simple matter of analysing quantitative data. Three  principles  govern
    this assessment:

      a. First, the approach must be  holistic  and  inclusive.  Courts  and
         Tribunals  must  take  into  account  a  wide  range  of   relevant
         variables.

      b. Second, Courts and Tribunals  should  not  limit  themselves  to  a
         purely quantitative analysis  of  figures  of  civilian  death  and
         injuries  etc.  The  approach  must  be  qualitative  as  well   as
         quantitative. When  assessing  quantity  and  quality,  courts  and
         tribunals  should  bear  in  mind  the  likelihood  of   unreported
         incidents and other uncertainties.

      c. Third, building on the case law, Courts and Tribunals  should  look
         in  particular  to  see  what  the  evidence  tells  us  about  the
         indicators of situations of violence and conflict (the following is
         intended as a non-exhaustive list):

          i. The ECHR  'Sufi  and  Elmi  criteria':-  the  parties  to  the
             conflict and their  relative  military  strengths  and  regard
             should be had to methods and tactics of warfare applied  (risk
             of  civilian  casualties);   type   of   weapons   used;   the
             geographical scope of the fighting (localised  or  widespread)
             and the number of civilians killed, injured and displaced as a
             result of the fighting.

         ii. The ability or lack of it by the State to protect its citizens
             against violence (where practicable, it will assist to set out
             the various potential actors  of  protection  and  to  address
             their actual role)/the degree of State failure).

        iii. Socio-economic conditions (which should include assessment  of
             economic  and  other  forms  of  assistance  by  international
             organisations and NGOs).

         iv. Cumulative effects of long lasting armed conflicts.

21. AT and Others was promulgated in July 2014  but  is  based  on  country
    evidence up to and including November 2013. The Tribunal stated-

      a. There were limited enforced returns at the time  but  what  returns
         took place went via Tripoli International airport  using  scheduled
         airlines.

      b. Checkpoints had more than one purpose with the militia  using  them
         to charge protection money, searching for drugs or alcohol as  well
         as checking who was actually  passing  through.  Not  everyone  was
         stopped as evidenced  by  the  personal  evidence  of  one  of  the
         experts. Road travel had improved throughout 2013 and  it  was  now
         possible to travel by car throughout most of  the  country  despite
         there being the possibility of harassment from militias.

      c. The airports of Tripoli and Benghazi were for the  most  part  safe
         with little immediate danger flying into them or  transiting  them.
         At the time  numerous  international  carriers,  including  British
         Airways, Alitalia,  Air  France  and  Lufthansa,  operated  with  a
         reasonable regularity.

22. Mr Ficklin's submitted it was no longer possible to fly direct to Libya
    from the United Kingdom and even if an indirect flight was taken  there
    was a risk that the plane could be struck  by  a  missile  due  to  the
    ongoing fighting.

23. The Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office's  (FCO)  latest  travel  advice
    advises caution to people travelling to Libya but precautionary  travel
    advice in relation to a  relatively  newly  post-revolutionary  country
    which  is  "awash"  with  arms  is  advice  I  would  expect  from  any
    government.  This  does  not   mean   that   returning   Libyans   need
    international  protection.  The  FCO  advice  is  targeted  at  British
    citizens considering visiting a country where fighting continues.  That
    situation, Mr Harrison argues, is different  to  the  situation  facing
    returnees who are being returned to their home country.

24. Mr Ficklin argued that Libya has changed since the Tribunal in  AT  and
    Others considered the risks and even if the appellant could safely  fly
    back to Libya or travel overland to Libya he would then face a tangible
    risk from travelling within the country. Mr  Ficklin  submits  it  must
    appropriate to review the conclusions in AT and Others given  in  light
    of the fact the country evidence is almost two years old and a lot  has
    changed since that case was heard.

25. Having considered the material placed before me I accept  the  decision
    of AT and Others should be further considered in light of  the  passage
    of time and the new evidence.

26. Whilst control of Libya may have altered since AT and Others the actual
    position remains the same in the sense that no single group has overall
    control of the country. When the Tribunal considered  the  position  in
    2013/2014  it  concluded  that  central  government  had  struggled  to
    maintain authority and had to rely, to a greater or lesser  extent,  on
    various  militias  to  undertake  certain   security   functions   that
    traditionally fell within a government's sole remit. Today, the country
    is run by various  militias  including  Libya  Dawn  Militia  alliance,
    Toubou militia, Tuareg militia, IS allied groups, Ansar-al-Sharia,  the
    incumbent government and other jihadists. The groups with  the  largest
    control are the incumbent government and Libya  Dawn  Militia  alliance
    who seized power of Triploi and surrounding areas  from  the  incumbent
    government after July 2014.

27. Mr Ficklin  argued  that  this  separation  of  power  in  Tripoli  was
    something that placed people at risk. However, this very same  argument
    was argued by both him and his co-counsel before the Tribunal in AT and
    Others. The Tribunal at that time concluded that the fractured state of
    the country did not give rise to a breach of Article 15(c)  and  stated
    at paragraph [72]-

         "...  The  situation  currently  in  Libya  is  that  of  a  highly
         decentralised state in which the primary sources of protection  are
         localised, through family and tribe. In  these  circumstances,  and
         given the need to take a factual approach, we  are  satisfied  that
         there is a general  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the  ordinary
         citizen."

28. The Tribunal in AT and Others from paragraph [86]  onwards  made  clear
    that although  different  factions/groups  ran  various  parts  of  the
    country this did not mean a person would be at risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence simply by travelling from one part of the country-

         "86 ... Depending on the facts, for the reasons we have  given,  we
         consider that it is in the main viable for a person to be  able  to
         travel to another area to seek safety.

         89 ... Dr George's  written  evidence  was  that  in  recent  years
         tribalism, whilst still important, has become less significant than
         it had been in the past. He goes on to state that while  particular
         tribes have traditional territories where  they  are  the  dominant
         element in the population, most if not all Libyan communities  have
         a populace that is at least to some extent mixed.  In  the  largest
         cities a significant proportion of the population never belonged to
         any tribe."

29. The Tribunal concluded at paragraph [211]-

         "... we are able to conclude on the evidence before us that a claim
         to international protection is unlikely to succeed  simply  on  the
         basis of the risk of travel to any particular area of Libya,  again
         quite apart from the question of internal relocation. Area specific
         evidence would have to be adduced which establishes such a risk."

30. Mr Ficklin argues the position on the ground has changed and  that  the
    guidance in AT and Others is no  longer  good  law.  Mr  Ficklin  quite
    properly drew my attention to what had been happening in  Libya  and  I
    have considered all of the evidence including reports  from  UNHCR,  UN
    Reports and newspaper articles.

31. The UNHCR report (pages 30 to 55 of the appellant's bundle)  considered
    the position on returns to Libya in November 2014. That  report  is  of
    course now some 10 months old  but  the  report  in  reality  tells  us
    nothing different from what the Tribunal had been told  twelves  months
    earlier. The report makes clear there has been damage or injury  caused
    to services,  airports,  hospitals  and  civilians  but  all  this  was
    happening when the Tribunal considered the position in  2013/2014.  The
    fighting may be in different places and involve  different  groups  but
    the events are similar to that facing the Tribunal in  2013/2014.  This
    report along with other documents highlight increased  risks  based  on
    political affiliation or nationality but the  First-tier  tribunal  has
    already rejected any increased risk for this appellant. The  number  of
    internally displaced persons has increased but the Tribunal in  AT  and
    Others had to deal with this problem, albeit on a  smaller  scale.  The
    UNHCR recognised that despite the ongoing  violence  some  institutions
    continued to operate.

32. In August 2014  Amnesty  International  (page  56  of  the  appellant's
    bundle)  called  upon  the  warring  factions  to  stop  indiscriminate
    shelling in August 2014 in both Tripoli  and  Benghazi.  However,  such
    shelling was mirrored in reports presented to the Tribunal  in  AT  and
    Others albeit the names of the towns affected may  have  changed.  Such
    actions, whilst condoned, do not automatically give  rise  to  a  claim
    under Article 15(c).

33. There is no  doubt  there  has  been  an  increased  intensity  to  the
    hostilities with the different groups continuing  to  try  to  exert  a
    larger control although a lot of the groups'  activities  is  targeting
    people based on their tribal affiliation or presumed allegiances but in
    considering this risk to the appellant I have to consider his situation
    based on the findings of fact made by the First-tier Tribunal about his
    claim. The appellant's asylum claim  was  rejected  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and no challenge was made to those  findings.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found the appellant did not have a profile  that  would  place
    him at risk.

34. The Tribunal made clear in AT and  Others  that  it  was  possible,  in
    practical terms, for a male to relocate to another area of  Libya,  for
    example Tripoli or Benghazi, particularly if he had  tribal  or  family
    connections there. I remind myself that the First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that the appellant's two sisters continued to live in Tripoli  and  his
    parents intended to return. Although Mr Ficklin has submitted  a  large
    number of reports none of these suggest that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to travel within  Libya.  I  acknowledge  there  are  heightened
    tensions in Libya  but  these  very  same  tensions  existed  when  the
    Tribunal in AT and Others considered the situation.

35. Accordingly, whilst I accept Libya  is  not  a  country  the  appellant
    desires to return to (an  in  light  of  his  successful  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR he will not) I am satisfied that the material  submitted
    does  not,  after  careful  consideration,  alter  what  the   Tribunal
    previously found in relation to conditions on the ground.

36. Mr Ficklin argued no safe route of return has been  identified  by  the
    respondent and he forcefully argues that the respondent is both  unable
    to return failed asylum seekers or identify an actual route of  return.
    He pointed to the fact major airports, such  as  Tripoli  International
    airport and Benghazi airport, remain shut to airplanes and have done so
    since July and May 2014 respectively. No foreign airline has flown into
    into Libya since January 2015 when Turkish airlines ceased  flights  to
    Misrata because of security concerns.

37. This situation has to be contrasted  with  the  conditions  facing  the
    Tribunal in AT  and  Others  because  at  that  time  there  were  both
    scheduled flights to Libya and enforced  returns  taking  place  albeit
    enforced returns were on a limited basis.  According  to  the  evidence
    submitted to the Tribunal there were 11 unescorted returns  to  Tripoli
    between January 2011 and May 2013 whereby the travel arrangements  were
    made by the Home Office, there were 11 enforced  returns  between  June
    and August 2013 by flight to Tripoli using scheduled airlines and there
    were  three  enforced  escorted  returns  since  August  2013;  one  in
    September 2013 and two in October 2013.

38. The situation has changed since At and Others. No foreign  airline  has
    flown into Libya since January 2015. Flights into Libya are in the main
    from Tunisia using an airline  that  is  effectively  state  owned.  Mr
    Ficklin submitted that the airline could not provide any safeguards but
    despite a large bundle of country evidence there was no  evidence  that
    identified any ongoing incidents or risks to people using that airline.
    The fact the airline continued to fly suggested both a use and  a  need
    for the flights. Neither party provided any evidence as to  the  amount
    of flights taking place or the regularity of  those  flights  but  both
    agreed flights were taking place.

39. Mr Ficklin submitted that the Libyan airline, being state owned,  would
    take  risks  to  ensure  Libya  had  access  to  the   outside   world.
    International commercial  airlines  have  chosen  for  operational  and
    security reasons not to fly to Libya but this does not mean there is  a
    risk of indiscriminate  violence.  Different  factors  would  govern  a
    foreign airline's decision to fly into Libya.

40. There is ongoing fighting taking place but reports of recent attacks on
    airports are limited. An airstrike on  Mitiga  airbase  in  Tripoli  in
    November 2014 reveals an area near the runway was hit  and  flights  to
    that airbase were temporarily suspended but later  resumed  (See  pages
    124-125 of the appellant's bundle).  There  were  reports  of  separate
    airstrikes on both Zintan and Mitiga airports in April 2015  but  there
    were no casualties during either attack.

41. Mr Ficklin argues that anyone flying to Libya  would  be  at  risk  but
    having considered all of the evidence I am satisfied that whilst  there
    have clearly been some attacks on areas  near  to  the  airports  these
    incidents are fortunately few and far between. There is  no  regularity
    to such incidents and the absence of reports of such incidents  is  not
    something I can overlook. I am not satisfied the level of risk  on  the
    ground reaches the required level to amount  to  a  breach  of  Article
    15(c).

42. Mr Ficklin's argument is that  the  respondent  has  no  proposals  for
    returning people  to  Libya.  He  submits  simply  saying  "he  can  be
    returned" is insufficient.

43. The Court of Appeal  in  HH  (Somalia)  v  SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426
    concluded that if the route or method of return is unknown,  the  court
    or tribunal may in  appropriate  cases  leave  this  matter  for  later
    decision by the Secretary of State. If the Secretary of State fails  to
    address the matter properly, the claimant's remedy is by way of  making
    a fresh claim or bringing judicial  review  proceedings.?The  court  or
    tribunal cannot, however,  delegate  to  the  Secretary  of  State  the
    resolution of any  material  element  of  the  legal  claim  which  the
    claimant has brought before that court or tribunal for determination.

44. Mr Ficklin invited me to find that the respondent's failure to identify
    a safe route of passage meant that the appellant would be at  risk  and
    he referred me to the decision of J1-v-SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 279.  Elias
    LJ stated-

         "106. ... questions of the risks arising from the route  of  return
         are quite distinct from  the  question  whether  in  principle  the
         asylum seeker would be safe in his home territory.  Frequently  the
         route of return is unknown at the time when the  asylum  status  of
         the applicant is being considered because removal  directions  have
         not been set, and the court cannot then engage  with  the  question
         whether the method of return of itself poses an  unacceptable  risk
         to the applicant. SN Iraq (referred to by Jackson  LJ  at  para  51
         above) is such a case, and other cases to like effect include GH  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1182 and
         Gedow v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ
         1342. As Jackson LJ points out, they are not cases where the courts
         are relying on any undertaking from the Secretary  of  State;  they
         are cases where the route, and therefore the  risks,  are  not  yet
         known and cannot be assessed. Nor is the court  delegating  to  the
         Secretary of State the right to make a  decision  relevant  to  the
         question whether the  applicant  should  in  principle  be  granted
         refugee status or leave to remain on human rights grounds."

         108. This principle was again confirmed in the most recent
         authority on route of return, HH, in which the Court of Appeal held
         that where safety on return is an issue raised by the applicants,
         the court should determine it. Sedley LJ, giving the judgment of
         the court (Sedley, Smith and Elias LJJ), after considering various
         route of return cases, including GH and Gedow, to which I have
         referred, observed (para 58):

             "... in any case in which it can be shown either directly or
             by implication what route and method of return is envisaged,
             the AIT is required by law to consider and determine any
             challenge to the safety of that route or method."

         109. The court noted in this  regard  that  the  intention  of  the
         Qualification and Procedures  Directives  (EU  instruments  dealing
         with the position of refugees) appears to be that the Secretary  of
         State should make a  decision  on  entitlement  to  refugee  status
         within a reasonable time of the application  being  made.  This  is
         inconsistent  with  accepting  the  general  undertaking  from  the
         Secretary of State that he or she will not remove the asylum seeker
         until it is safe to do so. Moreover, the court in  HH  went  on  to
         express the provisional view, obiter, that if there is a real issue
         on safety of return, the Secretary of State should engage with that
         question and identify what the proposed route will be  so  that  it
         can be challenged on appeal.

         110. ... It is not now legitimate to deny  an  applicant  leave  to
         remain in this country, if  only  for  a  limited  period,  on  the
         grounds that an undertaking of the Secretary of State  will  ensure
         that his or her safety is not put at risk.

         113. In my view, therefore, the  route  of  return  cases  are  not
         directly relevant to the issues before us ... The question here  is
         whether, in the determination of  the  primary  issue  whether  the
         appellant would  be  at  risk  on  return  to  Ethiopia,  SIAC  has
         wrongfully delegated the determination of part of that question  to
         the Secretary of State. I am satisfied that it has, and that if  it
         had asked itself whether at the time of its decision the  appellant
         could be safely returned, the only  possible  answer  was  that  he
         could not."

45. Mr Harrison's position and that of the respondent has always been  that
    the appellant is not at risk from anyone upon  return.  The  respondent
    cannot identify a specific  route  that  enforced  returns  would  take
    because no returns are currently being undertaken. I am satisfied  that
    this position is not the same as the position facing the Court in J1.

46. On the facts of J1 SIAC found  that  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    detention and interrogation and given Ethiopia's record on human rights
    there would be a real risk he would suffer torture or ill-treatment but
    based on an undertaking/agreement found returning him would  not  be  a
    breach  of  his  human  rights.  The  Court  of  Appeal  rejected   the
    undertaking  argument  because  there  was  an  actual  risk  to   that
    appellant. Those facts have to be compared to the facts of this current
    appeal in which both the respondent and the First-tier  Tribunal  found
    the appellant would not be at risk on  return.  The  rejection  of  his
    claim under Article 3 ECHR and asylum have  not  been  challenged.  The
    respondent in this case has always stated that having lost those claims
    he could return and it is his choice  whether  that  is  "enforced"  or
    "voluntary".

47. There are currently functioning airports in Libya namely Zuwara, Zintan
    Misrata, Triploi Mitiga and  Beida  Al  Abraq  airports.  He  lived  in
    Tripoli and Mitiga airport is the  airbase  operating  in  Tripoli.  My
    findings on risk at the airport are set out above.

48.  In  considering  whether  the  appellant  would   face   a   risk   of
    indiscriminate violence I have considered all of the evidence served in
    this appeal. I have taken as my starting  point  the  findings  of  the
    Tribunal in AT and Others and I have  then  considered  the  additional
    evidence that post dates that decision and that includes not  only  the
    reports on fighting but also the fact the numbers of displaced  persons
    has increased. However, his account of what  he  claimed  happened  was
    rejected by the  Tribunal  and  no  appeal  was  brought  against  that
    decision. His sisters remain in Tripoli and his evidence to the  First-
    tier Tribunal was his parents were considering returning as well.  This
    appellant therefore has both family and a home to return to and  unless
    a risk indiscriminate violence is identified his appeal must fail.

49. The  issue  ultimately  is  the  safeness  of  his  return  and  having
    considered all of the above including Mr Ficklin's skeleton argument  I
    am satisfied that the additional evidence, post AT  and  Others,  would
    not lead to a breach of Article 15(c) and consequently the decision  of
    AT and Others remains good law and I dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee has been paid.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
