
IAC-FH-CK-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05704/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 4 March 2015                      |On 12 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                      QZ
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Young, Legal Representative, Overseaslink Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this case is from China.  He is a Roman  Catholic  and
    so was his family.  I need not go into detail because it is accepted on
    behalf of the Secretary of State that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in
    dealing with his appeal did not take into account properly the evidence
    that was before him in relation to whether the appellant  had  come  to
    the adverse notice of the authorities.  Essentially  it  was  his  case
    that he had attended an unregistered church and that can,  and  in  his
    case he said did mean that he was wanted by the authorities and that is
    indicated by a wanted poster.

2.   Essentially there was doubt raised as to whether he was  even  a  Roman
    Catholic and there were questions asked in interview in an endeavour to
    test whether he had sufficient knowledge  of  Christianity  to  justify
    that finding.   Essentially  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was  not
    impressed with the appellant as a witness and did not  accept  that  he
    had come to the adverse notice of the authorities.  He  also  indicated
    that even if he had there was no reason why he should not relocate.

3.   It is, as I say, accepted that that adverse finding in relation to  the
    appellant was not justified in all  the  circumstances.   Whether  that
    will mean that he does qualify for asylum  or  humanitarian  protection
    will have to be considered in due course.   We  say  that  because  the
    Secretary of State has accepted in all the  circumstances  that  it  is
    desirable that there should be a reconsideration on the basis of taking
    fully into account the evidence in relation to whether  he  indeed  had
    come to the adverse notice of the authorities.

4.    We  expressed  considerable  doubts  as  to   whether   in   all   the
    circumstances that  would  have  made  a  material  difference  to  the
    decision which rejected his asylum  claim.   We  should  say  that  the
    appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8, essentially because of the position of his partner and child
    but that finding has not been the subject to any  cross-appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State, so that will stand.

5.   In all the circumstances, having regard to the concession made  by  the
    Secretary of State, we will remit this case to the reconsidered on  its
    facts so far as the asylum claim is concerned by a First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  It is  obviously  desirable  we  think  that  it  should  be  a
    different judge from the judge who decided the  case,  the  subject  of
    this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 4 March 2015

Mr Justice Collins
