
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05476/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 November 2015                  |On 23 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                   K S W K
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Target-Parker, Counsel
For the SSHD:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



      1. I have anonymised the appellant  because  he  has  made  an  asylum
         claim.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who claimed  asylum
         in the United Kingdom on 2 December 2014.   This claim was  refused
         by the SSHD on 16 March 2015 for reasons  set  out  in  a  detailed
         letter of that same date.

Court documents

      2. At the time that his asylum claim was refused the appellant had not
         provided the SSHD with court documents from  Sri  Lanka  concerning
         him.  These documents were provided by the  appellant's  solicitors
         in late May / early June 2015.  It is  important  to  set  out  the
         nature of these documents, which include a letter from a Sri Lankan
         lawyer, Mr Enanyake, to the appellant's  solicitors  dated  25  May
         2015.  This also attached a document stating that Mr Enanyake is  a
         life member of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.  The  letter  from
         Mr Enanyake states that a case has been filed against the appellant
         at Colombo Magistrates Court and attaches  a  number  of  documents
         that appear to emanate from that court.  Each of these documents is
         a copy (not an original) and contains a stamp from the court with a
         date of 21 May 2015.  The relevant documents are summarised below.
          i. A document that appears to have been sent by the police to the
             court on 19 December 2015 reporting the anti-state actions  of
             the appellant and requesting an arrest warrant for him.
         ii. A document dated 21 December 2012 from the court in  which  it
             states that it issues a warrant of arrest and orders that  the
             warrant  be  sent  to  the  Controller  of   Immigration   and
             Emigration.
        iii. A warrant of arrest for the appellant issued  on  21  December
             2012 by the court;
         iv. A document from the court which provides a trial start date of
             21 December 2012.

Procedural history /  legislative  framework  relevant  to  verifying  court
documentation

      3. This evidence was provided very late and a hearing before the First-
         tier Tribunal due to take place on 4 June 2015 was adjourned  as  a
         result of this.

      4. At that hearing Counsel for the appellant relied  upon  a  skeleton
         argument, which invited the SSHD to make enquiries so as to  verify
         the documentation  said  to  be  at  the  core  of  his  claim  for
         protection.  Reliance was placed upon PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2014]
         EWCA Civ 2011.  This is an important decision where  documents  are
         relied upon in Sri Lankan asylum appeals.  Fulford LJ held:
             "29.      Instead, the jurisprudence referred to above does no
             more than indicate that the circumstances of particular  cases
             may exceptionally necessitate an element of  investigation  by
             the  national  authorities,  in  order  to  provide  effective
             protection against mistreatment under article 3  ECHR.  It  is
             important to stress, however, that this step  will  frequently
             not be feasible or it may be unjustified or  disproportionate.
             In Tanveer Ahmed the court highlighted the cost and logistical
             difficulties that may be involved, for instance because of the
             number of documents submitted by some  asylum  claimants.  The
             enquiries may put the applicant or his family  at  risk,  they
             may be impossible to undertake because of the prevailing local
             situation or they may place the United Kingdom authorities  in
             the  difficult  position  of  making  covert  local  enquiries
             without  the   permission   of   the   relevant   authorities.
             Furthermore, given the uncertainties  that  frequently  remain
             following attempts to establish the reliability of  documents,
             if the outcome of any enquiry is  likely  to  be  inconclusive
             this is a highly relevant factor.  As  the  court  in  Tanveer
             Ahmed observed, documents should not be  viewed  in  isolation
             and the evidence needs to be considered in its entirety.
             30.  Therefore,  simply  because  a   relevant   document   is
             potentially capable of being verified does not mean  that  the
             national authorities have an obligation  to  take  this  step.
             Instead, it may be necessary to make an enquiry  in  order  to
             verify the  authenticity  and  reliability  of  a  document  -
             depending always on the particular facts of the case - when it
             is at the centre of the request for  protection,  and  when  a
             simple  process  of  enquiry  will  conclusively  resolve  its
             authenticity and reliability (see  Singh  v  Belgium  [101]  -
             [105]).  I  do  not  consider  that  there  is  any   material
             difference in approach between the decisions in Tanveer  Ahmed
             and Singh v Belgium, in that in the latter case the Strasbourg
             court simply addressed one of the exceptional situations  when
             national   authorities   should   undertake   a   process   of
             verification.
             31. In my  view,  the  consequence  of  a  decision  that  the
             national authorities are in breach  of  their  obligations  to
             undertake  a  proper  process  of  verification  is  that  the
             Secretary of State is unable thereafter to mount  an  argument
             challenging the authenticity of the relevant documents  unless
             and until the breach is rectified  by  a  proper  enquiry.  It
             follows that if a  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
             overturned  on  appeal  on  this  basis,  absent  a   suitable
             investigation it will not open to  her  to  suggest  that  the
             document  or  documents  are  forged  or  otherwise  are   not
             authentic.
             32. Finally, in this context it is to be emphasised  that  the
             courts are not required to order the  Secretary  of  State  to
             investigate particular  areas  of  evidence  or  otherwise  to
             direct her enquiries. Instead, on an appeal from a decision of
             the Secretary of State it is for the court to  decide  whether
             there  was  an  obligation  on  her  to  undertake  particular
             enquiries,  and  if  the  court  concludes  this   requirement
             existed, it  will  resolve  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
             sustainably discharged her obligation (see  NA  (UT  rule  45:
             Singh V Belgium) [2014] UKUT 00205 IAC). If court finds  there
             was such an obligation and that it was not discharged, it must
             assess the consequences for the case."

Enquiries undertaken by the SSHD

      5. No doubt in light of PJ the SSHD decided to conduct checks  in  Sri
         Lanka.  In a letter dated 18 June 2015 the SSHD indicated that  she
         had conducted checks regarding the arrest warrant i.e. (iii) above.
          No explanation has  been  provided  as  to  why  checks  were  not
         undertaken regarding the other documents ((i), (ii), (iv) above) or
         the bona fides of Mr Enanyake and his enquiries with the court,  or
         with the court itself. The SSHD's letter attached  a  documentation
         verification report (DVR) dated 12 June 2015 which  concluded  that
         the arrest warrant was not genuine.  This was based upon a visit by
         an entry clearance assistant (ECO) at the British  High  Commission
         in Colombo to  the  Terrorist  Investigation  Department  (TID),  a
         branch of the Sri Lankan state that investigates terrorism.  It  is
         asserted by the ECO that the officer-in-charge said that the arrest
         warrant was not genuine for three reasons.

FTT hearing

      6. All of the above information was available at  the  hearing  before
         Judge Shimmin  on  23  September  2015.   Judge  Shimmin  was  also
         provided with a copy of PV.  Importantly,  Judge  Shimmin  outlined
         the issues identified at the beginning of the hearing [33].  First,
         in relation to the  appellant's  sur  place  activities,  the  SSHD
         accepted that the appellant had started a Sri Lankan website in the
         UK but did not accept that anti-regime articles were posted on  it.
         Second, the  SSHD's  representative  also  "conceded  that  if  the
         appellant was found to be credible in respect of  the  warrant  for
         his arrest then he would be at real risk of serious harm on  return
         to Sri Lanka".

FTT findings

      7. It is clear from the issues in dispute outlined  by  Judge  Shimmin
         that the authenticity of the court documentation formed the  centre
         of the  appellant's  request  for  protection  in  respect  of  his
         activities in Sri  Lanka  (i.e.  his  non  sur  place  activities).
         Indeed  the  SSHD  conceded  that  the  genuineness  of  the  court
         documentation was determinative of the asylum  appeal.   The  judge
         attached limited weight to Mr Ekanayake's letter [49] and the court
         documentation generally [50].  The judge had serious concerns about
         the wisdom of the SSHD approach the TID as  that  might  place  the
         appellant at risk but decided in this  case  that  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities would simply see the appellant's attempts as a means to
         bolster an asylum claim [54].

      8. The judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  court
         documentation was not credible and the appellant  did  not  publish
         any anti-state material on his website.

      9. The appellant has appealed the judge's findings with permission.

Hearing before UT

     10. At the beginning of the hearing I indicated a preliminary  view  to
         both representatives to the effect that the judge had erred in  law
         in his  analysis  of  the  SSHD's  enquiries  regarding  the  court
         documentation in light of PV and  in  his  approach  to  the  court
         documentation.  Mr Harrison agreed that the  judge  had  materially
         erred in law in  failing  to  direct  himself  to  and  follow  the
         guidance set out in PV, such that the decision should be set  aside
         and remitted de novo to the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of law discussion

     11. I am entirely satisfied that Mr Harrison was correct to concede the
         appeal for the reasons he  provided.   The  judge  simply  did  not
         address the issues raised in PV.  He was obliged to do  so  in  the
         circumstances of this case.  It was accepted by both  parties  that
         the authenticity of the court documentation played a  determinative
         role in the protection claim.

     12. The judge failed to address the question of whether the SSHD was in
         breach of her duties to undertake a proper process of verification.
          This is a case in which the SSHD clearly accepted she had  such  a
         duty and sought to undertake enquiries in  Sri  Lanka.   There  has
         however been no explanation why those enquiries were restricted  to
         the arrest warrant.  The arrest warrant was  one  in  a  series  of
         court documents that were provided by a Sri Lankan  lawyer.   There
         has been no explanation why the ECO did not check  with  the  court
         whether  these  were  genuinely  issued   documents.    They   were
         purportedly stamped by that court.  The judge  was  correct  to  be
         concerned about the enquiries made with the TID [54].  The  obvious
         source to check was the court yet there was a failure  to  do  this
         without any explanation.

     13. The judge attached little weight to the letter from the Sri  Lankan
         lawyer without providing adequate reasoning for this.  Contrary  to
         the judge's finding there was mention of a trial date in the  court
         documents.  Further the SSHD did not appear to doubt the bona fides
         of the lawyer, just the arrest warrant.

     14. Both representatives agreed that the key question for the judge was
         whether  the  court  validly  issued  the  four  documents  I  have
         summarised above.  The judge has dealt with that  pivotal  question
         briefly.  He has indicated that because he was only  provided  with
         copies that he attaches limited weight to them.   No  consideration
         has been given to the lawyer's role in obtaining the  documents  or
         the possibility that the court may retain the original.

     15. The court documents lie at the centre of the appellant's protection
         claim and it was incumbent  upon  the  judge  to  provide  adequate
         reasoning as to why they were falsely prepared.  He  has  not  done
         so.  He has not even addressed  the  reasons  offered  in  the  DVR
         regarding the warrant (which appear to me difficult to follow).

Remittal

     16. Both representatives agreed that the decision needs  to  be  remade
         completely.  I agree.  The judge considered his adverse credibility
         points cumulatively [55] and it  cannot  be  said  that  errors  in
         approach to the court documentation have  not  infected  the  other
         credibility findings.

     17. Both parties agreed with me that given the nature and extent of the
         factual findings that need to be remade, this should be done in the
         First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant
         Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature and extent  of
         the factual findings required in remaking the decision, and I  have
         decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier
         Tribunal.



Decision

     18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

     19. The appeal shall be remade by First-tier Tribunal de novo.

Directions

     20. Both parties accepted that further enquiry was necessary and agreed
         the following directions:
             (1) The appeal shall be  remade  de  novo  by  the  First-tier
             Tribunal sitting in Manchester (TE: 2.5hrs) on the first  date
             available.  Sinhalese interpreter necessary.
             (2) A key issue to be determined is whether or not the Colombo
             Magistrate's Court in Sri Lanka genuinely issued the documents
             set out above at para 2.  This is because it  is  accepted  by
             the SSHD that if it did the appellant has a well-founded  fear
             of persecution because of an imputed political opinion.
             (3) Before 31 December 2015 the appellant's  solicitors  shall
             file and serve:
                  (a)  a detailed original letter / email from Mr  Ekanayake
                  which clearly outlines the steps that have been  taken  to
                  confirm that documents (i) to (iv)  above  were  genuinely
                  issued by the  court  and  which  addresses  the  concerns
                  identified in the DVR;
                  (b)   clear  supporting  evidence  that  Mr  Ekanayake  is
                  recognised  as  a  practicing  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka  and
                  authorised as such.
             (4) Before 12 February 2016 the SSHD shall file  and  serve  a
             response to the above information together  with  any  written
             evidence setting out the further enquiries in relation to  all
             the court documentation available, undertaken in Sri Lanka.
             (5) 28 days before the hearing date the appellant  shall  file
             and  serve  a  comprehensive  indexed  and  paginated   bundle
             including all evidence relied upon.
             (6) 14 days before the hearing  the  SSHD  shall  provide  her
             response if necessary to any further evidence relied  upon  by
             the appellant.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 November 2015
