


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05567/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Liverpool                           |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 16th August 2017                          |On: 27th September 2017      |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson,  Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson
                       and Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born in  1983.    He  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Birrell)  to
    dismiss his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  him
    protection.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"






    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant claimed to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for
    reasons of his imputed political opinion in Iran.  The historical basis
    of that claim was that in November 2013 he  had  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of  the  authorities  who  now  believed  him  to  have  some
    association with the banned Kurdish group the KDPI.


 4. The claimed circumstances were that the Appellant had  been  driving  a
    work car in the border region between Iraq and Iran. He was employed by
    a private company which was subcontracted to the state-run Ground Water
    Company and he regularly drove in that area.  He  was  contacted  by  a
    friend who asked if he could give him, and two other men, a  lift  from
    the border to Sar Pol E Zahab (a town in Kermanshah province,  not  far
    from the border). The friend told the Appellant that these men had come
    from Iraq.  The Appellant agreed and picked the men  up.  The  car  was
    later stopped at a checkpoint, the men were searched and were found  to
    have incriminating materials including documents bearing the emblem  of
    the KDPI.  The  three  passengers  were  all  arrested.  The  Appellant
    managed to escape arrest by claiming that he had simply picked the  men
    up at the side of the road. As he was driving a water  board  car,  and
    had denied knowing the men, the police let him go, having taken a  note
    of his details.  When the Appellant  returned  to  his  office  he  was
    informed by his boss that the Etelaat had been looking for him, and had
    taken  his  personal  laptop,  which  had  been  on  his  desk.     The
    Appellant's boss asked him to wait at the office and not  go  anywhere.
    The Appellant became afraid because he knew that there was material  on
    the laptop that linked him to the KDPI; he was not  a  member  but  had
    developed a sympathy for the cause whilst at university.  He  left  his
    workplace and went to a friend's house. About one - two hours  later  a
    neighbour called him to tell him that the Etelaat had been at his home.
    The Appellant knew he had other material there. The  security  services
    arrested his father and brother.  He left Iran that night.


 5. The Appellant further relied on his sur place  activities  in  the  UK,
    which he claimed further put him at risk. He  had  contacted  the  KDPI
    shortly after he arrived in Manchester. He has attended meetings and at
    least one protest. He has kept in touch with members of  the  group  in
    the UK.

 6. The Respondent had rejected the entire claim for want  of  credibility.
    The Appellant had then appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was  promulgated  on  the  18th
    January 2017. In summary, the Tribunal  did  not  find  the  historical
    account to be proven to the standard of reasonable likelihood.  It  did
    not consider it credible that the Appellant would  agree  to  give  the
    three men a lift without making any enquiries into what they  had  been
    doing in Iraq. Nor was  it  credible  that  the  men  would  have  been
    carrying incriminating materials when it was obvious that they would be
    stopped at a checkpoint, given the 'zero  tolerance'  attitude  of  the
    Iranian authorities to the KDPI.  Nor for that reasons was it  credible
    that the police would have arrested the three passengers  and  not  the
    driver. The claim that the authorities very  soon  after  attended  the
    Appellant's workplace and seized his laptop was inconsistent with their
    apparent indifference at the checkpoint. As to the laptop the  Tribunal
    noted the evidence that it was left unsecured, even though it contained
    incriminating materials.   It did not seem likely  that  the  Appellant
    would leave his personal laptop at work in  those  circumstances;  when
    asked to explain why it was there at all he could  give  no  reasonable
    explanation.

 8. As to his sur place activity  the  Tribunal  noted  a  tension  in  the
    evidence. The Appellant had said that he had developed a  sympathy  for
    the group at University in Iran but had not become involved because  of
    the inherent dangers. He had arrived in the UK  in  December  2013  and
    although there was no such obstacle to his becoming more involved here,
    he did not contact them for approximately a  year.   Three  letters  of
    support from various sources within the KDPI were given  little  weight
    as they were vague, appeared to be  in  standard  format  and  did  not
    substantiate anything that the Appellant had said about events in Iran;
    nor could any of the writers speak to the bona fides of the Appellant's
    claim to be a genuine political supporter of the group.    The Tribunal
    considered whether it was reasonably likely that any of the Appellant's
    claimed activities in the UK could have come to the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities.  There was nothing to  suggest  that  any  of  the
    activity had been reported  online,  and  it  was  not  clear  why  the
    Iranians would have any information  on  the  attendees  of  a  protest
    outside the UK Supreme Court. This was minimal  level  activity  and  a
    cynical attempt to bolster a claim.


 9. The appeal was thereby dismissed.




    The Appeal


10. Permission was refused by First-tier  Tribunal  but  was  granted  upon
    renewed permission by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on the 5th June 2017
    who considered in arguable that Judge Birrell erred in her approach  to
    credibility: it is arguable  that  the  judge  wrongly  considered  the
    appellant's  actions  as  not  credible  when  she  was   in   practice
    considering whether they were plausible or not". The grounds  are  that
    the Tribunal erred in:


              i) Failing to take material matters into account;


             ii) Impermissible speculation;

            iii)  Raising  new  matters  without  giving  the  Appellant  an
                 opportunity to respond;

             iv) Failing to consider submissions  made  on  the  Appellant's
                 behalf;

              v) Failure to apply the country guidance/consider  submissions
                 made.


    Discussion and Findings


    The Credibility Findings


11. I deal first with the challenge to the credibility  findings  about  a)
    whether the Appellant would have given the  men  lifts  without  making
    enquiries as to what they were doing/where  they  were  going  etc,  b)
    whether the men would have risked carrying incriminating materials on a
    road in that area, c) whether the police would have let the  driver  of
    the vehicle go in such circumstances and d) whether the Appellant would
    have left his personal laptop, containing illegal material unsecured at
    his workplace. Mr Nicholson made  detailed  submissions  about  why  he
    vehemently disagreed with these findings; pressed to identify an  error
    of law he settled with a failure to take relevant matters into account.
    Those matters were a) that people do give each other lifts and b)  that
    young people "do not think" about whether  it  is  advisable  to  leave
    their personal technology lying around.   It is further said  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  speculated  about  the  degree  of  incriminating
    material  found  on  the  passengers  and  the  extent  to  which   the
    police/Etelaat would have considered  this  a  serious  matter.  In  Mr
    Nicholson's submission "there was no reason why the checkpoint officers
    would not have let A go".


12. The grounds place reliance on the fact that Judge Lever, who  dismissed
    an earlier appeal in June 2015, did not consider it to be "particularly
    startling" that people give each other lifts.   The grounds contend  it
    is in fact perfectly normal, and suggest that this is  particularly  so
    in Kurdistan. Had Judge Birrell rejected as incredible the notion  that
    the driver of a car might give  someone  else  a  lift,  a  rationality
    challenge might have been made out. But that is not what she found. She
    found that  in  these  circumstances  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    Appellant would  give  a  lift  to  two  complete  strangers  -  albeit
    introduced by a friend - who had just  crossed  the  border  from  Iraq
    without querying who they were and what they had been  doing  in  Iraq.
    This  is  all  said  to  have  taken  place  in  Kermanshah,  an   area
    characterised  by  three  things:  illegal  activity  (eg   smuggling),
    political opposition to the Iranian state (Kurdish nationalism) and for
    those reasons a high presence of Iranian security  personnel  (such  as
    the checkpoints that feature in this account).   Judge Birrell made her
    findings in that context: see paragraph 41 of  the  determination.   It
    was a finding open to  her  that  cannot  be  impugned  on  rationality
    grounds.


13. I would add that it is somewhat surprising that the  grounds  highlight
    the findings of Judge Lever, the full text of which reads: "on the face
    of it there is nothing particularly startling in  the  concept  of  the
    Appellant providing a lift to a friend and others. However,  there  are
    circumstances in  this  case  which  render  those  initial  assertions
    lacking in credibility".   Judge Lever went on to explain very  clearly
    why he considered the account not to be credible, given the  particular
    context: his reasoning foreshadows that of Judge Birrell.  Contrary  to
    the suggestion in the grounds, no error in his approach in this  regard
    was found by the Upper Tribunal: Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Harris set
    Judge Lever's decision aside for procedural impropriety.  These  issues
    were then clearly known to the Appellant and his  representatives,  and
    if there  was  an  answer  to  them,  there  was  in  the  remaking  an
    opportunity to advance it.

14. Similarly I can find no error in Judge Birrell's findings on the laptop
    and on whether the men would be carrying KDPI material.  Judge  Rintoul
    is correct to note  that  these  were  plausibility  points,  and  upon
    detailed consideration I find that it was open to the Tribunal to reach
    those negative findings. The country  background  material  before  the
    Tribunal was not in issue. Both parties agreed that the  repression  of
    the Kurdish people in north western Iran is such that  any  association
    with the KDPI is likely to lead to persecutory ill-treatment.  That was
    the context in which Judge Birrell  evaluated  the  likelihood  of  the
    actors in this account risking discovery. The  passengers  in  the  car
    could have simply avoided checkpoints on the  main  road  by  taking  a
    route over the mountains; the Appellant could have left his  laptop  at
    home. Mr Nicholson submitted that the Judge failed to take  account  of
    how a younger generation behave. He gave the example of a young  person
    who routinely leaves his phone or ipod lying on the  front  seat  of  a
    car. Were this a 16 year old in Manchester City Centre  then  he  might
    have had a point. It was not. It was an educated adult  well  aware  of
    the consequences of  discovery  [paragraph  41]  in  an  atmosphere  of
    intense state surveillance. The Appellant was unable to explain why  he
    decided to take his personal laptop to work, or more particularly to do
    so knowing that it contained material that could land him  in  jail  or
    worse.


15. Finally, on this matter it  is  submitted  that  it  was  impermissible
    speculation on Judge Birrell's part to assume that the  KDPI  materials
    in the possession of the passengers would obviously have given rise  to
    problems, or that the police officers who stopped the  car  would  have
    viewed the possession of such material as serious.  I find it  hard  to
    understand this submission in light of the  agreed  country  background
    material. See for instance page 31 of the Appellant's bundle, at 2.3.3:
    "the authorities have no tolerance  for  any  activities  connected  to
    Kurdish political groups and those involved are targeted for  arbitrary
    arrest, prolonged detention, and  physical  abuse...those  involved  in
    Kurdish political activities also face a high risk  of  prosecution  on
    vague charges such as "enmity against God" and "corruption on  earth"".
     In the context of  this  material  I  Judge  Birrell's  findings  were
    plainly open to her.

16. The grounds submit that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  failing  to
    consider  Mr  Nicholson's  submission  that  the  Appellant's  pro-KDPI
    activities should have been weighed in the  balance  in  assessing  his
    historical account, since they supported his claim to be a  sympathiser
    of the cause. This ground has  no  merit  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, it was nowhere part of the Appellant's case  that  he  chose  to
    give those men a lift, or left his laptop at work,  because  he  was  a
    KDPI sympathiser. In fact he expressly denies knowing that  his  friend
    had anything to do with the organisation. Second, Judge  Birrell  finds
    that the sur place activity relied upon is entirely cynical.



    Risk on Return

17. There are two limbs to the  challenge  in  respect  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of risk on return. First  it  is  said  that  the
    Tribunal erred in failing to recognise that this Appellant  would  give
    rise to "particular concern" and so be likely to endure ill-  treatment
    during questioning upon return to Tehran: SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:
    failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC). Second, issue is
    taken with the findings in that country guidance  case,  and  with  the
    First-tier Tribunal's failure to address the  alleged  lacunae  in  its
    conclusions.


18. As to the first limb, I cannot find any basis upon which Judge Birrell,
    on the findings she made, could have found  that  the  Appellant  would
    give rise to any "particular concerns" to the Iranian security services
    on return. Like the appellant in the country guidance case he is a Kurd
    being returned to Iran having made a failed asylum claim.

19. As to the second, the  grounds  set  out  detailed  criticisms  of  the
    decision in SSH and HR, asserting that the Tribunal failed  to  address
    evidence before it, that the decision is unclear  and  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal failed to give guidance. As I understand  this  critique,  the
    point made is that the Tribunal does not address what might  happen  to
    returnees while they are held at the  airport  pending  investigations,
    and that the evidence of the expert in that case,  Dr  Kakhki,  is  not
    addressed.  Although  it  is  accepted   that   returnees   will   face
    questioning, and that conditions "in detention" are  likely  to  breach
    Article 3, the Tribunal fails  to  make  clear  whether  this  includes
    detention at the airport.

20. I can find no merit in this ground. Whilst I agree that an  absence  of
    evidence does not amount to evidence of absence, it is quite clear from
    the decision in SSH and HR that the Tribunal analysed what  happens  at
    the point of return with anxious scrutiny.  Dr Kakhki gave no  evidence
    to the effect that there was any likelihood of  ill  treatment  at  the
    airport whilst detainees are waiting to be   questioned.    Mr  Drabble
    QC, who represented the appellants in that case, made no submissions to
    the effect that there was evidence of a risk in the airport: in fact it
    is clear from his closing submissions that in speaking  of  'detention'
    the parties in that case were concerned with prison (see  for  instance
    at paragraph 16 Annex 2).   Mr Nicholson asks me to consider what might
    happen if the Appellant arrives at Tehran airport in the middle of  the
    night and there is no one available to question  him  til  morning.  He
    asks me to surmise that it  is  reasonably  likely  that  he  would  be
    transferred to Article 3 conditions at that point. I am satisfied  that
    if this were the case, that would have  emerged  in  the  course  of  a
    country guidance hearing that had been convened  specifically  to  hear
    expert evidence on the point. The express findings of the Tribunal  are
    that there is not a real risk  of  ill-treatment  during  this  initial
    period. It is only if something of concern arises  in  the  questioning
    that the risk arises:


         "15. There is a general consistency to this evidence that a  person
         returning on a laissez passer, having left Iran illegally, would be
         subjected to  no  more  than  a  fine  and  probably  a  period  of
         questioning although there is no indication in  the  evidence  that
         that questioning would be of  a  kind  or  in  a  place  where  ill
         treatment could be expected...


         23.... "The evidence in our view shows no more than that they  will
         be questioned, and  that  if  there  are  any  particular  concerns
         arising from their previous activities either in Iran or the United
         Kingdom or whatever country they  are  returned  from,  then  there
         would be a risk of further questioning, detention and potential ill-
         treatment. In this regard it is relevant to return to  Dr  Kakhki's
         evidence in re-examination where he said that  the  treatment  they
         would receive would depend on their individual case.  If  they  co-
         operated and accepted that they left illegally and  claimed  asylum
         abroad then


      Decisions


21. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material error
    of law and it is upheld.


22. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                   [pic]


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                 26th September 2017










