
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05828/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     SH
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Chaggar, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

      1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, who has made an asylum claim in
         the United  Kingdom.   For  this  reason  I  have  made  the  above
         anonymity direction.

      2. In a decision promulgated on 23 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge
         VA Cox dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum and human  rights
         grounds.   The  Judge  comprehensively  disbelieved  much  of   the
         appellant's claim as to what happened to her in Iran.

      3. At the hearing before me Ms Chaggar submitted that  the  judge  had
         made three errors of law as set out in the grounds of  appeal.   Mr
         McVeety did not accept that there were any errors  of  law  in  the
         decision and invited me to dismiss the appeal.

      4. After hearing from both representatives  I  reserved  my  decision,
         which I now give by addressing each ground of appeal relied upon by
         the appellant.

Ground 1 - failure to admit a 'YouTube' clip

      5. At the beginning of the hearing before the judge Ms Chaggar applied
         to admit late evidence in the form of a  YouTube  clip.   The  clip
         comprised solely of a YouTube film said to  include  fervent  anti-
         Islamic content.  The appellant claimed that she had attached  this
         to a Facebook message that she sent to her sister-in-law  in  2012.
         The clip was said to be relevant to demonstrate that  at  the  time
         the appellant was anti-Islamic and held atheist views.

      6. It is important to note that the appellant did not claim  that  the
         authorities discovered that she had sent or used  this  clip.   The
         clip did not relate to the appellant personally.  She did not claim
         to be at risk by  reason  of  having  sent  this  clip.   Its  only
         relevance was said to  support  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  an
         atheist.  The appellant's asylum claim focused upon the authorities
         discovering that she and her family members held  atheist  meetings
         in Iran.  After one such meeting was raided the appellant fled  and
         claims that she is wanted by the Iranian authorities.

      7. I do not accept that it was necessary for the judge  to  admit  the
         YouTube clip in order for the hearing to be  conducted  justly  and
         fairly.  As the judge  observed  "the  detail  of  the  clip  added
         nothing to the evidence that counsel relied on  to  show  that  the
         Facebook entry was from a date prior to the decision" [6].   Indeed
         the detail of the clip showed no more than  an  anti-Islamic  film.
         The judge acknowledged that the appellant was not  a  supporter  of
         Islam [44].  In my judgment there was no unfairness in refusing  to
         admit evidence which was readily available for a number  of  years,
         on the day of the hearing.  It was not necessary for the  judge  to
         view the film when it had been summarised in the witness  statement
         of  the  appellant's  sister-in-law  and  by   the   appellant   in
         examination-in-chief [20]. Viewing the film would not have assisted
         the judge's assessment  of  whether  or  not  the  appellant  is  a
         committed atheist who attended meetings and  researched  the  topic
         over many years.

Ground 2 - assessment of the evidence

      8. This is divided into three parts, which I address in turn.  For the
         reasons I have already set out I do not  accept  that  viewing  the
         film itself would have added anything to  the  judge's  credibility
         assessment when the judge was clearly aware of the contents of  the
         film.

      9. It is incorrect to assert that the judge assumed  that  an  atheist
         from Iran would be aware of Darwin or the 'big bang'  theory.   The
         appellant did not describe herself as a mere atheist but  rather  a
         committed atheist who attended meetings on the  subject  over  many
         years.  Her evidence was that she knew about  Darwin  and  the  big
         bang theory [25, 26 and 43].  In these circumstances the judge  was
         entitled to draw adverse inferences from the appellant's failure to
         answer relevant questions at the interview and to provide a  cogent
         explanation for such failure [42].

     10. The judge was well aware of the appellant's mental health  concerns
         [35, 48, 66] and the stresses facing the appellant  [38,  40].   It
         cannot be said that she failed to  take  these  into  account  when
         assessing the appellant's evidence.

Ground 3 - mental health

     11. The appellant's bundle contained a report dated 15 June 2015 from a
         CBT practitioner.  This described the appellant as  suffering  from
         severe PTSD symptoms.  The  appellant  also  relied  upon  a  short
         letter dated 6 March 2015 from  Dr  Killingley  who  described  the
         medication she has been described for depression.

     12. Ground 3 submits that the judge has dealt with  the  mental  health
         evidence in a perfunctory manner and this  infected  her  decision.
         It is correct  that  the  judge  has  not  dealt  with  the  detail
         contained in the report from the CBT practitioner and it might have
         been more helpful for her to have done so.  However the  judge  was
         clearly aware of this evidence [35] and specifically said  she  had
         taken into account all the evidence in reaching her  decision  [7].
         I am satisfied that when the decision is read as a whole  that  the
         judge has taking into account this evidence as part of her  overall
         assessment of the appellant's evidence.

Decision

     13. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         an error of law.

     14. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
22 October 2015

