
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05317/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     MM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Tetty, Counsel
For the SSHD:     Ms Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

    1. I have anonymised the appellant because this decision refers  to  his
       asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

    2. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Somalia  who  claimed  asylum  after
       arriving clandestinely in the United Kingdom  ('UK')  on  20  October
       2013.  The appellant contends that he  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution in Somalia for reasons relating to his past ill treatment
       by [Al] Shabab and his lack of protection for reasons relating to his
       claimed membership of the Tumal clan.

Procedural history

    3. In a decision dated 24 November 2014 FTT Judge  Hands  dismissed  the
       appellant's appeal.  She rejected his  claimed  clan  membership  and
       indeed the entirety of his account in Somalia.

    4. In a decision dated 5 January 2015 FTT Judge White granted permission
       to appeal observing that the judge arguably  failed  to  give  proper
       weight to the country and medical  expert  evidence  adduced  by  the
       appellant.

    5. The SSHD has submitted a rule 24 notice dated 9 January 2015 in which
       it was argued that the expert evidence was considered  in  the  round
       and the FTT was entitled to reach the credibility  findings  for  the
       reasons provided.

Hearing

    6. Mr Tetty relied upon the grounds of  appeal  and  focussed  upon  the
       FTT's failure to engage  with  the  expert  evidence.   Mr  Parkinson
       relied on the rule 24 notice and invited me to find that the FTT  was
       entitled to make the  factual  findings  for  the  reasons  provided,
       having adequately considered the expert evidence.

    7. After hearing submissions I reserved my decision, which I now provide
       with reasons.

    8. Both representatives agreed that should I find the FTT committed  the
       alleged errors of law  the  most  appropriate  approach  is  for  the
       findings to be remade completely and that given the nature and extent
       of those findings, this should be done in the FTT.

Discussion

    9. The FTT has failed give adequate reasons for rejecting  an  important
       aspect of Dr Lord's medical  report.   This  report  dealt  with  two
       important aspects.  First, it describes  the  wounds  caused  by  the
       appellant being shot.  Second, at paras 40 and  41  he  describes  in
       some detail the scars caused by  burning  and  makes  it  plain  that
       "there are so many in so many different parts of the body  that  they
       could not be regarded as accidental".  He then  concludes  that  "the
       majority of many scars all over his body are diagnostic  of  torture"
       [48].  The FTT has rejected this evidence for two reasons.  First, it
       is said that the medical report is based upon the appellant's account
       [28].  That is simply wrong.  This aspect of the report is based upon
       Dr Lord's own analysis of the physical  presentation  of  the  scars.
       Second, the scars could have been caused during  the  course  of  his
       work as a blacksmith, which involves working with  hot  metal.   This
       fails to take into account Dr Lord's clearly expressed view that  the
       scars could not be regarded as accidental.  I am satisfied  that  the
       FTT has irrationally failed to take  relevant  matters  into  account
       when considering Dr Lord's report.

   10. The country expert, Mr Mullen interviewed the appellant regarding his
       claim to be a member of the Tumal clan.  He considered the  appellant
       to be explicit  in  explaining  the  characteristics  of  alienations
       experienced by the clan as well  as  its  specialisms.   He  provided
       detailed reasons to support that conclusion.  The FTT did not  impugn
       Mr Mullen's expertise and noted he provided evidence in  the  country
       guidance case on Somalia.  Of course  the  FTT  was  not  obliged  to
       accept this as determinative  of  the  appellant's  clan  membership.
       This evidence is however very important and the FTT  was  obliged  to
       consider it in the round with all the other  evidence  including  the
       appellant's lack of knowledge within the asylum interview.   The  FTT
       did not conduct this analysis or carefully  scrutinise  the  evidence
       relevant to the appellant's knowledge and was content to  effectively
       find that little or no weight can be attached to Mr  Mullen's  expert
       view because it was based upon the appellant "having told the  truth"
       when he has "displayed a propensity to say whatever suits" [27].  The
       FTT has failed to take into account that Mr Mullen  was  not  testing
       truth but knowledge.  Mr  Parkinson  submitted  that  such  knowledge
       might have been deliberately learnt but that was not a reason offered
       by  the  FTT.   In  failing  to  carefully  scrutinise  the  evidence
       available as to  the  appellant's  knowledge  of  the  Tulan  and  Mr
       Mullen's expert view upon this, the FTT has  irrationally  failed  to
       take material evidence into account.

   11. These errors of  law  are  material  and  go  to  the  heart  of  the
       appellant's claim and lead me to the view  that  the  FTT's  decision
       should be set aside.

   12. MOJ and others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG  [2014]  UKUT  00442
       makes it clear that the withdrawal of Al  Shabab  from  Mogadishu  is
       complete and that the significance of clan  membership  has  changed.
       Clans now provide potentially social support  mechanisms  and  assist
       with access to livelihoods.  The headnote then says this at (ix):

           "If it is accepted that a person facing a  return  to  Mogadishu
           after a period  of  absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
           relatives in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself
           on return, there will need to be a careful assessment of all  of
           the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but  are
           not limited to:

                circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

                length of absence from Mogadishu;

                family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

                access to financial resources;

                prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether   that   be
                employment or self employment;

                availability of remittances from abroad;

                means of  support  during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
                Kingdom;

                why his ability to fund the journey to the  West  no  longer
                enables an appellant to secure financial support on return."

   13. The FTT has made no clear findings on the availability of  family  or
       other support for this appellant if returned to Somalia.  This is key
       to the assessment of prospective risk.  The FTT has  wrongly  focused
       upon  the  risk  from  Al  Shabab  upon  return  [25].   Whilst   the
       appellant's claim to have been mistreated by Al Shabab in the past is
       relevant in assisting  a  finding  to  be  made  regarding  his  clan
       (because he claims he was targeted for reasons relating to  his  clan
       membership) it is of less relevance to risk on return in light of the
       country guidance.  When the FTT remakes the decision attention  needs
       to be focused upon  MOJ  and  the  changed  landscape  to  assist  an
       accurate determination of asylum claims from Somalia.

Remittal

   14. The decision must be remade entirely and de novo.  I have had  regard
       to  paragraph  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior  President's   Practice
       Statement and the nature and extent of the factual findings  required
       in remaking the  decision,  and  I  have  decided  that  this  is  an
       appropriate case to remit to the FTT.

Decision

   15. The decision of the FTT involved the making of a  material  error  of
       law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

   16. The appeal shall be remade by FTT de novo.

Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting  in  North  Shields  (TE:  2.5hrs)  on  the  first  date
           available.  Somalia interpreter necessary.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
18 December 2015
