
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05872/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2015                  |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                 JAWAD SAFI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Blundell of Counsel instructed by Malik &
Malik, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is an Afghan national whose date of birth is given  as  1
    January  1996.   He  clandestinely  entered  the  United  Kingdom   and
    subsequently claimed asylum.  The Respondent  refused  his  application
    but granted him discretionary leave until 20 April 2012.   On  about  2
    March 2012, in time, he applied for further leave which on 30 July 2014
    the Respondent refused.

 2. On 14 August 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds assert that on return he will  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on account of imputed political opinion because people will
    wish to exact revenge on him on account of his father who  was  accused
    of killing people.  The grounds also refer to Articles 2, 3  and  8  of
    the European Convention and assert the Appellant's account is  credible
    and entitled to recognition under the Refugee Convention.

 3. The Respondent relied on the reasons given in a letter of 20 April 2009
    for the refusal of recognition under the Refugee Convention and did not
    accept the Appellant's accounts of why he would be at risk  on  return.
    It was at that time the Appellant was granted discretionary leave.

 4. The Appellant  had  entered  illegally  and  following  expiry  of  the
    discretionary leave granted to him he was an adult and able  to  return
    to Afghanistan.  He had not supplied any evidence of efforts to contact
    his family in Afghanistan.  Addressing the interference with any family
    and private life he might have established in the United Kingdom  which
    result from the decision the Respondent considered  the  Appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules
    and could not show that that his removal would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his rights protected under Article 8.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. By a decision promulgated on 29 September 2014 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kaler dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 6. On 6 November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes granted  the
    Appellant permission to appeal because it was arguable  the  Judge  had
    erred in her assessment that the application of  Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act, in particular  in  relation  to  the  appropriate  degree  of
    facility in the English language expected of the Appellant.  Permission
    to appeal on all grounds was granted.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. At the start of the hearing Ms Sreeraman said she had not seen  a  copy
    of the grounds for appeal.  A copy was made available and time given to
    her to considerate.

Submissions for the Appellant

 8. Mr Blundell made the initial point the Judge's treatment of the factors
    referred to in Section 117B of the 2002 Act  at  paragraph  43  of  her
    decision was insufficient in the light of the later decisions  in  Dube
    (ss.117A-117D)   Zimbabwe   [2015]   UKUT   90,    Forman    (ss.117A-C
    considerations)  USA  [2015]  UKUT  412  and   Bossade   (ss.117A-D   -
    interrelationship with Rules) DRC [2015] UKUT 415.   Additionally,  the
    Upper Tribunal  had  given  guidance  on  the  meaning  of  "precarious
    immigration status"  in  AM  (s.117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260.   The
    learning in these decisions should now be reflected in  the  assessment
    of the proportionality of  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant further leave and to remove him to Afghanistan.

 9. Mr Blundell accepted that the grounds at paragraphs  4  and  8  of  the
    grounds for permission to appeal which he had not drafted did not  pose
    an arguable challenge to the  Judge's  decision.   The  only  remaining
    effective ground for appeal was the Judge's assessment of the requisite
    facility in English language by way of reference to  S.117B(2)  of  the
    2002 Act which did not impose a requirement  that  an  applicant  speak
    fluent English merely an ability to speak  English.   There  was  ample
    evidence in the Respondent's bundle before the Judge at pages  G20  and
    G21 that the Appellant in 2010 when aged about 14 was recorded  in  his
    Key Stage 3 Assessment to have a facility in English language  covering
    speaking and listening, reading and writing, albeit below the  national
    expected standard for most 14 year olds.  Consequently, by the date  of
    the hearing before the Judge, the issue of the Appellant's facility  in
    English language was simply a neutral factor and not an adverse one.

Submissions for the Respondent

10. Ms Sreeraman argued the Judge had not made any material  error  in  her
    treatment of the factors identified in ss.117A-117D.  The  decision  in
    AM made it clear that satisfying the s.117B requirements did not itself
    create a right to remain in the United Kingdom.  Even if the Judge  had
    erred, the  error  was  immaterial  because  there  was  no  reasonable
    prospect of any different outcome from another tribunal.

11. Mr Blundell  made  the  point  again  that  the  consideration  of  the
    Appellant's facility in English language as a factor  under  s.117B  of
    the 2002 Act had been taken by the Judge against the Appellant when  it
    should have been a neutral factor.

Findings and Consideration

12. The Judge erred in law by construing  s.117B(2)  of  the  2002  Act  as
    requiring fluency in English language as  the  relevant  factor  rather
    than simply an ability  to  speak  English  of  which  there  was  some
    evidence at pages G20 and G21 of the Respondent's bundle.  The basis of
    the grounds for appeal in paragraph 8 of the permission application has
    effectively been undermined  by  what  is  said  about  a  "precarious"
    immigration status in AM.

13. There was no challenge  to  the  Judge's  other  findings.   While  the
    Judge's treatment  of  the  factor  of  English  language  facility  in
    s.117B(2) of the 2002 Act was an error of law, I do not  find  that  it
    was material and consider  there  is  no  reasonable  prospect  of  any
    different outcome if the matter were heard by  another  tribunal.   For
    these reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Anonymity

14. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I do not find one is not warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain an error of law
    such that it should be set aside.  Accordingly it stands.   The  effect
    is that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. xi. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

