
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05437/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 August 2016                  |On 13 September 2016               |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           MOHAMMED KISHWAR AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shah of Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as  they  were
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on 18 November 2015 which dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to remove
    the Appellant  from  the  UK  following  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Appellant's claim for asylum

Background

 4. The Appellant was born  on  31  January  1988  and  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.

 5. On 13 March 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum on the basis that  he
    would be at risk on return on the basis of his political opinions.

 6. On 13 March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) It was  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was  an  active  member  of
         Jatiyatabadi  Chhatra  Dal  (JCD)  the  student  subgroup  of   the
         Bangladesh National Party.

      b) It was not accepted that he was accused of Mahmud  Shawkots  murder
         due  to  inconsistencies  in  the  claim.The  notarial  certificate
         produced in re4lation to the claimed prosecution  was  not  clearly
         dated; the FIR names 17 who were accused  of  the  murder  but  the
         Appellants name age and address do not appear;  the  bail  document
         dates are inconsistent  with  the  period  claimed  in  the  Asylum
         Interview; the newspaper article names only 11 arrested rather than
         17 and the Appellant highlighted the name S K  Dewan  aged  22  but
         this was not an alias he gave to the Respondent nor was he 22 years
         old at that time.

      c) It was not accepted that  the  Appellant  was  accused  of  Fahim's
         attempted murder.

      d) In relation to the Appellants claim that he participated in a local
         council election the article submitted from Daily Sylhet  dated  10
         June 2013 does not mention his name although it does refer  to  his
         alias but the age given is inconsistent with his age.

      e) The account of him running for election is  inconsistent  with  his
         claim that he was charged with murder at that time.

      f) The Appellants claim to have been wanted for murder is inconsistent
         with background material about limits on freedom  of  movement  for
         political figures and the fact that he  lived  in  Bangladesh  from
         September 2013 to 21 January 2014 without  being  arrested  and  to
         leave legally although claiming  that  the  murder  case  was  high
         profile and his political identity well known.

      g) The delay in claiming asylum undermined his credibility.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  M  Davies  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:

      a) The Judges findings were inadequately reasoned.

      b) The  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  weight  to  the  background
         material.

      c) The  findings  in  relation  to  the  documents  were  inadequately
         reasoned.

 9.  On  15  December  2015  First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  gave
    permission to appeal.

10. A Rule 24 Response dated 24 December 2015 was filed opposing the appeal
    and arguing:

      a) The Judges findings were adequately reasoned relying on  Budhathoki
         (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 341(IAC)

      b) The grounds amount to a disagreement with a decision that was  well
         reasoned.

11. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Shah  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that

      a) he relied on the grounds and grant of permission.

      b) The findings at paragraph 56  in  relation  to  the  ocuments  were
         inadequately reasoned.

      c) The was plenty of evidence  before  the  Judge  to  show  that  the
         Appellant had used a nickname.

      d) The Judge failed to explore the reason why the  Appellant  did  not
         claim aylum on arrival.

      e) The Judge has failed to take into account  the  general  background
         material in relation to arrest warrants.

      f) The  Judge  has  failed  to  balance  the  inconsistencies  in  the
         Appellants account against the  documentary  material  that  showed
         that he was implicated in the murders.

12. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison submitted that:

      a) He relied on the Rule 24 notice.

      b) There was a clear contradiction in relation to  the  issue  of  the
         Appellant using a nickname in that in the  Screening  Interview  he
         denied ever using one.

      c) The Judge is not required to refer to every piece of evidence.

      d) The credibility findings were damning in particular in relation  to
         the way that the Appellant gave evidence.

      e) This was a detailed decision made  by  an  experienced  Judge.  The
         grounds were no more than an extended disagreement.

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or  giving
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail  to
    deal with every factual issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
    Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law. Unless an Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have  taken  no  account  of  evidence  that  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration judge concludes that the story told is untrue. If  a  point
    of evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is
    a failure to take into account a material consideration. In  Mibanga  v
    SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 Buxton LJ said this in relation to challenging
    such findings:

         "Where, as in this case, complaint is made of the reasoning  of  an
         adjudicator in respect of a  question  of  fact  (that  is  to  say
         credibility), particular care  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the
         criticism is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and
         does not merely reflect a feeling on  the  part  of  the  appellate
         tribunal that it might itself have taken a different  view  of  the
         matter from that that appealed to the adjudicator."


Finding on Material Error

15. Having heard those submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

16. I am satisfied that when read as a whole the Judge  has  made  detailed
    findings in relation to the Appellants credibility that arise not  only
    out of inconsistencies between the documentary evidence, the background
    material and his interviews which are set out in detail in the  refusal
    letter and I can see for myself but also on the basis  of  the  way  in
    which he gave his evidence and responded to cross examination which  he
    describes in detail at paragraph 65: he noted that in  spite  of  clear
    advice given by him in opening (paragraph 29) the Appellant  failed  to
    answer questions and prevaricated in answering questions. I  note  that
    Mr Shah did not represent the Appellant before the First tier  Tribunal
    and therefore could not address me on the manner on which the Appellant
    dealt with questioning but it was open to the Judge who  was  there  to
    reach an adverse credibility finding in  those  circumstances.  It  was
    also open to the Judge to note that the Appellants failure to answer  a
    number of questions at all  was  not  clarified  or  addressed  in  re-
    examination in that Ms Jabin did not  seek  to  re  examine  him.  This
    overarching finding that the Appellant was an untruthful  witness  made
    by someone who heard that evidence must be  given  considerable  weight
    and would have inevitably impacted on the Judges overall assessment  of
    the claim.

17. I note what  was  said  in  Budhathoki  that  it  was  unnecessary  and
    unhelpful for a Judge to rehearse every detail or  issue  raised  in  a
    case and I am satisfied that the Judge set out the Appellants claim  in
    detail at 10-25 and the view taken of it in the refusal letter. He  set
    out in detail at 31-41 the cross examination noting occasions on  which
    he failed to answer the questions put.

18. The Judge accepted the concession  made  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    Appellant was politically active but beyond that found  the  Appellants
    claim was undermined by inconsistencies  and  set  out  in  detail  the
    inconsistencies that he  obviously  found  most  notable:  he  was  not
    required to address every issue raised. I am satisfied that he was  not
    required to identify every single document produced as  he  made  clear
    that he had taken into account the evidence in the bundle and a  number
    of documents were specifically identified in the refusal letter and the
    discrepancies highlighted. The Judge took into account the  explanation
    given by the Appellant to explain the inconsistencies in the  documents
    but was entitled to reject it.

19. It was argued by Mr Shah that there was evidence before  the  Judge  to
    show that the Appellant used a nickname but I  am  satisfied  that  the
    point made by the Respondent in the  refusal  letter  which  the  Judge
    found had merit was that he stated he had never used an  alias  in  the
    Screening Interview and provided no explanation for this discrepancy.

20. The Judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  the  Appellants
    credibility was undermined by his failure to claim  asylum  on  arrival
    and having noted at paras 34-35 the Appellants evidence as  to  why  he
    failed to claim on arrival at 58 gave clear  reasons  why  he  rejected
    that explanation at 59  and  62.:  he  does  not  have  to  repeat  the
    explanation given.

21. The Judge gave clear reasons why he rejected the Appellants claim  that
    he was able  to  escape  arrest  by  relocating  to  a  rural  area  at
    paragraphs 59 and 60 and identified a contradiction between his current
    explanation and what was said in the asylum interview. It was  open  to
    the Judge to find it  incredible  that  someone  who  claimed  to  have
    himself a high profile and to be  wanted  in  connection  with  a  high
    profile murder would have been  able  to  leave  the  country  with  no
    difficulty given the  acceptance  by  his  representative  that  police
    intelligence would be on computers.

22. I remind myself of what was said in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) about the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to  be  given  in  a  decision  in  headnote  (1)  :
    "Although there is a legal duty to give  a  brief  explanation  of  the
    conclusions on the central issue on  which  an  appeal  is  determined,
    those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole  makes
    sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge."

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                                              Date
12.9.2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

