
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/05554/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6th June 2017                       |   On 28th June 2017                 |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                     DKG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood,of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a  national  of  Sri  Lanka,  who  appeals  against  a
    decision dated 18th March 2015 refusing to grant him  asylum  or  other
    protection in the United Kingdom.

2.   By way of background the appellant entered the United Kingdom  in  2008
    as a student with leave until October  2011.   Thereafter  he  made  an
    application  to  remain  as  a  post-study  work  migrant  using  false
    documents,  including  a  false  university  degree  certificate.   His
    application was refused.  Thereafter he absconded, being encountered in
    April 2013 and detained.  He claimed asylum.  A screening interview was
    conducted in April 2013  but  it  was  not  until  March  2015  that  a
    substantive interview was arranged.  However that was cancelled as  the
    appellant was unfit to take part.  Further submissions were made on his
    behalf leading to the decision now under challenge.

3.   Thus it  was  that  his  appeal  came  for  hearing  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wylie on 25th  November  2016.   The  determination  was
    promulgated on 16th February 2017.

4.   There were, and remain, two distinct aspects of the  claim;  the  first
    being the contention that, by reason of his activities in Sri Lanka, he
    would be at risk upon return. The second being  his  medical  condition
    and the lack of treatment on return.  It was his case that he worked as
    a sales executive selling mobile phone SIM cards across Sri Lanka.   In
    January 2007 a suicide bomber from the LTTE detonated a bomb in Colombo
    and the mobile phone and SIM card of the bomber was  found  leading  to
    the arrest of the appellant on the basis that he had sold the SIM  card
    to the bomber.  It is his case that he was twice  arrested  being  ill-
    treated and tortured on those occasions.  Finally he paid  a  bribe  on
    condition that  he  report  to  Kandy  Police  Station  twice  a  week,
    meanwhile arrangements were made for him to come to the United  Kingdom
    which he did.   It  is  his  case  that  following  his  departure  the
    authorities have continued to harass his parents and  sister  and  that
    when they were attending a protest in November 2013 they were  arrested
    and have not been in contact since.  His case is that he  would  be  of
    continuing interest to the authorities particularly upon his return.

5.   It seems not to be in  issue  that  the  appellant  suffers  from  post
    traumatic stress disorder and it was the part of  the  claim  which  he
    presented, relying particularly on  the  expert  reports  of  Frederica
    Jansz and Dr Sharif and  Dr  Sodhi,  that  there  would  be  inadequate
    medical treatment upon his return such as to worsen his  condition  and
    to engage with Article 3 of the ECHR.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the credibility of  the  claim
    which was advanced and considered also the country guidance case of  GJ
    and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319
    (IAC).  That case highlighted the conclusion  of  the  Court  that  the
    government's present objective was to identify Tamil activists  in  the
    diaspora who were working for Tamil separatism and to  destabilise  the
    Sri Lankan state.  It  was  the  finding  of  the  Judge  applying  the
    principles in GJ that the appellant's profile did not engage  with  the
    risk factors such as to mean that he had no risk upon return.

7.   In terms of the  mental  health,  although  the  medical  reports  were
    considered,  it  was  the  finding  of  the  Judge  that  the   overall
    jurisprudence of the cases of  N and  D  was  such  as  to  defeat  the
    contentions made.  Thus it was that the appeal  was  dismissed  in  all
    respects.

8.   Application was made on behalf  of  the  appellant  to  challenge  that
    decision.  Leave to appeal was not granted in relation  to  the  asylum
    aspect but was  granted  in  relation  to  the  mental  health  of  the
    appellant, not least because of the decision in  Paposhvili  v  Belgium
    (Application No 41738/10) dated 13th December 2016.

9.    Subsequently  permission  was  granted  for  amended  grounds  to   be
    presented.  They in effect resurrected  the  challenge  to  the  asylum
    aspect of the decision and sought to argue further in relation  to  the
    mental health aspect.

10.  Thus it was that the matter came before me in pursuance to  that  grant
    of permission,  Mr Haywood of Counsel acting for the appellant  and  Mr
    Melvin acting for the respondent.   I  am  grateful  to  both  for  the
    material presented.

11.  It seems to me that a proper starting point for  the  challenge  is  to
    consider the refusal decision itself of 18th March 2015,  which  was  a
    very detailed decision setting out fully the nature of the  claim  that
    was advanced.  Also set out was a helpful chronology of  matters.   The
    account of his arrest and torture is considered in detail and a  number
    of inconsistent statements  were  noted  when  comparing  the  Rule  35
    application account of April 2013 with the witness statement account of
    March 2015.  A number of conflicting matters were noted.

12.  The activity sur place was also considered but it  was  the  contention
    of the respondent that inadequate evidence had been presented as to his
    involvement.  Challenge  was  also  made  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant, not least because of the deception that had  been  practised
    by him.

13.  One of the complications in this case  is  the  mental  health  of  the
    appellant, who suffers markedly from  post  traumatic  stress  disorder
    such that he was said to be unable to  attend  the  substantive  asylum
    interview and indeed his wife has  been  appointed  as  his  friend  to
    assist in his claim.  Because of his mental  health  he  did  not  give
    evidence at the hearing, although it is right to note that his wife did
    together with two other witnesses.

14.  The Judge, in the determination, noted the inconsistencies between  the
    screening interview and the report of the medical practitioner and  the
    witness statement.  It was noted that because  of  his  current  mental
    health  the  appellant  was  unable  to  comment  or  assist   in   the
    clarification of those matters.  Although his wife gave evidence at the
    hearing she had no direct knowledge of his claim as she met him in  the
    United Kingdom rather than knowing him in Sri Lanka.

15.   The  Judge  recognised  the  limitations   that   were   imposed   but
    nevertheless concluded that  the  account  of  experiences  was  not  a
    credible one overall.

16.  Challenge has been made specifically  to  the  approach  taken  by  the
    Judge as highlighted in paragraph 44 of the determination in which  the
    Judge indicates as follows:-

         "He has given two different  accounts  of  mistreatment  to  family
         members, around the time of the protests in November 2013.  It  may
         be that a note made in December  2013,  being  contemporaneous,  is
         more  likely  to  be  accurate,  but  I  can  make  no  finding  of
         mistreatment to his family due to the inconsistency".


17.  It is maintained  by  Mr  Haywood  in  his  grounds  that  that  is  an
    incorrect approach to take to the evidence and that it is for the Judge
    to make a finding on the facts as presented.  There is of course  trite
    law to indicate that Judges are asked to  make  findings  of  fact  but
    there are occasions when no findings can properly  be  made.   The  two
    accounts in this matter are remarkably divergent in their nature, as is
    set out at paragraph 43 of the determination.  In the witness statement
    of the appellant it was said that after his parents had participated in
    the protest in November 2013 they were arrested and that there has been
    no contact from them since then.

18.  Notes however made by Dr  Sodhi  in  2013  record  that  the  appellant
    indicated that he had been speaking to his family members in Sri  Lanka
    on Skype and had seen their wounds sustained during  alleged  detention
    and torture.

19.  It is difficult as a matter of common  sense  to  reconcile  those  two
    accounts and it is entirely understandable, as  I  so  find,  that  the
    Judge would be  in  some  difficulty  in  determining  which  was  more
    accurate.

20.  Mr Haywood seeks to criticise  the  Judge  for  not  relying  upon  the
    evidence of the appellant's wife but  that  again  is  not  entirely  a
    proper challenge given that it is noted explicitly at paragraphs 42 and
    43 of the determination, that  when  his  wife  gave  evidence  at  the
    hearing, she said that there had been no news  or  information  of  the
    whereabouts of the appellant's parents and sister.  She had  no  direct
    knowledge as to the circumstances in which they came to be  absent  and
    there seems to have been  little  investigation  conducted  as  to  the
    whereabouts of both.  If indeed they were arrested,  it  is  surprising
    that there should  not  be  some  criminal  procedures  or  solicitors'
    involvement in their case.  If they  were  arrested  by  protesting  on
    their own account it is difficult  also  to  consider  how  that  would
    impact upon the safety of the appellant.

21.  Although challenge is made to that particular passage it  is  right  to
    note the overall challenges to credibility and accuracy which  are  set
    out in the refusal decision.

22.  Even treating  the  appellant's  account  of  his  experiences  at  its
    height, the Judge considered and applied the country guidance  case  of
    GJ and Others and concluded that there was no risk  to  the  appellant.
    Indeed, the Judge cites MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka)  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 829 and particularly the comments  of  Lord  Justice  Underhill  at
    paragraph 50 of that judgment which emphasises that the  clear  message
    of the Upper Tribunal's guidance is that a record of past LTTE activism
    does not as such constitute a risk factor for Tamils returning  to  Sri
    Lanka.  The events the appellant describes even if  they  are  credible
    took place in 2007 and there was a paucity of information as to any sur
    place activities since then.

23.  I do not find that there is an  error  of  approach  by  the  Judge  in
    dealing with the aspect of asylum.

24.  I turn therefore to the mental health of the appellant,  in  particular
    to the medical report of Dr Sodhi prepared on 11th  November  2016,  as
    relied upon by Mr Haywood in his submissions.  The appellant was  first
    referred to the mental health team in May 2013.  Following his  release
    from the detention centre he started behaving unusually  claiming  that
    he had been tortured as had his sister, and that he heard  voices.   He
    was assessed by a community psychiatric nurse on 8th May 2013 and  seen
    then by a consultant psychiatrist.  He was prescribed an antidepressant
    medication and discharged.

25.  He again  came  to  the  attention  of  the  Berkshire  Healthcare  NHS
    Foundation Trust in December 2013.  Upon that assessment  it  was  felt
    that he was suffering from post traumatic stress disorder.   Medication
    was prescribed which seemed to bring  about  some  improvement  in  his
    mental state and thus he was discharged in January 2014.

26.  He was seen again in January 2015, seemingly in a  poor  state  because
    he had not been taking his medication.  It was noted in that connection
    that one of the causes of his anxiety was the lack of contact with  his
    parents since November 2013.  He was diagnosed with  severe  depression
    with post traumatic stress disorder and he re-started his  medications.
    The notes of 19th February 2015 speak of a  noticeable  improvement  in
    his health but at a subsequent review however it was noticed  that  the
    appellant was distracted and seemingly in a dissociated state which was
    also noticed in December 2015.  It was noted  that  the  appellant  was
    hitting himself on the head with the palms of his hands and  unable  to
    respond to any of the questions that were asked of him.   Thus  it  was
    that Dr Sodhi was asked to see him in March  2016  and  again  on  13th
    October.  It was noted that the appellant receives medication  but  was
    not currently receiving any psychological therapy.

27.  The doctor indicated that the cause of that stress was the  appellant's
    experience in Sri  Lanka  followed  by  the  absence  of  his  parents.
    Although Dr Sodhi was not familiar with the healthcare  system  in  Sri
    Lanka he comments that it  is  unlikely  that  psychological  therapies
    would be as readily available as they would be in the  United  Kingdom.
    There was little basis for that comment but in any  event,  as  I  have
    indicated, there was no psychological therapies being conducted in  the
    UK.

28.  The appellant is under the care of the Reading Community Mental  Health
    Team and seen in the outpatient  clinic  for  regular  reviews  of  his
    mental state.  Depending upon the outcome and/or improvement  that  may
    be followed by psychological therapy.

29.   One criticism, which seems to be mounted to his going  to  Sri  Lanka,
    is that there would  not  be  the  opportunity  of  that  psychological
    therapy, although even in the United Kingdom as I have indicated it  is
    not currently being undertaken in any event.

30.  My attention was also drawn to the report of Dr Sharif  Ghali  of  15th
    December 2015, which that deals  more  fundamentally  with  the  actual
    condition of the appellant.

31.  The decision in Paposhvili promulgated  on  13th  December  2016  dealt
    with an individual who  had  developed  lymphocytic  lymphoma  and  who
    showed a lack of response to chemotherapy  and  a  progression  of  the
    disease in the lymph nodes and the liver.  Clearly a condition far more
    serious than that which  the  appellant  is  experiencing.   The  Court
    stressed that every case as to whether or not there is  appropriate  or
    sufficiently accessible treatment in  the  receiving  country  must  be
    examined carefully on a case by case basis.  In that  particular  case,
    as  I  have  indicated,  it  was  of  an  appellant   with   particular
    vulnerability, his leukaemia having reached the most serious stage.

32.  In paragraph 183 the court considers that the "other  very  exceptional
    cases" within the meaning of the judgment in N v United  Kingdom  which
    may raise an issue under Article 3, should be understood  to  refer  to
    situations involving the removal of a seriously  ill  person  in  which
    substantial grounds have been shown  for  believing  that  he  or  she,
    though not at imminent risk of dying, would face a real risk on account
    of the absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country  or  a
    lack of access to such treatment, of being exposed to a serious,  rapid
    and irreversible decline in his or her state  of  health  resulting  in
    intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy.
    The court pointed out  that  these  situations  correspond  to  a  high
    threshold for the application of Article 3 of the Convention  in  cases
    concerning the removal of aliens suffering from serious illness.

33.  In the context of these procedures it is for the  appellant  to  adduce
    evidence capable of demonstrating that there were  substantial  grounds
    for believing that if treatment required was not to be implemented, the
    appellant  would be  exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  being  subject  to
    treatment contrary to Article 3.

34.  To what  extent  the  case  of  Paposhvili  amounts  to  a  significant
    departure from the general rule will no doubt be a matter of discussion
    in other decisions.  It seems  to  me,  however,  that  the  degree  of
    illness and risk envisaged in that case is not one that is  present  in
    this.

35.  Mr Haywood seeks to argue that  there  is  a  very  limited  amount  of
    specialist treatment available and that clearly is a  matter  that  was
    addressed by the Judge in the determination.  The report  of  Frederica
    Jansz was noted in paragraph 70 of the determination and in  particular
    that the support systems available were extremely limited  in  quantity
    and quality.  Another point which is made by the Judge, and  one  which
    seems to me entirely and properly open to be made, is that there was no
    evidence that the appellant  at  any  time  has  needed  or  will  need
    inpatient treatment.  Currently and for a few years past he has had his
    condition dealt with by adequate medication and  therapy  has  not  yet
    started and  will  not  start  until  his  condition  has  calmed  down
    somewhat.  It is difficult therefore to understand what will cause  him
    to need that treatment in any event.

36.  In terms of deprivation of life or treatment prohibited  by  Article  3
    it is noted by the Judge that the appellant will be returning with  the
    support of his family.

37.  A further matter that has been prayed in  aid  by  Mr  Haywood  is  the
    subjective fear of risk which will pray upon the mind of the  appellant
    such as to make his situation and circumstances in Sri Lanka very  much
    worse.  In that context I note the comments made in the Court of Appeal
    decision of MP and NT [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and in particular  paragraphs
    47 and 48 thereof.  It was recognised that there was an overlap between
    protection under the Refugee Convention and protection under Article  3
    of the EHCR but they are not completely co-extensive.  It was the  view
    of the court that the Qualification Directive was not intended to catch
    Article 3 cases where the risk is to health or of suicide  rather  than
    of persecution.  Attention was drawn to the health cases,  particularly
    N v United Kingdom [2008] 47 EHRR 39 at paragraph 43 thereof.

38.  The judgment concludes as follows:-

         "Mr Hussain seeks to circumnavigate this by holding the Sri  Lankan
         authorities responsible for MP's post traumatic  stress  order  and
         depression, together with the resultant suicide risk.  However,  in
         my judgment that is to stretch the concept too far.  I am satisfied
         that the Qualification Directive does not do that.   Accordingly  I
         would dismiss MP's appeal in relation to  asylum  and  humanitarian
         protection.  He remains properly protected under Article 3".


39.  It  is  particularly  significant  to  note,  in  connection  with  the
    appellant's condition, that part of it is said to have arisen from  his
    experiences in Sri Lanka but part from his concerns and  worries  about
    his parents.  This was a condition that arose in 2013 after he had left
    Sri Lanka.  It may be  a  matter  that  his  fear  of  returning  would
    increase his anxiety but this is to some extent speculative  given  the
    nature of family support and the availability no doubt  of  medication.
    It will also depend as to whether indeed  his  parents  are  absent  or
    present in Sri Lanka.  Currently GS (India) and Others v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40  is  the  existing
    authority on the application of D and N.

40.  I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has properly  and  adequately
    considered the medical evidence and the issues raised on behalf of  the
    appellant so far as his condition is concerned and has properly applied
    the relevant case law to those issues.

41.  In all the circumstances I do not find there to be a material error  of
    law in either the assessment of asylum or humanitarian protection or in
    the application of Article 3.

42.  In those circumstances the appellant's appeal against the  decision  is
    dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall  stand,
    namely that the appellant's appeal is dismissed on asylum  grounds,  on
    humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights grounds.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date 28 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD


















