
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/05119/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 May 2016                         |    On 2 June 2016                   |
|Extempore judgment                     |                                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                         miss Niranjini Sabarathnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bandegani instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The determination under challenge is a decision by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dean Kershaw promulgated on 27 November 2015 following a  hearing
    at Sheldon Court in Birmingham on 13 November 2015.  The appellant  was
    represented at that hearing by Mr McWatters of Counsel instructed by HK
    Solicitors and the Secretary of State by Mr  Petryszyn  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  The judge's decision runs to some  87  paragraphs,
    the final paragraphs of which conclude that the application for  asylum
    is dismissed, the appeal under the Rules is dismissed and no  anonymity
    direction has been made.

2.   The appellant sought to challenge the judge's  decision  on  the  three
    grounds set out in the application for permission  to  appeal  dated  7
    December 2015 drafted by Mr Habib Ullah Khan of HK Solicitors.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
    on 18 December 2015 for the reasons set out in paragraphs 3  and  4  of
    his grant of permission.  In paragraph 3 Judge  Holmes  refers  to  the
    grounds as drafted in the following terms:

         "3.  The grounds as drafted assert either that the judge failed  to
             correctly record the basis upon which Counsel  was  instructed
             to make an application for the adjournment of the  hearing  in
             order to obtain expert medical evidence upon the injuries  she
             claims to have suffered  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  the  scars  the
             appellant had claimed were visible upon  her  body,  or,  that
             Counsel mistakenly conveyed false information to the judge  in
             the course of making that application.  Either way the grounds
             raise the issue of  whether  the  appellant  received  a  fair
             hearing of her appeal; Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418.


         4.   It will  be  for  the  appellant  to  make  out  her  case  of
             unfairness before the Upper Tribunal and  this  will  in  turn
             require a consideration on her  part  of  whether  she  should
             waive  legal  privilege  in  relation  to   her   instructions
             concerning the application for an adjournment.  She will  need
             separate advice on that.  It will also  require  consideration
             on the part of her current  solicitor,  and  on  the  part  of
             Counsel who appeared on her behalf before  the  judge,  as  to
             whether they can properly continue to represent  her  if  they
             are to be witnesses of fact as to  the  detailed  instructions
             given to, and received by, Counsel, and the  information  that
             was then  conveyed  by  Counsel  to  the  judge;  BW  (Witness
             statements by advocates) Afghanistan [2014] UKUT 568."

4.   The matter originally came before me on 8 April 2016 when Mr  Bandegani
    appeared on behalf of the appellant.  Wimbledon Solicitors were now the
    instructed solicitors on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   The  Solicitors
    Regulatory Authority had intervened into HK Solicitors on 4 April  2016
    and Mr Bandegani was without the papers required to properly  represent
    his client, as  indeed  were  Wimbledon  Solicitors.   The  matter  was
    therefore adjourned to today's date with appropriate  directions.   One
    such direction was that the appellant was to file and serve an  indexed
    and paginated bundle containing all the documents she intended to  rely
    upon no later than 4pm, 6 May 2016.  That time limit was breached,  the
    documents arriving after the date, but I have allowed them  in  without
    consultation with  the  Secretary  of  State's  representative  as  the
    information within the bundle contains matters of particular  relevance
    to the issues under  consideration  today,  in  particular  the  signed
    witness statement of Mr McWatters which was attached to a supplementary
    bundle filed on 12 May and received at Field House together  with  what
    is described as an amended report of the medical expert Mr Martin.

5.   It is important in relation to this matter that we take  stock  of  the
    chronology of the First-tier Tribunal proceedings.   The  matter  first
    came before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  Judge  Pirotta,  at  a
    Case Management Review hearing at Sheldon Court  in  Birmingham  on  10
    June 2015.  Judge Pirotta records in the Record of Proceedings that she
    was advised by Counsel who appeared on behalf of the appellant on  that
    occasion that the representatives were awaiting reports that  could  be
    late, but they could proceed anyway  as  no  date  was  known  for  the
    reports  to  be  made  available.   Judge   Pirotta   issued   standard
    directions, one of which was for all medical evidence to  be  filed  at
    least five days before the full hearing, including full copies  of  all
    medical reports upon which the appellant was seeking to rely being sent
    to the Tribunal and the other party.  The matter had been listed for  a
    substantive  hearing  on  Wednesday  24  June  2015  so,  although  the
    timescale was a little tight, it did provide ample opportunity for  the
    solicitors to obtain the medical reports they were still waiting for.

6.   On 24 June 2015  the  matter  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp.  On that occasion the judge was advised that a psychiatric
    report was awaited that it  was  hoped  would  be  available  within  a
    relatively short period of time.  The judge  was  instructed  that  the
    psychiatric assessment had occurred on 22 May 2015.  Judge  Boylan-Kemp
    acceded to the request and adjourned the hearing to a later date.   The
    First-tier Tribunal file then shows that on 6 November  2015  a  letter
    was received at Sheldon Court in Birmingham having attached  to  it  an
    application to adjourn the substantive hearing scheduled for Friday  13
    November 2013.  This application is extremely detailed and was prepared
    by Grace Capel of Garden Court Chambers and is dated 6  November  2015.
    In relation to the medical  report,  the  report  of  Dr  Morrison  the
    consultant psychiatrist is stated to have been prepared but needs to be
    finalised and that on the advice of Counsel, additional information had
    been sought from Dr Morrison who had not confirmed whether he was  able
    to respond by 13 November 2015.  In relation to  the  scarring  report,
    the application for an adjournment suggested that the  appellant  could
    not proceed fairly with the hearing  in  the  absence  of  an  Istanbul
    Protocol compliant legal-medico report evaluating  the  consistency  of
    the appellant's scarring with her account of detention and  torture  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities.  There is also reference in  this  document
    to witness statements from the appellant's sister in the United Kingdom
    and mother and sister who reside in Colombo.  The application does  not
    indicate whether any scarring report had in fact even been sought.

7.   On 11 November 2015 the application was refused  by  Designated  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy currently acting as the Resident Judge  at
    Sheldon Court for the following reasons:

         "The appellant requests a further adjournment in order to obtain  a
         medico-legal report, for additional information to be provided by a
         psychiatrist and to obtain evidence from the appellant's sister who
         is resident in the UK and from her mother and  another  sister  who
         reside in Sri Lanka.  The request is refused because  there  is  no
         explanation why these matters have not been raised  or  dealt  with
         sooner particularly given the previous case  management  and  other
         directions.

8.   The matter was not adjourned and remained listed before  Judge  Kershaw
    on 13 November, as stated.  The judge  records  in  the  determination,
    between paragraphs 34 and 43 inclusive, the matters  that  were  raised
    before him as a preliminary issue.  The judge records the following:

         "34. At the hearing I asked Mr McWatters if  he  was  intending  to
             make an application to adjourn the proceedings.  I asked  this
             as I had noted on the file that  there  had  been  a  previous
             request by the solicitors to seek an adjournment and there was
             a written application in the bundle.  The written  application
             was considered by the acting Resident Judge at Birmingham  and
             refused with reasons given in writing.  They amounted  to  the
             fact that no reasons had been given as to why the matters  had
             not been raised sooner.  There was no mention of the  previous
             hearing in June when there was an adjournment  to  obtain  the
             material still being sought now.


         35.  The application had been put into writing and is  set  out  in
             the second bundle from the appellant.  This  was  repeated  at
             the hearing.


         36.  I heard a full application but decided to refuse the  request.




         37.  The request was  made  so  that  a  medical  report  could  be
             obtained in respect of any scarring/injuries to the appellant.
              Additionally so that witness statements could be  taken  from
             several people.  I wanted to know whether an adjournment would
             actually achieve anything bearing in mind that  back  in  June
             the same matters were mentioned  and  an  adjournment  at  the
             hearing date granted so these matters could be dealt with.   I
             invited Mr McWatters to make enquiries and  let  me  know  the
             following:

             a)   has an expert been instructed already to give a report on
                  the scarring/injuries?


             b)   if not what are the proposals for instructing one?   What
                  timeframe is proposed?


             c)   what efforts have been made to obtain witness  statements
                  from family members?


             d)   when is it likely that such statements can be obtained?


             e)   if no work has been done in respect of the above what  is
                  the reason for that?

         38.  I gave Mr McWatters time to go and find out the answers to the
             above.  After he made the enquiries the case was  called  back
             on and I was told in no uncertain  terms  that  there  was  no
             expert instructed and when I asked if one  was  likely  to  be
             instructed soon he was unable to give any positive indication.




         39.  I was told that letters had been received from family  members
             who could be potential witnesses but no efforts had been  made
             to request witness statements themselves.


         40.  I considered carefully the application  and  the  written  and
             oral submissions for the application.


         41.  I have to consider the  overall  picture  here  including  the
             overriding objective as set out within  the  2014  Rules  that
             cases are to be  dealt  with  fairly  and  justly.   There  is
             Presidential  guidance  given  to  judges  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal.  Rule 4(3) gives the power to adjourn or postpone  a
             hearing.  This power must be exercised in accordance with  the
             overriding objective and having regard to any  other  relevant
             considerations.


         42.  I refer myself to  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
             Nwaigwe (Adjournment; fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).   The
             Upper Tribunal looks at whether the requesting party  will  be
             deprived of a fair  hearing  if  an  adjournment  is  refused.
             Bearing in mind that there  was  no  suggestion  that  further
             witness statements were going to be taken,  that  nothing  had
             been done  since  June  2015  and  also  that  no  expert  was
             instructed and no information that one was going to be I could
             see no reason to adjourn the  hearing.   Such  an  adjournment
             would, on the information I was told by Mr McWatters,  achieve
             nothing more than further delay.


         43.  Accordingly weighing up all matters I refused the  application
             and the hearing continued."


9.   Paragraph 1 of the grounds  of  challenge  suggests  that  the  judge's
    recording of the events on the day is in fact inaccurate.  Paragraph  1
    states the following:

         "The judge acknowledged the applicant's request for an  adjournment
         which was put in writing and  was  also  orally  presented  by  the
         appellant's Counsel [34].  The request was made so that  a  medical
         report could be obtained in respect of the scarring injuries of the
         appellant.  Additionally so that witness statements could be  taken
         from the appellant's family members [37].  The claim by  the  judge
         'After he made the enquiries the case was called back on and I  was
         told in no uncertain terms that there was no expert instructed  and
         when I asked if one was likely to be instructed soon he was  unable
         to give any positive indication' [38], is false.   The  appellant's
         solicitors had already instructed an expert in order to obtain  the
         scarring report for the appellant.  This was  communicated  to  the
         appellant's Counsel to  inform  the  judge  at  the  hearing.   The
         judge's claim 'I was told  that  letters  had  been  received  from
         family members who could be potential witnesses but no efforts  had
         been made  to  request  witness  statements  themselves'  [39],  is
         inaccurate.   The  appellant's  solicitor  clearly   informed   the
         appellant's Counsel on all efforts which had been  made  to  obtain
         the witness statement which will be ready in  a  short  time.   The
         judge had not satisfied the overriding objective as set out  within
         the 2014 Rules that the cases are  to  be  dealt  with  fairly  and
         justly as seen in the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe
         (Adjournment; fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  Rule  4(3)  gives
         the power to adjourn or postpone a hearing.   This  power  must  be
         exercised in accordance with the overriding  objective.   It  is  a
         fundamental rule that, in the absence  of  statutory  authority  or
         consensual agreement or the operation  of  necessity,  there  is  a
         right to an unbiased decision maker.  At common law this rule  will
         be applied  where  the  fair-minded  and  informed  observer,  when
         considering the  facts,  would  conclude  that  there  was  a  real
         possibility that the decision maker was biased in the case."

10.  The first point to note in relation to ground 1 is it does not  suggest
    a procedural irregularity on the basis of a failure to adjourn, it does
    appear rather to be making a specific allegation that the judge did not
    approach this matter in a fair and open way with an open  mind  willing
    to listen to both  parties'  submissions  and  the  evidence  that  was
    available and arrived  at  a  balanced  decision  having  assessed  the
    appropriate weight to be given to that evidence.  I  will  say  at  the
    outset there is no basis established, either in the papers or before me
    today, to justify a finding that the judge approached  this  matter  in
    anything other than in an open and fair-minded manner.   The  assertion
    of bias is wholly inappropriate and is not made out on  the  facts  and
    indeed was not pursued before me  by  Counsel  today,  to  his  credit.
    There is absolutely no merit in such an assertion.

11.  The other issue that concerns me relates to  the  accusations  made  in
    paragraph 1 of the grounds and whether Mr Khan, in stating what he did,
    is in breach of his duty of candour which requires him to be honest  at
    the very least in relation to the matters that have  been  put  to  the
    Tribunal and not to set out pleadings which are clearly  inaccurate  or
    false.  I make this statement  as  Mr  McWatters,  in  accordance  with
    directions, signed and filed a witness statement.  Although the witness
    statement does not contain a declaration of truth immediately above the
    signature the statement is opened with the words "I,  Chris  McWatters,
    of Garden Court Chambers, 57-60 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, WC2A 3LJ,
    make this statement believing that its contents are  true".   I  accept
    this as a valid witness statement and have no reason to believe that an
    admitted member of the bar practising from Garden Court Chambers or  Mr
    McWatters would have  any  reason  to  mislead  this  Tribunal  in  the
    material that he has produced.  It is a short statement but I will read
    it in full:


         "1.  I am a barrister practicing  from  Garden  Court  Chambers  in
             London.


         2.   On 11th November 2015 I was instructed  by  HK  solicitors  to
             represent Niranjini Sabaratnam at a full asylum appeal hearing
             at the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal in Birmingham.


         3.   An application for an adjournment had already been made on the
             papers in order for Ms Sabaratnam to obtain  a  medical  legal
             scarring  report,  and  for  her  to  obtain  further  witness
             statements from her relatives.  This had been refused.  I  was
             instructed to  reapply  for  the  adjournment  orally  at  the
             hearing.


         4.    At  the  hearing  on  13th  November,  prior  to  making  the
             application, I was asked by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Kershaw
             to obtain certain information from HK solicitors.  I have  now
             read his determination and I can confirm  it  is  an  accurate
             account as to the approach he took and the answers I  gave  in
             respect of the information he required regarding the  proposed
             expert and the proposed witness statements.


         5.   When I spoke to  the  solicitors,  I  only  ever  spoke  to  a
             paralegal who was handling the case, and he informed  me  that
             he had lined up a psychiatrist  in  respect  of  the  scarring
             report.  I was also informed that the solicitors were  in  the
             process of acquiring witness statements but could not give  me
             timescales.  At no stage have I ever spoken with the solicitor
             with conduct of the case.


         6.   It was only at the hearing  on  13th  November  2015,  that  I
             discovered that an application for  an  adjournment  had  been
             made several  months  before  in  order  for  Ms  Sabaratnam's
             representatives to obtain further expert evidence and  witness
             statements from her relatives, as well as discovering that the
             solicitors had failed to go about acquiring this evidence.


         7.    It  was  evident  that  Ms  Sabaratnam  had  not  been   well
             represented by HK Solicitors, and I  made  my  views  on  that
             point clear to her accordingly.


         8.   I was never sent a copy of  the  determination  of  First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Kershaw by HK Solicitors, and after the hearing
             on 13th November 2015, I  received  no  further  communication
             from HK solicitors."

12.  Two points arise from this statement.  The first is that  there  is  no
    evidence within the Tribunal file including the judge's note  that  the
    statement in paragraph 7 of Counsel's  witness  statement,  namely  the
    communication between  Counsel  and  his  client  in  relation  to  the
    standard of service represented by HK Solicitors, was ever communicated
    to the judge.  That is a statement that would have  been  protected  by
    legal professional privilege at the time and  there  is  no  indication
    that Counsel breached any professional obligation owed to his client in
    relation to his views vis-�-vis HK Solicitors.

13.  The assertion therefore that in the  determination  between  paragraphs
    34 and 43 the judge failed to accurately record what he had  been  told
    by Counsel is materially incorrect. Such an  allegation  has  not  been
    proved or established on the material made available to me.

14.  Before this Tribunal today Mr Bandegani has provided a useful  skeleton
    argument.  It was handed up at  the  hearing  and  I  make  no  further
    observation with regard to that.  In his skeleton argument Mr Bandegani
    analyses the approach taken by Judge Kershaw in relation  to  not  only
    the content of  the  determination  but  also  Judge  Kershaw's  letter
    written to the Resident  Judge  at  Field  House  in  response  to  the
    assertions that have been made against him.

15.  It is not disputed that if an  adjournment  application  is  made,  the
    issue is that of fairness.  In assessing the question of  fairness  the
    test to be applied is whether there was any deprivation of the affected
    party's right to a fair hearing.  This does  not  require  a  judge  to
    adjourn  a  matter  on  receipt  of  each  and  every  request  for  an
    adjournment that has been  made  but  it  does  require  the  judge  to
    consider all the material available before him or her before coming  to
    a conclusion as to whether a fair  trial  can  be  undertaken.   Having
    looked at the material in this file with great care, both prior to  the
    earlier application and in relation to today's proceedings, I make  two
    findings of fact that apply to the judge's assessment of the  evidence.
    The first of these is that it is clear that the judge did consider  the
    evidence made available to him with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
    scrutiny.  The second finding is that it  is  clear  from  reading  the
    determination that  the  judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for  the
    findings made in relation to the application for an adjournment and  in
    proceeding thereafter in relation to his dismissal of the core  account
    advanced by the appellant.  As such the weight  to  be  given  to  that
    evidence was a matter for the judge.

16.  In his submissions Mr Bandegani summarised matters in a  very  accurate
    way.  We were discussing at that point the issue of materiality and  it
    was submitted that the findings on the deficiencies,  when  taken  with
    other material not available, shows that the decision of the judge  was
    one in which it was capable of being found that the  appellant's  claim
    had in fact been shown to be met on the evidence.  That of course is  a
    statement made with the benefit of hindsight  and  in  this  respect  I
    refer specifically to the  scarring  report  that  has  now  been  made
    available.  The date of the medical report the appellant is now seeking
    to rely upon is that dated 5 June  2016  following  examination  on  29
    April 2016, five months after the hearing on 13 November  2015.   I  am
    sure many judges and advocates wish they had  the  benefit  of  perfect
    hindsight and if they did it may be that some decisions that  are  made
    would not be made in the terms that they  are,  but  that  is  not  the
    required test.  As stated, a judge is not required to adjourn a  matter
    solely because a party requests it to obtain evidence.  Indeed as  long
    ago as 2003 in the case of A (Afghanistan) [2003] UKIAT  165  where  an
    Adjudicator refused to adjourn part-heard to allow a medical report  to
    be produced.  The Tribunal said the Adjudicator was entitled to  refuse
    the request and was required to do so as the  appeal  could  be  justly
    determined without the adjournment.  There had been  ample  opportunity
    before the hearing to obtain a medical report and  the  representatives
    were aware of the circumstances that suggested  that  medical  evidence
    might be relevant.

17.  In relation to medical conditions, the Court of Appeal  in  R  (On  the
    application of AM (Cameroon)) v AIT [2007]  EWCA  Civ  131  found  that
    unfair decisions on interlocutory matters such as adjournments  or  the
    admission of evidence can amount to errors of law  but  such  decisions
    will have to be grounds for arguing that they display gross  procedural
    unfairness or a complete denial of natural justice.  In that  case  the
    Court of Appeal thought that test had been met as the judge refused  to
    adjourn and the appellant was medically unfit to give evidence  because
    he listed the case for a day when Counsel was not available and because
    he refused permission for evidence to be taken on the telephone.

18.  It is important that  we  do  not  lose  sight,  when  considering  the
    allegation of procedural unfairness, of the chronology and the  matters
    that were before the judge.  This judge was perhaps  more  generous  in
    the approach taken, bending over backwards it could be said  to  ensure
    that matters were properly examined and adopting  a  fair  approach  to
    ensuring that all matters were properly  considered,  including  asking
    Counsel to go and find answers to five specific questions.  It is clear
    that when Counsel returned, no explanation for the failure  to  provide
    the material that the adjournment was sought for had been provided.  In
    general or specifically in relation to the  additional  time  that  the
    Tribunal had granted on the previous occasion.

19.  Directions are not given for the benefit of a  court/tribunal  with  an
    expectation that an advocate will not comply with the same.   They  are
    given  to  ensure  effective,  cost-effective,   and   efficient   case
    management.  Parties including  Home  Office  Presenting  Officers  are
    under  an  obligation,  a  professional  obligation,  to  comply   with
    directions given by the Tribunal and it cannot be  suggested  that  the
    parties were unaware of the fact a further opportunity had been granted
    by the First-tier Tribunal to  enable  the  appellant  to  produce  the
    evidence within a specific time.

20.   Mr  Bandegani,  before  the  Tribunal  today,  has  spent  some   time
    discussing the fact that it appears with the benefit of hindsight  that
    the reason that report was not obtained was that HK Solicitors had  not
    bothered asking for one.  I do accept Mr  Bandegani's  submission  that
    the judge  was  confused  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  information
    received. The psychiatric report was clearly one that was available  to
    the  judge.   The  judge  refers  to  the  medical  evidence  and   the
    adjournment application that had been made and  that  was  reviewed  or
    renewed at the hearing, specifically relating to the scarring report.

21.  The suggestion that with the benefit of hindsight it should  have  been
    known to the judge or that the judge should have been able to work  out
    for himself the reason for the failure of HK Solicitors  to  commission
    the report, has not been made out  on  the  basis  of  the  information
    available to the judge at that time.  It is of particular importance to
    note that Mr McWatters when returning to the judge failed to explain to
    the judge or give any indication that the matter may have arisen  as  a
    result of improper representation by the solicitors.  For  that  reason
    although Mr Bandegani relies on the case of FP (Iran) and MB (Libya)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13  which  I
    accept is authority for the point that clients are no longer  fixed  by
    the failings of their legal representatives, the failings of the  legal
    representative were matters not made known to the judge on the day.  In
    fact so far as the judge was concerned it appeared that no  report  was
    available and there was no timescale provided as to when one  would  be
    made available.  On that basis the judge was fully entitled in  law  to
    go on to consider whether the matter could be fairly  adjudicated  upon
    on the basis of the available evidence and his finding that it was,  in
    all the circumstances, has not been shown to amount to legal  error  on
    the  basis  of  the  judge's  conduct,  recordings,  or  the  issue  of
    procedural irregularity.  Ample time was given, everybody knew what was
    required, somebody did not do it, the judge was  arguably  entitled  to
    act as he did.

22.  In relation  to  a  further  submission  by  Mr  Bandegani  as  to  the
    materiality of the expert report, we have now had  the  opportunity  of
    reading that report  in  which  comment  is  made  upon  the  scarring,
    including  whether  it  is  consistent  or  not  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's explanation.  It appears the report has been written on the
    basis of a short interview with the appellant. It is settled  law  that
    medical  reports  are  not,  or  should  not  be,  obtained  by   legal
    representatives with a view  that  the  medical  report  comments  upon
    credibility.  HH (Ethiopia) Court of Appeal [2000] Civ 306 is authority
    that it is not a function of the medical expert  to  comment  upon  the
    claimant's credibility and in HE [2004] UKIAT Mr Justice  Ouseley  then
    President of the Upper Tribunal  found  that  the  Tribunal  said  that
    practitioners should take care in putting forward  medical  reports  as
    probative of their client's credibility.  A doctor will normally accept
    what his patient tells him and indeed it is  not  his  role  to  assess
    whether what his patient tells him is true.  When a  doctor  says  that
    physical features such as scarring  are  consistent  with  a  patient's
    account of how he came by  them,  this  has  the  effect  only  of  not
    negating the claim since they may  be  equally  consistent  with  other
    causes.  A psychiatric report  is  even  more  dependent  on  what  the
    patient says.  Even a diagnosis of PTSD or depression actually reflects
    symptoms which the patient is genuinely suffering.  There may  well  be
    other causes where the report  simply  recounts  a  history  which  the
    Adjudicator is minded to reject and contains  nothing  which  does  not
    depend on the truthfulness of the appellant, the part which it plays in
    the assessment of credibility is negligible.

23.  The reason the judge dismissed the  appellant's  claim  of  involvement
    with the LTTE, torture and the medical evidence, is  simply  summarised
    by the judge at paragraph 65 of the determination where he states:

         "I cannot accept her evidence  on  being  ill-treated  as  claimed.
         There are too many factual  discrepancies  in  my  finding.   I  am
         lenient as towards the years things happened but the events and  in
         particular being ill treated would be matters I would have expected
         consistency in and that is not the case here."

    The judge has given adequate reasons for finding that the appellant  is
    not a reliable witness, especially having seen and heard her give  oral
    evidence and there was nothing in the scarring report which we have now
    seen that would suggest that, notwithstanding the  lack  of  successful
    challenge to the procedural aspects, the interests of justice need this
    matter to be reopened.  It is also a case that  if  a  report  obtained
    after the determination gives rise to a different outcome, it is always
    open to the appellant to make a further application, a fresh claim,  to
    the Secretary of State, although she elected not to do so but to pursue
    this challenge before the Tribunal today.

24.  Having taken careful account of what Mr Bandegani has said in  relation
    to this matter and all the evidence before me I do not  find  that  the
    appellant has made out that there is any arguable legal  error  in  the
    determination  of  Judge  Kershaw  which  is  the  determination  under
    challenge.  For that reason the appeal is dismissed.

Decision

25.  There is no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision. The determination shall stand.


    No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date 2 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

