
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA059142014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 8 June 2016                            |On 15 June 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                     W T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Background

 1. The appellant in this case  is  a  male  citizen  of  Afghanistan.   He
    arrived in the UK clandestinely and claimed asylum on 4  October  2010.
    His asylum application was refused on 23 November 2010 but he was given
    discretionary leave to remain until 31  July  2013  because  he  was  a
    minor.  He applied for further leave to remain on 20 June  2013.   That
    application was refused.  The appellant's  first  appeal  against  that
    decision was allowed on asylum grounds and under Articles 2 and 3 in  a
    decision promulgated on 28 September 2014.

 2. The judge found that the appellant was aged 17 having been born on [  ]
    1997.  The Upper Tribunal set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 17 February 2015, as  the  Upper
    Tribunal found an error of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    failure to give adequate reasons for departing from the age  assessment
    made by the London Borough of Croydon which found  that  the  appellant
    was born on [ ] 1996.  The appeal was remitted back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal with none of the findings of fact preserved.

 3. Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kaler  subsequently  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal in a decision promulgated  on  4  April  2016.   The
    appellant again appealed with permission.  The appeal came before me.

Error of Law

Ground 1

 4. It was argued that Judge Kaler erred in making adverse  findings  about
    the failure of the appellant to give information to the Red Cross about
    his family without asking the appellant any questions on  this  matter.
    A letter from the Red Cross identified one  person  whose  details  the
    appellant had supplied, but he was a neighbour and not a family member.

 5. Although the judge granting permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    was not persuaded in relation to the first ground,  Mr  Duffy  conceded
    this ground was properly arguable before me.

 6. Ms Radford submitted a helpful note of the hearing before  Judge  Kaler
    which indicated that at the  start  of  that  hearing  that  the  judge
    advised the appellant as follows:

         "This is your appeal against decision to refuse you asylum - appeal
         was allowed but then Upper Tribunal overruled, so that's  why  back
         here - hear everything afresh  -  not  binding  on  me  -  had  the
         transcript - can have a look at it."

 7. It was argued by Ms Radford and not  disputed  by  Mr  Duffy  that  the
    appellant had previously told the First-tier  Tribunal,  at  his  first
    appeal, what family details he gave to the British Red Cross to  assist
    with his tracing request and that this  included  the  details  of  the
    "whole  family,  specifically   his   mother,   father,   brother   and
    grandfather".  Although the appeal was remitted de novo to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, it was not disputed by Mr Duffy that this  evidence  was
    both unchallenged and accepted as credible by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    at the appellant's first hearing.

 8. In light of this it was  conceded  by  Mr  Duffy,  that  it  would  not
    therefore have been obvious to the appellant or his representative that
    he needed to repeat all the contents of his examination-in-chief again,
    particularly given that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  at  his  second
    hearing stated that she had a record of the evidence  in  his  previous
    appeal and could refer to it.

 9. I had before me counsel's note of the evidence given at the hearing  on
    18 September 2014 in relation to the appellant giving  details  of  his
    entire family to the Red Cross but that the Red  Cross  asked  for  the
    name of a well-known person and the appellant therefore gave  the  name
    of A T, a villager who was a neighbour.  It is also recorded  that  the
    appellant gave evidence that the Red Cross would have a problem finding
    people through women's details,  which  was  another  reason  why  this
    individual's details were given.

10. I am satisfied therefore that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    making assumptions about what the appellant had told  the  British  Red
    Cross without specifically asking the appellant about  this  issue  and
    without any evidence to support that conclusion.

11. The judge's failure to put to  the  appellant  her  concern  about  the
    content of the British Red Cross letter which  led  to  her  conclusion
    that the appellant had "not assisted" the Red  Cross  and  had  made  a
    disingenuous tracing request led to the judge  consequently  giving  no
    weight to the Red Cross' inability to  trace  the  appellant's  family.
    This led to the judge concluding at [53] and [63]  that  the  appellant
    would  have  contact  with  his  relatives  if  he  were  returned   to
    Afghanistan.  This was material  to  the  judge's  conclusions  on  the
    conditions the appellant would face in  Kabul  and  led  to  the  judge
    distinguishing AA (Afghanistan) [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC).

12. The error was material to the judge's credibility findings generally as
    Mr Duffy did not dispute that the aspect of  the  appellant's  case  on
    which the First-tier Tribunal Judge Kaler made a  negative  comment  on
    credibility was specifically in relation to whether  he  was  genuinely
    unable to contact his family.  I am of the view that this  in  turn  is
    material to the judge's findings as to the family's  real  reasons  for
    sending the appellant abroad  [although  the  judge  clearly  did  make
    findings that the  appellant's  father  was  not  of  interest  to  the
    authorities and also found that there was no basis for fearing that the
    appellant  might  be  harmed  by  his  relatives  had  he  remained  in
    Afghanistan].

13. However, I am satisfied that the judge's failure to take  into  account
    the appellant's previous evidence, having indicated  to  the  appellant
    that she could make reference to it, coupled with her  failure  to  put
    her concerns to the appellant in relation  to  the  Red  Cross  letter,
    amounts to an error.  This was procedurally unfair  and  the  error  is
    material as it led to the judge finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    assisted the Red Cross and that he made his way  to  the  UK  with  the
    assistance and encouragement of his relatives.

14. Although, as noted above, the  judge  did  make  separate  findings  in
    relation to elements of the appellant's claim which were not  accepted,
    it cannot be said definitively that she would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion had she not made the error in relation  to  the  appellant's
    failure to assist the Red Cross tracing efforts.

15. Mr Duffy conceded that the first ground of appeal was made out.  It  is
    not necessary accordingly to consider the second ground as I find  that
    the first ground discloses a  material  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety.

16. However, for  completeness  it  was  the  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration  under  the
    Immigration Rules was inadequate as it amounted to  no  more  than:  "I
    find that he does not qualify for leave to  remain  under  the  Rules".
    Although the judge went on to make findings outside of the  Immigration
    Rules and I am of the view that it cannot be said  that  such  findings
    can never be determinative of the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules,
    in this case I accept that the judge fell into error.

17. The judge did  not  give  specific  consideration  to  the  appellant's
    vulnerability as a result of his diagnosis with Borderline  Personality
    Disorder  and  Major  Depressive  Episode.   Although  the  judge  made
    findings that she was bound by KH (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  1354  and  therefore  in  the
    judge's view the appellant would not be entitled to leave under Article
    8 either, that does not in  itself  definitively  settle  whether  this
    appellant  might  succeed  in  demonstrating  that   there   are   very
    significant obstacles to his integration back  into  Afghanistan.   The
    judge also failed to make any findings in relation to the evidence  and
    submissions that were before the judge in relation to this issue  under
    the Immigration Rules.

18. Again, Mr Duffy conceded that he  was  also  in  difficulties  on  this
    ground.  That must be particularly the case as the error  under  ground
    1, in relation to the appellant's ability or  otherwise  to  trace  his
    family,  is  potentially  relevant  to  his  ability  as  someone  with
    diagnosed  mental  health  difficulties,  to  reintegrate   back   into
    Afghanistan.   There  were  no  factual  findings  as  to  the  claimed
    disappearance of the appellant's father and brother, nor to the claimed
    Taliban involvement of  the  appellant's  father.   At  paragraph  [40]
    although the judge did not find that  the  appellant's  father  was  of
    interest to the authorities for teaching Taliban students she  went  on
    to state that the authorities may have questioned him once or twice but
    that could have been in connection with any number of matters.   It  is
    not clear therefore whether any Taliban involvement was accepted.

19. As the errors  turn  in  large  part  on  the  appellant's  credibility
    regrettably a complete rehearing of this appeal is again  necessary  as
    was the agreed view of both parties before me.  Although the  appellant
    has already had two appeals in the First-tier Tribunal, I am  persuaded
    that such a rehearing should take  place  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    particularly in view of the fact that the error in ground 1 resulted in
    the appellant being deprived of a fair hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it should be set aside in its entirety.

Directions


This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  de  novo
before any judge apart from Judge Kaler and Judge Callender Smith.  For  the
avoidance of doubt no findings  of  fact  are  preserved  from  any  of  the
previous hearings  and  the  appellant  should  not  rely  on  any  evidence
previously given before the First-tier Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 13 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


