
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/05350/2013
     AA/05351/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 October 2013                             |On 1 November 2013           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKIC

                                   Between

                                SADIA MUSHTAQ
                               MINAHAL FATIMA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss N Hashmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the dismissal by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Brunnen of the appeal by Sadia Mushtaq and her small  daughter  who  is
    her dependant against the rejection by the Secretary of  State  of  her
    asylum claim.

 2. The background is as follows.  The  principal  appellant  was  born  in
    December 1984.  She is from Pakistan.  She has a daughter who was  born
    in this country on 22 February of this year.  The appellant grew up  in
    Sialcot.  She studied to degree level and then worked for two years  as
    a teacher of English and social studies in a  government  school.   Her
    paternal uncle  has  a  business  manufacturing  sports  equipment  and
    apparently he  suggested  that  if  she  obtained  a  qualification  in
    business management he would employ her.  She thought that that  was  a
    good idea and with the aid of the uncle and her father she  selected  a
    course at the London Business College and received entry clearance as a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant on 18 March  2012,  that  being  valid
    until 28 April of this year.

 3. She arrived in this country at the end of March 2012.  Arrangements had
    been made for her to lodge with a family but it seems that those  broke
    down after a few days and she had to  find  alternative  accommodation.
    She did not seek help from her family.  She found  it  difficult.   She
    became distressed and  met  up  with  a  man  called  Arif  Karim.  She
    explained her problems. He persuaded her to share his accommodation and
    he, as it was put, seduced her with promises of  marriage  and  in  the
    result she became pregnant in May 2012.  Apparently  she  had  informed
    the college that because of the accommodation problems  she  could  not
    start her studies straight away after arrival and the college  informed
    her that the non-attendance had been reported to the Home  Office.   Mr
    Karim assured her that he would marry her but once he  appreciated  she
    was pregnant  he  began  to  backtrack  and  prevaricated.   He  became
    controlling and he in the end would not  marry  her  and  left  her  in
    October 2012 and effectively she was then abandoned.  She had contacted
    her sister in the meantime.  Her sister had told her mother who in turn
    had told her father and brothers and the men of  the  family  she  said
    were extremely angry, taking the view that she had brought shame on the
    family and they disowned her and she said that if she  were  to  return
    they would kill her and her child and also the female  members  of  the
    family broke off contact with her.  And so it was that in February this
    year she contacted the Home Office to claim asylum.   She  was  advised
    apparently to wait until she had given birth and, following a screening
    interview and a substantive interview, her application was  refused  on
    20 May 2013.

 4. Essentially her application was based upon the  contention  that  as  a
    member of a social group, namely single parents in Pakistan, she  would
    be liable to persecution and two matters in particular were relied  on.
    First and foremost, she  would  suffer  possible  death  and  certainly
    ostracism by her family and so she would  not  be  able  to  return  in
    safety, and, secondly, she would land  up  as  a  single  parent.   The
    Pakistan Criminal  Code  indicated  that  fornication  was  a  criminal
    offence and since a child had been conceived outside marriage  she  was
    guilty of fornication and so was liable to the penalty in that  regard.



 5. Those contentions were, as we say, not accepted  by  the  Secretary  of
    State who in addition took the view that if there was any risk from her
    parents she would be able to relocate.  She was an  intelligent  person
    from what could be  described  as  the  middle  class  and  there  were
    agencies available who could provide assistance for such as her, namely
    a single parent without a husband or a man to look after her.   Clearly
    she would be in a difficult position.  There is no question about  that
    but that difficulty would not be so serious as to amount to persecution
    or to contravene the need for protection under the European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 6. She called  as  a  witness  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  a
    gentleman called Mohammed Khan.  He said that he knew  the  appellant's
    family because her family and his family  lived  in  the  same  village
    before they had both moved to Sialcot and he met the appellant in  this
    country in July 2012.  He said that he had met the appellant's  brother
    who told him that the family would wash  out  the  appellant's  sin  by
    killing her when she returned to Pakistan and he said that  the  threat
    to the appellant was in his view genuine since her father was a  devout
    Muslim and very angry about what she had done.

 7. The judge went on to  say  this  and  we  quote  paragraph  20  of  his
    determination:

         "There is, however, reason to doubt Mr  Khan's  evidence.   He  has
         said the Appellant's  father  and  brother  were  farmers  yet  the
         Appellant said in her interview that her father was banker and  one
         of her brothers was a lawyer, although  the  other  brother  was  a
         farmer.  This must call into question how well Mr Khan really knows
         the family."

 8. There was  present  an  interpreter.   Apparently  Mr  Khan  needed  an
    interpreter for his evidence although perhaps it was not  so  necessary
    for  the  appellant  herself.   The  interpreter   was   not   entirely
    satisfactory.   Miss  Hashmi  who  represented  her   below   and   has
    represented her on this appeal herself was a speaker  of  the  relevant
    language and was able to understand where the interpreter  was  getting
    things  wrong  and  indeed  she  made  a  number   of   complaints   or
    interjections  to  correct  matters  that   had   not   been   properly
    interpreted.  However it is important to note what the  judge  says  in
    paragraph 11 about this and again we quote:

         "I must also record that the interpreter provided by  the  Tribunal
         for this appeal was substandard.  Concern  was  expressed  by  Miss
         Hashmi but she did not ask for the  hearing  to  be  abandoned,  no
         doubt having in mind the Appellant's financial situation.   It  was
         necessary to take care and to go over some questions more than once
         to  ensure  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  had  been   correctly
         recorded.  Miss Hashmi did not make any further reference  to  this
         aspect of the matter in her submissions."

    Although that refers to the appellant's evidence rather than Mr  Khan's
    and that may be somewhat mistaken, nonetheless the point is an  obvious
    one, namely that Miss Hashmi could but did not  find  it  necessary  to
    make any representations as to the clear error Mr Khan was making about
    the occupation of the father and it should have been obvious that  that
    was a matter which was capable of  being  of  some  importance  because
    there was doubt raised as to the veracity of  the  appellant's  account
    that she would be killed if she returned to Pakistan and to her  family
    and effectively would be abandoned by her family.

 9. The judge did take the view that, albeit he accepted  that  the  father
    and brothers would be very angry and might even go so far as to  disown
    her, nonetheless he did not accept the threats to kill.  He said he was
    not impressed by Mr Khan's evidence, he did not accept his claim to  be
    acquainted with the appellant's family or his claim  that  the  brother
    had told him that they would kill her and he went on to  say  that  the
    fact that the appellant called this evidence damaged her credibility on
    the issue and he did not accept threats had been made.  That finding is
    criticised by Miss Hashmi but in our view it was  a  finding  that  the
    judge was entitled to reach on the material before him.  It  must  have
    been clear that if Mr Khan's evidence was rejected because he  was  not
    seen to be telling the truth about a relevant matter it meant that  the
    appellant herself must have known that Mr Khan was not in a position to
    give the assistance that he was appearing to give and so it did  damage
    her credibility and in our view entitled overall the  judge  to  reject
    her evidence as to the threats.  Furthermore, the judge was entitled as
    he did to rely upon  the  objective  material  which  is  available  in
    relation to honour killings and which is to be found in the decision of
    this Tribunal in KA [2010] UKUT 216 and the fact that the appellant did
    not come from a tribal area or a rural area but  from  a  middle  class
    family, her father being a banker and one of  her  brothers  a  lawyer,
    meant that the chances that they were such as would indulge  in  honour
    killings was singularly improbable.  Overall, in our  view,  the  judge
    was as we say entitled to conclude as he did on that issue.

10. The other matter relied on was the failure of the judge to  deal  with,
    or even to refer directly to, the fact that the Pakistan Criminal  Code
    made fornication a criminal offence  and  the  appellant  herself  was,
    prima facie, guilty of that offence  and  therefore  would  suffer,  or
    could suffer as a result.  What has to be established of course is that
    there was a real risk of that happening and, although the threshold  is
    not a high one, nonetheless it is necessary to establish that the  risk
    is a reality.  The fact that that is on the statute book as a  criminal
    offence does not mean that it will necessarily be implemented and there
    is equally no reason to believe that the appellant, even  if  she  were
    unable to receive the protection of her family and certainly  that  has
    not been established, would be known to be someone who had a child as a
    result of fornication and would be pursued criminally  on  that  basis.
    The risk in our view was such that the judge would have  been  entitled
    to have regarded it not as a real risk had he dealt with the matter  as
    he clearly should have  done.   However  we  are  in  the  position  of
    deciding that for ourselves.

11. There is no further evidence that can be produced or relied on  and  so
    there is no question of returning the matter for a further decision  to
    be reached on fact.  All that is relied on is  the  objective  material
    and essentially that provides no more than  than  this  is  an  offence
    within the Criminal Code.  There is no evidence produced that  goes  to
    the likelihood or the risk of this being used  against  this  appellant
    were she to be returned to Pakistan.

12. The  other  matter  that  was  dealt  with  was  the  question  of  the
    possibility of relocation  to  another  city  in  Pakistan.   Both  the
    Secretary of  State  and  the  judge  on  appeal  took  the  view  that
    relocation was a real possibility and in those circumstances that there
    were organisations  which  were  available  to  assist.   There  is  no
    specific ground of appeal relating to that and it is plain in our  view
    that the judge was entitled to decide that relocation was an answer if,
    in reality, the appellant were rejected by her family were  she  to  be
    returned to Pakistan.  In those circumstances,  although  we  recognise
    that the appellant has got herself  in  the  situation  which  is  most
    unfortunate and she will suffer undoubtedly as a result of the  actions
    of Mr Arif Khan, nonetheless she does not qualify as  a  refugee  or  a
    person in need of  humanitarian  protection  and  accordingly  we  must
    dismiss this appeal.






Signed                                  Dated:                 2013


Mr Justice Collins
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


