
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05257/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th October 2015                          |On 11th March 2016            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    [S S]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr R Singer (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent's appeal against a  decision  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson ("the
    judge") in a decision promulgated on 16th July 2015.

2.   The respondent claimed to be at risk on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  as  a
    person of adverse interest to the authorities.  The  judge  found  that
    the respondent had suffered ill-treatment, in all likelihood  during  a
    recent visit there, and concluded that she  was  a  refugee.   On  this
    basis, she found that there was no need to consider Articles 2, 3 and 8
    of the Human Rights Convention.

3.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge erred in two respects.  First, in  failing  to  consider
    and apply country guidance in GJ and Others  [2013]  UKUT  00319.   The
    decision  contained  no   proper   assessment   of   the   respondent's
    circumstances in relation to  the  risk  factors  set  out  in  GJ  and
    approved by the Court of Appeal in MP.  The judge was obliged to assess
    whether or not the respondent's profile was such that she was likely to
    be perceived by the authorities as representing a threat to the unitary
    state, so as to give rise to a risk  of  detention  and  ill-treatment.
    The assessment at paragraph 40  of  the  decision  did  not  take  into
    account the relevant risk factors.

4.   Secondly, the judge erred in giving weight to a diagnosis of  PTSD  and
    in accepting the medical expert's view of the reasons for discrepancies
    in the evidence.  The expert was not  a  psychiatrist  and  the  report
    before the judge was concerned  with  scarring.   Although  the  expert
    considered self-infliction by proxy in relation to the injuries  giving
    rise to scarring, it did not follow that she had considered alternative
    reasons for the psychological symptoms and so the guidance given in  HE
    [2004] UKIAT 00321 was not  properly  followed.   This  undermined  the
    favourable credibility assessment.

5.   Permission to appeal was given on 30th July 2015 in  relation  to  both
    grounds.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Tufan said that the GJ risk factors were  not  properly  taken  into
    account.  The respondent's immigration history showed that she  had  no
    particular problems in Sri Lanka, came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    student, returned for a short holiday and then apparently suffered  the
    ill-treatment claimed to have occurred.  In issue was  the  credibility
    of the overall account.  The judge gave weight to the  report  from  Dr
    Longman but the guidance given in HE and in JL (China) was not properly
    applied.  If an account were based on what a claimant  told  a  doctor,
    less weight might be due to it in some circumstances.   So  far  as  Dr
    Persaud's report was concerned, the judge referred to  shortcomings  in
    it.  The evidence contained in the respondent's bundle, for example  at
    page 48, showed that she denied suicidal ideation and there was no real
    risk of  self-harm.   At  paragraph  36  of  the  decision,  the  judge
    considered inconsistencies in the respondent's account and made mention
    of part of the Secretary of State's decision letter but took no account
    of the important adverse finding by the Secretary of State at paragraph
    27 of that document,  concerning  the  respondent's  journey  from  Sri
    Lanka.

7.   Mr Singer said that the decision was sustainable.  Dr Persaud's  report
    was not rejected, notwithstanding any shortcomings and the judge  found
    overall that it supported Dr Longman's findings.   The  respondent  was
    not fit to give evidence at the hearing.  Suicide risk  was  raised  in
    the skeleton argument and if the decision had contained a resolution of
    that issue, there would have been an alternative  basis  on  which  the
    respondent might have succeeded.

8.   The findings of fact made by the judge were  brief  but  it  was  clear
    that she broadly accepted the  respondent's  account  as  credible  and
    rejected the Secretary of State's criticism of it.  Mr Singer  accepted
    that the judge did not expressly apply the GJ and Others  guidance  but
    on the basis of her findings of fact, she would  have  found  that  the
    respondent was on a "stop" list.  Risk on return did not  arise  merely
    by reason of a high ranking post in the LTTE, for  example.   A  person
    might be at risk even if not on a "stop" or "watch" list and so not  at
    risk at the airport.

9.   The judge made sufficient findings and properly took into  account  the
    past torture suffered  by  the  respondent,  bearing  directly  on  the
    present risk she faced.

10.  Paragraphs 16 to 20 in the decision contained a  summary  of  the  case
    and it was clear that the judge  had  in  mind  that  the  respondent's
    brother had been detained as a person suspected of supporting the LTTE.
     There was evidence of ongoing  interest  in  the  respondent  and  her
    family by the authorities.  The judge accepted these parts of the case.
     The judge also had in mind that Dr Longman is not a  psychiatrist  and
    she was entitled to accept the report as supportive.

11.  It was clear that GJ and Others showed that bribery to  secure  release
    and exit through the airport was still relevant factors and  the  judge
    considered the Secretary of  State's  criticisms  of  the  respondent's
    account of events at paragraphs 36 and 37  of  the  decision.   It  was
    correct that paragraph 27 of the Secretary of State's  decision  letter
    was not dealt with  expressly  but  this  was  about  the  respondent's
    journey and where she travelled to under the agent's guidance and there
    was mention of  health  issues.   The  judge  found  that  the  medical
    evidence broadly supported the respondent's case and set  out  relevant
    findings of fact at paragraph 39.  There was a clear finding  that  the
    respondent had recently been tortured.  The judge  must  have  accepted
    that the authorities were still interested in her and, coupled with the
    clear finding regarding past torture, it was  apparent  that  paragraph
    353 in GJ and Others had been taken into account  and  applied.   There
    was a real risk that the respondent would be on a "stop" list.  She had
    scarring on her body, mental health issues and would be  less  able  to
    defend herself if questioned.  Overall, the judge was entitled to  find
    that the asylum grounds were made out.

12.  Had the judge considered the alternative case on suicide risk,  in  the
    light of the respondent's skeleton argument, the appeal might very well
    have been allowed on  this  basis.   Suicidal  ideation  had  not  been
    revealed in earlier medical assessments but the respondent had a report
    from an expert in the present appeal.  The judge acknowledged that  the
    respondent had said little about torture to her GP but this was  by  no
    means fatal to the finding that she was a vulnerable person.

13.  In reply, Mr Tufan said that the risk factors in GJ and Others  and  MP
    fell to be applied even if a person had  attracted  interest  from  the
    authorities in the past.  It did not  follow  that  there  would  be  a
    present risk.  All the factors had to  be  considered  and  taken  into
    account.  The absence of a finding regarding  the  journey  and  travel
    arrangements, considered in paragraph 27 of the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision letter, was important.  The respondent's case might have  been
    that she was under the  control  of  an  agent  but,  nonetheless,  the
    evidence showed that she was in  possession  of  a  valid  visit  visa.
    There were inconsistencies in the part of her case regarding travel  to
    India.

14.  In a brief discussion about the appropriate  venue  for  re-making  the
    decision, should an error of law be found, Mr Singer proposed that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, in  view  of  the
    extensive fact finding that would be required, including in relation to
    the respondent's ill-health and suicide risk.  Mr Tufan said  that  the
    venue was a matter for the Upper Tribunal to decide.

Conclusion on Error of Law

15.  The judge considered the asylum grounds of  appeal  but  there  was  no
    assessment, however, of the respondent's human rights case.  This is of
    some importance, as her case was advanced on the basis that  she  would
    be at risk as a result of her mental health  difficulties  and  suicide
    risk.

16.  The judge's assessment began with consideration of the reports from  Dr
    Longman and Dr Persaud and took  into  account  salient  parts  of  the
    respondent's account, in particular the apparent absence of any mention
    of wounds to her GP in April 2013, shortly after the events claimed  to
    have occurred.  The judge dealt briefly with inconsistencies  found  by
    the Secretary of State but, as Mr Tufan submitted, an important part of
    the appellant's case was omitted.  Paragraph 27  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision letter is of importance, as the  respondent's  initial
    account of her journey was not fully consistent with  her  later  claim
    that she left Sri Lanka under the guidance of an agent.

17.  The judge drew her analysis together  and  found  that  the  respondent
    suffered ill-treatment and that the evidence of past torture was a good
    indicator that she likely to be tortured if returned.

18.  With great respect to the judge,  notwithstanding  mention  of  GJ  and
    Others in the context of exit procedures at the airport,  the  decision
    does not contain an assessment of the respondent's circumstances in the
    light of the risk factors set out in the country guidance part  of  the
    Upper  Tribunal's  decision.   A  finding  of  past  ill-treatment   is
    insufficient, of itself, to show  that  the  respondent  is  a  refugee
    without a close application of those risk factors.

19.  The decision contains no findings of fact regarding the  respondent  as
    a person who might be at risk as a person perceived to be a  threat  to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state or as a  person  perceived
    to have a significant role in post-conflict  Tamil  separatism.   There
    are insufficient findings on the risk that the respondent might  appear
    on a computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport or whether  she
    is a person against whom there is likely to be an extant court order or
    arrest warrant.  Similarly, there is no clear finding  whether  or  not
    the respondent is reasonably likely to be  on  a  "watch"  list,  as  a
    person not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport but who will
    be monitored by the security services after return or  in  relation  to
    the respondent's past history.

20.  I find that the appellant's second ground of  challenge  is  also  made
    out.   First,  Dr Longman's  acknowledgement  that  she  is   not   a
    psychiatrist was an  important  factor  which  the  judge  recorded  at
    paragraph 27 but appears not to  have  taken  into  account  in  giving
    weight to the diagnosis of PTSD and, in particular, Dr  Longman's  view
    of memory as not a "video tape" of events.  That view might  very  well
    be valid  but  it  affords  a  relatively  flimsy  foundation  for  the
    conclusion that the accounts given by the respondent to her GP did  not
    amount, overall, to an adverse factor.  Furthermore, the judge set  out
    guidance contained in HE, regarding other potential causes for signs of
    anxiety, stress  and  depression  but  appears  to  have  applied  that
    reasoning to possible alternative causes of the physical injuries which
    gave rise to the scars.  At paragraph 32 of the decision, she  set  out
    Dr Longman's assessment of the scars and noted that other  causes  were
    considered.  In contrast, at paragraph 33 of the decision, the  "memory
    factors" found by Dr Longman were  found  not  to  cast  doubt  on  the
    respondent's account, although  there  is  nothing  on  possible  other
    causes, unrelated to the particular trauma claimed  to  have  occurred,
    for the respondent's mental ill-health.

21.  In summary, the  grounds  of  application  have  been  made  out.   The
    decision contains errors of law.  Taken together with  the  absence  of
    consideration of the respondent's  human  rights  case,  in  which  the
    evidence of suicide risk is an important feature, I conclude  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal must  be  set  aside  and  re-made.
    Taking into  account  Mr  Singer's  submission,  I  conclude  that  the
    decision should be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal,  at  Birmingham,
    before a judge other than First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robertson.   The
    hearing will be de novo, with no findings of fact preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  will  be  re-made
in the First-tier Tribunal at the Birmingham Hearing Centre, before a  judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge M Robertson.

Anonymity

The anonymity direction will continue in force until  or  unless  varied  or
brought to an end by a court of Tribunal.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
