

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal Number
AA/05781/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Centre City Tower
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 19th September 2016                       On 12th October 2016


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                         HUSSIEN AYED MAHADI SHARIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr R Sharif (Solicitor, Fountain Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Ms Abone (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's asylum appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   O'Hagan at Sheldon on the 10th of July 2015 and dismissed in a decision
   promulgated on the 11th of August 2015. The Appellant sought permission
   to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in grounds of the 20th of August 2015
   which was refused. Permission was granted on a renewed application to the
   Upper Tribunal, limited to the asylum grounds.

2. The Appellant's case is that he is non-Arab Darfuri from the Berti
   Tribe. The findings are set out in the decision from paragraph 42
   onwards. The Judge rejected the Appellant's claim to be of that
   background and found that the Appellant would not be at risk in Sudan.
   The Appellant did not succeed under the Immigration Rules or article 8.

3. The grounds argue that the Judge misdirected himself in law in paragraph
   48 in relation to the question he was addressing. It is suggested that
   the findings at paragraphs 50 and 51 were inconsistent, that paragraphs
   53 and 59 contained inadequate reasoning for the findings. With regard to
   paragraph 55 there was no requirement for corroborative evidence. At
   paragraph 62 the Judge noted the Appellant's distress but had not taken a
   holistic approach to assessing credibility and had erred in relation to
   section 55 and the Appellant's children.

4. The Appellant's skeleton argument was relied on by Mr Sharif in addition
   to the submissions made. The submissions of Mr Sharif and Ms Abone are
   set out in the Record of Proceedings and referred to where relevant
   below. To some extent the grounds rely on selective quotes from the
   decision which do not give an accurate picture of the approach of the
   Judge or the findings made.


5. The burden was on the Appellant to show that he would be in danger for
   the reasons advanced. His case was, as indicated above, that he is from
   the Berti tribe. That was his case and was the question the Judge had to
   address. It was not the Appellant's case that he was, generically so to
   speak, a non-Arab Darfuri and for the Judge to have considered that would
   have entailed an exercise in speculation which was outside his remit. The
   Judge correctly identified the Appellant's case and considered it as
   presented.


6. Superficially the complaints about the differences between paragraphs 50
   and 51 look to have merit. However, having read the decision it is clear
   that the paragraphs are dealing with different aspects of the Appellant's
   case and different aspects of his knowledge. Paragraph 50 concerned the
   Appellant's lack of knowledge of the history and culture of the tribe and
   this was not held against the Appellant.


7. Paragraph 51 concerned what were current events for when the Appellant
   was in his 20s, an adult, and in the claimed circumstances a time when he
   might be expected to be take an interest in the issues affecting his
   claimed tribe at that time. The Judge was entitled to consider that more
   knowledge of current events would be reasonable to expect given the
   impact that could have on day to day living. The aspects considered by
   the Judge were different and not mutually dependent, the different
   findings were justified by the content and context of the subject matters
   under consideration.


8. The suggestion that the reasoning in paragraph 53 was inadequate is
   unjustified. It is a lengthy paragraph in which the Judge analysed the
   information and the basis of the conclusion of Dr Osman and noted
   inadequacies in the evidence provided. Fairly he noted that rejecting the
   findings of the report did not lead to a finding that the Appellant was
   not a member of the Berti and gave other and further reasons for that
   finding.


9. Similarly paragraph 59 is a lengthy paragraph which contains detailed
   consideration of the Appellant's claim to have given money to charity. To
   simply quote the final sentence of the paragraph without engaging with
   the preceding analysis is unhelpful and misleading. The analysis
   conducted was measured and open to the Judge and the complaint has no
   merit.


10. With regard to paragraph 55 the Judge was not requiring corroboration.
   It is trite law that a Judge is entitled to have regard to the absence of
   evidence that might reasonably be expected. The gap identified by the
   Judge was surprising and it was a matter he was entitled to take into
   account in assessing the Appellant's evidence. It was not treated as
   being determinative but was one of a number of factors taken into
   consideration.


11. The suggestion that the Judge did not take a holistic approach to the
   consideration of the Appellant's evidence is unsustainable. Demeanour is
   an aspect but as the Judge observed is a notoriously unreliable guide.
   Had the Appellant given his evidence completely calmly and
   dispassionately would that have justified a rejection of the claim? That
   was only one aspect of the evidence considered by the Judge and he noted
   in paragraph 62 why caution was required.


12. The decision has to be read as a whole and regrettably the grounds do
   not engage with the decision fully but have taken aspects of the decision
   out of context and sought to portray the findings made in a light which
   is not justified. The grounds do not show that the Judge erred either in
   the approach taken to the evidence or the findings made and I find that
   there is no error of law.


CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 11th October 2016

