
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05669/2015
      AA/05956/2015
      aa/05960/2015
      aa/05964/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 7 March 2016                        |On 16 March 2016               |
|                                       |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T A
                                     N S
                                     L A
                                     A A
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnston, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain (Solicitor) Lei Dat and Baig Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  dated  28  July
    2015. The appeal relates to a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hindson promulgated on 13 July  2015.   The  Judge  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had allowed the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. The
    Secretary of State had sought permission to appeal. To  ease  following
    these grounds I shall continue to refer to the Secretary  of  State  as
    the Respondent and to the claimants as the Appellants.

2.    The Secretary of State's  grounds  of  appeal  can  be  summarised  as
    follows:

    1) The Judge failed to give adequate reasons for findings  on  material
       matters. The findings are expressed as conclusions only, unsupported
       by proper reasoning.
    2) Failure to follow Country Guidance on material matters. Even at  its
       highest if the Judge had followed the Country Guidance  case  of  AT
       and others (Article 15c: risk categories) Libya CG [2014]  UKUT  318
       the facts found would not appear to equate to a risk on return.


3.    At the hearing before me Ms Johnston said that the decision  ought  to
    have been based on the Reasons for Refusal Letter. The Judge had failed
    to make clear reasoned findings. The decision was not safe  on  reasons
    points. In relation to Country Guidance issues a  cousin  in  the  army
    does not meet a risk category. The so called findings at  paragraph  27
    are statements not reasons. It was  submitted  I  ought  to  allow  the
    appeal.

4.    Mr Hussain in his submissions said that  he  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    Reply. There was no error. There were proper  reasons.  The  Judge  had
    found the Appellant to be plausible. The issue of  the  false  passport
    had been noted at paragraph 23. He confirmed he had  family  in  Libya.
    The real case was that the Appellant had his own case  and  had  helped
    Gaddafi's fighters. Therefore it puts him at risk. I asked  Mr  Hussain
    to deal with the points raised against him. For example,  paragraph  28
    to 42 of the Respondent's Reasons for Refusal Letter set  out  in  some
    detail that the claimed assistance to soldiers by cooking for them  was
    not made out and the Appellant's own photographs showed that to be  so.
    Mr Hussain said that paragraph 27 of the  Judge's  decison  dealt  with
    this. Mr Hussain said that the determination was brief  but  the  Judge
    had dealt with all of the issues. I note that Paragraph 27 (iii) of the
    Judge's decision says no more than, "The appellant allowed the army  to
    use his property to store food and then organise the  cooking  of  that
    food in order to feed Gaddafi's troops".

5.    Ms Johnston was invited to reply but declined that offer.

6.    In my judgment there is a material error of law. The Judge's  decision
    has plainly failed to deal adequately with the various  matters  raised
    in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The  sub-heading  of  "Findings  of
    Fact" in the Judge's decision are not findings of fact at all. I  agree
    with Ms Johnston they are statements. Mr Hussain was correct  to  refer
    to the Judge's decision as being "brief". Although  brevity  is  to  be
    commended in some situations, in this instance the difficulty which has
    arisen is that there is inadequate reasoning. The Judge said  he  found
    some of the inconsistencies to be minor in nature at  paragraph  22  of
    his decision. The difficulty is that the Judge has not dealt  with  the
    major inconsistencies and issues raised in the Respondent's Reasons for
    Refusal Letter.

7.    In my judgment there is inadequate reasoning in the Judge's  decision.
    Thereby there is a material error of law.

8.    Accordingly, I allow the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal.  The  matter
    shall be reheard at the First-tier Tribunal. None of  the  findings  of
    fact shall remain.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law. I set it aside. The appeals of  the  Appellants  are  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.



An anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 7 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

