
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05447/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th October 2015                 |On 27th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                          KRISHNAKURUPARAN GANESAN
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, who is from Sri Lanka, appeals with  permission  against
    the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Broe,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 14th July  2015,  to  dismiss  on  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights grounds,  his  appeal  against
    removal to Sri Lanka.  Judge Broe considered  the  Appellant's  account
    not to be credible.

 2. In the Grounds of Appeal it is contended  that  the  Judge  relied  too
    heavily upon the Appellant's delay in  claiming  asylum,  relying  upon
    Section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004, that he did not engage properly with the Appellant's account,
    that he considered a medical report by Mr A I Martin, a  consultant  in
    emergency  medicine,  only  after  having  reached  conclusions  as  to
    credibility and that he misconstrued that report as to  the  likelihood
    of causes of injuries.  It was also said that he had failed to evaluate
    the evidence of  a  witness,  had  given  inadequate  consideration  of
    documentary evidence and had not  given  reasons  for  discounting  the
    significance of the Appellant's participation in  Tamil  activities  in
    the United Kingdom.

 3. The Respondent served a response under Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 24
    contending that the determination was adequately reasoned and that  any
    activities of the Appellant as part of the  Tamil  diaspora  would  not
    have entitled him to succeed in his appeal.  In granting permission  to
    appeal Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert  considered  there  was
    limited merit to the point under Section 8 of the 2004  Act  but  there
    was potential merit in the other points  raised.   The  grant  was  not
    however restricted in its scope.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Smart indicated  that  he  relied
    upon the Rule 24 response. He handed in a copy of the judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155 as to  the
    weight to be attributed to medical reports.  Mr Smart  noted  that  the
    grant of permission had alluded to the fact  that  the  Judge  had  not
    relied solely upon  Section  8  in  reaching  his  adverse  credibility
    findings.  He had to accept that there were no specific  findings  upon
    the evidence of the second witness but he submitted at that stage  that
    the witness's evidence was not potentially material to the outcome.  He
    accepted that the determination was not without some  difficulties  but
    argued that there was insufficient reason to set it aside.

 5. Mr Spurling for his part referred  to  the  treatment  of  the  medical
    report.  He relied upon the judgments of the Court of Appeal in Mibanga
    v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367 and SA (Somalia)  v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1302.  He acknowledged that  the  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  consider
    evidence in the order it saw fit and had to start somewhere but he said
    the Judge had made findings on the core issues at paragraph 36  of  his
    decision before he had assessed the medical  report.   The  Judge  then
    went on to the medical report but reached  conclusions  on  it  in  the
    light of his earlier findings.  He failed to consider the  evidence  in
    the round; he decided that the Appellant's case was without  foundation
    and had then looked at the medical report.  That mattered  because  the
    medical report was part of the evidence.  The report showed that  there
    were marks on the Appellant's body consistent with his account and  the
    report was therefore highly relevant.  He was not seeking to  say  that
    the Judge had to accept the medical report and weight was a matter  for
    him but he had to consider it in the proper manner and the way that  he
    had approached it was undercut by his earlier findings.  That  infected
    his consideration of the evidence and his approach to the weight to  be
    applied to that report was therefore flawed.  It was clear from SS that
    weight was a matter for the Judge but the report had to  be  approached
    properly.  He also submitted that the way that the Judge dealt with the
    report did not make sense.  It appeared from the report that a  finding
    of  self-infliction  of  the  wounds  by  proxy  (SIBP)  was  a  remote
    possibility.  It was unclear what the Judge made of that.  He  accepted
    that what the report said was grammatically odd but it was incumbent on
    the Judge to say in sufficiently precise terms  what  he  made  of  the
    report.  Even if he found it confusing he ought to have said so.

 6. Mr Spurling continued that it was also a serious error not to have made
    findings upon the evidence of the second witness.   At  that  point  Mr
    Smart accepted that the evidence of the  second  witness  had  in  fact
    related to evidence other than hearsay from the Appellant.  Mr Spurling
    said that the witness had spoken about the  Appellant's  activities  at
    Jaffna University, which  was  potentially  significant.   That  was  a
    freestanding error.  Finally he criticised the  findings  relying  upon
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act.  He said there was  difficulty  in  the  way
    that  these  findings  were  made  and  there  had  been   insufficient
    consideration of the substantive facts of  the  case.   The  Judge  had
    failed to engage with the detail of the Appellant's  account.   He  had
    made no finding upon the evidence that there had been a  visit  by  the
    authorities to the Appellant's parents after the Appellant had left Sri
    Lanka.  The Judge had commented on the fact that the Appellant had left
    using his own passport but had made no reference to the fact  that  the
    evidence was that an agent had been used to  get  through  the  airport
    security arrangements.

 7. Finally in reply Mr Smart said he took  issue  as  to  the  submissions
    about the treatment of the medical report.  There was  unusual  wording
    in that report and in the determination  the  Judge  appeared  to  have
    corrected the doctor's grammatical error.  The Judge  had  applied  his
    mind to that evidence and had given reasons for its rejection.  He  had
    to accept that he was in some difficulties concerning  the  failure  to
    address the evidence of the second witness.

 8. Having heard those submissions I came  to  the  view  that  there  were
    material errors of law in the findings of the judge at  first  instance
    and his decision was required to be set aside.  In  my  judgment  there
    was substantial  force  in  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant as to the treatment of the medical report.  It is clear  from
    Mibanga  and  SA  (Somalia)  that  expert  medical  evidence  must   be
    considered in the context of the evidence as a whole.  It is stated  at
    paragraph 24 of Mibanga by Lord Justice Wilson

         "It seems to me to be axiomatic that a fact finder must  not  reach
         his or her conclusion before surveying all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto ... what the fact finder does at his peril is  to  reach  a
         conclusion by reference only to the Appellant's evidence and  then,
         if it be negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted
         by the expert evidence ...".

 9. At paragraph 36 of his determination Judge Broe  stated  "I  find  that
    these are not the actions of a person in genuine  fear  of  persecution
    and I reject the Appellant's account as lacking  in  credibility".   He
    went on to state at paragraph 38 as follows:

         "I  note  that  Mr  Martin  found  that  it  was  likely  that  the
         Appellant's injuries were caused by a third party.  He  found  that
         self-infliction by proxy could not be discarded as a possible cause
         as there was no presenting  fact  making  it  more  than  a  remote
         possibility.  In the light of my  conclusions  above  I  cannot  be
         satisfied that the Appellant's injuries were caused in the  way  he
         claims.  I have also considered the documentary  evidence  provided
         by the Appellant in the round and in the light  of  my  conclusions
         above I am able to attach little weight to it."

10. At paragraph 38 the Judge does appear to have  fallen  into  the  error
    identified in Mibanga and SA (Somalia) in reaching conclusions  on  the
    medical report only after  having  made  adverse  findings  as  to  the
    Appellant's credibility on other elements of the evidence.  That factor
    alone justifies setting aside the decision.

11. I consider there was arguably potentially less weight in the submission
    made with regard to Section 8 of  the  2004  Act  but  that  is  of  no
    significance in the light of my decision to set the  conclusion  aside.
    There was also I found force in the submissions made with regard to the
    treatment of the evidence of the second  witness,  as  Mr  Smart  quite
    properly accepted.  That evidence related not only to  the  Appellant's
    activities in this country but also to testimony as to a visit said  to
    be made to the Appellant's parents' home after his departure  from  Sri
    Lanka.  It was for the Judge to make findings as to that  evidence  and
    he did not do so.   That evidence might, if found credible, have had  a
    bearing upon the conclusion.  That also warrants the decision being set
    aside.

12. For those reasons I came to the view that a  further  full  hearing  of
    this appeal is required with none of the findings of the previous Judge
    being preserved. Having regard to Practice Statement 7.2(b) the  appeal
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Decision

There were material errors of law in the decision  made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal and that decision  is  set  aside.   The  appeal  is  remitted  for
rehearing by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  accordance  with  the  directions
given below.

There was no request for an anonymity order and no such order is made.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French



Directions for Re-Hearing in the First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  Sections
12(3)(a) and 12(3)(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007:

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 14th  July  2015
    is set aside with no findings preserved.  The members of the First-tier
    Tribunal who are to reconsider the appeal should not include Judges  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Broe or Lambert.

 2) The appropriate hearing centre is Birmingham.  A Tamil interpreter will
    be required and the time estimate is 3 hours.

 3) Each party shall serve upon the other and upon the  Tribunal  at  least
    seven days before the hearing copies of all witness statements  and  of
    any other documents which are sought to be relied upon.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

