
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05229/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15th February 2016                    |On 25th April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     t n
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sills (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Brockleby-Weller (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M A Khan, promulgated on 24th September 2015, following a hearing
    on 28th August 2015.  In the determination,  the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal of the appellant, whereupon the appellant  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Grant of Permission

 2. On 12th November 2015, permission to appeal was granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the determination of Judge M A Khan arguably
    contained material  errors  of  law  and  that  the  findings  are  not
    supported by reasons.  The Tribunal failed to set the  developments  in
    the evidence in the context of the  appellant's  young  age,  and  that
    there were errors of fact in that some of the evidence  in  the  asylum
    interview is overlooked.   Moreover,  the  consideration  of  "internal
    flight"  has  been  undertaken  in  the  context  of  the  findings  of
    credibility  in  relation  to  the  appellant,  thereby  leading  to  a
    distorted view of the availability of internal relocation.

 3. A Rule 24 response dated 10th December 2015 was to the effect that  the
    judge at paragraph 38 did have specific regard to the  appellant's  age
    when making his credibility assessment.  The evidence was considered to
    be vague and evasive.  The judge gave sound and persuasive reasons  for
    disbelieving the appellant.

Submissions

 4. At the hearing before me on 15th February 2016, Mr Sills, appearing  on
    behalf of the  appellant,  relied  upon  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   He
    submitted that first, the judge referred  to  the  appellant's  age  at
    paragraph 38, but did so only by way of a generic reference.  There was
    no consideration of the appellant's age in  relation  to  the  specific
    findings made against the appellant, namely, in relation  to  the  time
    when disclosure was made, and her description  of  the  money  lenders.
    The generic reference to age was inadequate.  The appellant's  age  was
    relevant to considering why the appellant  had  not  given  details  of
    kidnapping at the outset.

 5. Second, the judge referred  to  the  appellant's  evidence  on  various
    occasions  as  being  "vague  and  evasive"  however,  where   such   a
    description is given, it is incumbent upon the judge to explain why and
    where the evidence is vague and evasive.  The judge did not do so.   My
    attention was directed to paragraph 41 and paragraph 43.

 6. Third, the judge failed to give reasons in relation to the  appellant's
    father.  The appellant had initially not referred to  any  threat  from
    the father.  She had then gone on to say that she  was  afraid  of  the
    father, when pressed further, she said that she did not fear the father
    but this was only because she would not be living with him if returned,
    given that she would be going back to the grandmother.

 7. Finally, the assessment of internal relocation was  completely  out  of
    context, because it normally should be done  at  the  end  of  all  the
    findings of fact in relation to the appellant.  In this case, the judge
    considered internal relocation in the context of the credibility of the
    testimony given by the appellant, and this made no sense whatsoever.

 8. For her part, Ms Brockleby-Weller submitted that if one takes a  closer
    look at the evidence, it is clear that the judge was right to  describe
    the evidence as  being  "vague  and  evasive".   For  example,  if  one
    compares the screening interview at 3.2 with the screening interview at
    3.1 where the appellant explained as to why she came to the UK,  it  is
    clear that there is an inconsistency.

 9. Similarly, at question 7 the appellant is asked, "Do  you  fear  anyone
    else" and the appellant mentions her father, whom she had not mentioned
    before.  This was clearly an attempt to  embellish  the  evidence.   At
    question 9 she is asked, "What do you fear your dad will do to you" and
    she replies that he is not going to do anything to her.   The  fact  is
    that the various statements are not consistent with  each  other.   The
    judge had the benefit of hearing the appellant give  evidence  and  his
    conclusion was sustainable.

10. As for internal relocation, the judge  rejected  everything  about  the
    claim and therefore it was  unsurprising  that  the  judge  would  also
    reject any suggestion that the appellant could not be returned  because
    of concerns over  internal  relocation.   At  paragraph  43  the  judge
    observes how the grandmother, who continued to live in Vietnam, had  no
    problems from anyone.

11. If that was the case, then the appellant would simply go and live  with
    the grandmother and she would not have any problems either.  This was a
    case where the judge had looked  (see  paragraph  48)  at  the  broader
    evidence and had found the appellant not to be a credible witness.

12. In reply, Mr Sills explained once again that the  approach  recommended
    by the Presenting Officer today at this hearing in terms  of  taking  a
    "holistic account" of the determination was inappropriate  because  the
    judge had to pin down the evidence when he referred to the evidence  as
    being vague and evasive, but failed to do so.  Insofar  as  there  were
    ambiguities, such as the threat from  the  father,  the  appellant  had
    plainly  explained  this  away  but  the  judge  failed  to  heed  that
    explanation in the proper manner.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come  to  this
    conclusion notwithstanding Mr Sills' powerful  submissions  before  me.
    On the face of it, it is plain that a dismissal of the evidence on  the
    basis that it is "vague and evasive" does require a proper articulation
    of the evidence by the Tribunal.

14. In this case, however, if one were to look at the evidence given it  is
    clear that inconsistencies can be found in the oral  evidence  and  the
    claim  at  the  screening  interview   (see   paragraph   45   of   the
    determination).

15. Furthermore, the judge makes it clear that, "The  appellant  could  not
    explain how in a country of 90,000,000 people, her  mother's  creditors
    would be able to find her  or  even  know  that  she  has  returned  to
    Vietnam" (paragraph 43).

16. Moreover, as the judge found the appellant would be returning  to  live
    with the grandmother, who continued to be in that country  without  any
    fear of ill-treatment.

17. The judge's reasoning is set out at paragraphs 43 to 46 in  a  credible
    manner, and although the evidence relied upon  is  not  set  out,  upon
    examination it is clear that such  evidence  does  exist,  so  that  it
    cannot be said that the error, such as it is, is a material one by  the
    judge in the determination.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st April 2016

