
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Numbers: AA/05760/2014
     AA/05761/2014
     AA/05762/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st December 2015                          |On 20th January 2016           |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between


                                     GO

                                     EO

                                     JGO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms K Smith of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer





                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 7th September 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb gave permission to the
    appellant to appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Mather in which  she  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian
    and human rights protection to the appellants who are all  citizens  of
    Nigeria.  The first appellant is the mother of  the  second  and  third
    appellants who are her minor son and daughter respectively.

 2. Judge Grubb thought it arguable that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for her findings on credibility and risk on return and
    it was  just  arguable  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give  proper
    consideration to the psychiatric and expert evidence.  He also  thought
    that the arguable errors in making  the  adverse  credibility  findings
    would have impacted on the judge's assessment of the  risk  of  FGM  on
    return.  Permission was granted on all grounds.

 3. At the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal, Ms Smith confirmed that
    the  appellant  relied  upon  the  grounds.   In  particular  she  drew
    attention to paragraph 5 which identifies six  areas  of  the  decision
    (paragraphs 26, 28, 33, 37 and 34) where reasoning was  claimed  to  be
    inadequate.  The grounds also contend, in  the  alternative,  that  the
    judge failed to  have  proper  regard  to  corroborative  evidence  and
    reached conclusions before  giving  consideration  to  the  expert  and
    country evidence.  It is also argued that the judge  failed  to  engage
    with the evidence to support the claim that the third  appellant  would
    be at risk of FGM bearing in mind that the  first  appellant  had  been
    subjected to that treatment and the  absence  of  laws  in  Nigeria  to
    protect against it.  The grounds also submit that  the  judge  did  not
    apply the undue harshness test to internal  relocation  and  failed  to
    make  the  best  interests  of   the   child   appellants   a   primary
    consideration.

 4. At the hearing Ms Smith also pointed out that  the  judge  appeared  to
    have omitted to give consideration to the Multi Agency information from
    page 24 onwards of the appellant's main bundle dealing with threats  to
    the family.

 5. Mr McVeety indicated that the respondent relied upon the terms  of  the
    response dated 18th September 2015 which alleges  that  the  judge  had
    given "copious" reasoning for her conclusions from paragraph 20 onwards
    of the decision having directed herself appropriately.  The findings in
    relation to the threat of FGM should also  be  seen  in  the  light  of
    adverse credibility findings.  However, Mr McVeety nevertheless  agreed
    that there was an inadequacy of reasoning in relation to the  areas  of
    evidence identified in paragraph 5 of the grounds.  He  further  agreed
    that there was nothing to suggest that  the  compiler  of  the  Medical
    Report, Dr Kumar, had considered  whether  or  not  the  appellant  was
    telling the truth.  He  also  conceded  that  the  judge  had  made  no
    reference to the Multi Agency Report.

 6. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  was
    satisfied that the decision showed material errors  on  points  of  law
    such that it should be set  aside.   My  reasons  for  that  conclusion
    follow.

 7. The judge's adverse credibility findings commence at  paragraph  26  of
    the decision. Those set out in subsequent paragraphs 28, 33, 34 and  37
    (about such material matters as a  kidnapping,  domestic  violence  and
    state of health) each contain statements to the effect that evidence is
    not accepted and is inconsistent but no reasons  are  given  for  those
    conclusions.  Despite the detailed summary of  the  evidence  in  other
    pats  of  the  decision  there  is  no  reference   to   any   specific
    inconsistencies in that evidence which might justify the conclusions.

 8. It is also evident that  the  conclusions  reached  from  paragraph  26
    onwards did not, on the face  of  it,  take  into  consideration  other
    evidence in the round particularly the Medical Report by Dr Kumar and a
    specialist report by Ms Nwogu.  In  M  (DRC)  [2003]  UKIAT  00054  the
    Tribunal said that it was wrong to make adverse findings of credibility
    first and then dismiss an expert report.  Further, in FS (Treatment  of
    expert evidence) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00004 the Tribunal  decided  that
    Immigration Judges have a duty to consider all the evidence before them
    when reaching a decision in an even-handed and  impartial  manner.   It
    may, on occasions, be appropriate to reject the conclusions reached  by
    an expert but what is crucial is that a reasoned explanation  is  given
    for so doing.  In paragraph 38 of the decision the judge  rejected  the
    conclusions reached by Dr Kumar and Ms Nwogu on the sole basis that the
    appellant was not telling the truth.  The judge did  not  identify  the
    parts of the reports which might be relevant whether the appellant  was
    credible  or  not  and  might  stand  alone  from  adverse  credibility
    conclusions.  In this respect it has to be borne in mind that Ms  Nwogu
    completed her report on the basis of the general situation  in  Nigeria
    in addition to that put forward by the appellant.

 9. As to the consideration of internal relocation the judge's  conclusions
    (paragraph 39) are also unreasoned.  Whilst the  judge  refers  to  the
    undue harshness test, no clear reasons are given  for  concluding  that
    the appellants could relocate without it being unduly harsh for them to
    do so.

10. For the reasons I have given, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    shows material errors on points of  law  relating  to  the  credibility
    findings and so the decision must be set aside.

11. As it will be necessary at the re-making of the decision to examine the
    evidence afresh, the  provisions  of  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statement for the Upper  Tribunal  made  by  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals on 25th September 2012 applies.  It is therefore  appropriate
    that the appeal should be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

12. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal and,  taking
    into consideration the circumstances of  this  appeal,  I  consider  it
    appropriate to make the following direction in the Upper Tribunal:

    DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY -  RULE  14  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE
    (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant.  This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed
                                Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

DIRECTIONS

13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  hearing.



14. The hearing will take place at the Stoke Hearing Centre.

15. No interpreter will be provided for the hearing unless  representatives
    indicate to the contrary.

16. The appeal should not be heard by Judge Mather.

17. The hearing will take place on a date to be specified by  the  Resident
    Judge.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


