
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/05404/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                              |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     rc
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on [ ] 1991.  She  arrived  in
    the UK on 24 September 2009 and made a claim for asylum on 12  December
    2013.

 2. Prior to making her claim for asylum she had a son born in the UK on 29
    June 2012.  Her husband had joined her in the UK on 25  December  2009.
    The appellant was the victim of domestic violence, with  a  history  of
    having been seriously abused and assaulted by her husband,  leading  up
    to the asylum claim.

 3. Her claim for asylum was refused and a decision taken by the respondent
    to remove her under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999.
    Those decisions were made on 18 July 2014.

 4. The appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Page ("the
    FtJ") on 13 August 2015 whereby  he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, and on human rights grounds with reference to  Articles  2,  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") but only in relation to Article 8 of the  ECHR,  in  particular
    with  reference  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 ("the  2009  Act").   Permission  was  refused  in
    relation to asylum, and human rights grounds under Article 3.

 6. A renewed application for permission  to  appeal  in  relation  to  the
    asylum and Article 3 grounds was  refused  by  a  judge  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me in relation to Article 8  of  the  ECHR
    only.

 8. In his decision the FtJ referred to a family court judgment by Recorder
    Rodgers on 29 March 2015 in which the appellant's account of the  abuse
    that she was subjected to from her husband was accepted.  At  [18]  the
    FtJ said as follows:

         "It is plain that the whole of the appellant's story that she  told
         to the respondent in support of her asylum  claim  was  the  truth.
         There are no credibility issues for me to determine in this appeal.
          These events have all  happened  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
         unfortunate  circumstances  of  the  appellant's  marriage  to  her
         husband."

 9. At [20] he concluded that the appellant had established  to  the  lower
    standard that she would be at risk of persecution  in  her  home  area,
    that is to say a risk of being harmed  by  her  husband's  family.   He
    concluded that she is a member of a particular social group, as a woman
    in India.  However, he decided that the appellant would have  available
    to her the option of internal relocation.

10. It is  not  necessary  to  explore  further  the  judge's  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant would  be  able  to  relocate  in  India,
    permission to appeal against that aspect of his  decision  having  been
    refused.

11. The ground of appeal pertinent to the proceedings before me is  as  set
    out in the grounds on which permission was granted.   It  asserts  that
    the FtJ erred in not making a finding  regarding  submissions  made  in
    relation to s.55 of the 2009 Act.  It is stated  in  the  grounds  that
    submissions were made by the appellant's representatives at the hearing
    regarding the respondent not complying with  her  duty  under  s.55  to
    safeguard the appellant's son.  It is further said that the appellant's
    son is under a supervision order, as  explained  in  the  report  by  a
    social worker.

12. The respondent's 'rule 24' response, in summary, asserts that the judge
    rejected the  contention  that  the  appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
    reprisals from her husband's family throughout the whole of India.  The
    FtJ had concluded that it would not be unduly harsh for  the  appellant
    to relocate internally, particularly given her level of education,  and
    that  those  findings  of  fact  clearly  inform  a   best   interest's
    assessment.

13. The rule 24 response goes on to state  that  although  there  does  not
    appear to be an explicit reference to s.55 in the  FtJ's  decision,  it
    can be assumed that the best interests  of  the  child  are  served  by
    remaining with his primary carer, his mother.   The  child  is  aged  3
    years and is  clearly  focused  on  his  mother,  and  is  "adaptable".
    Reference is made to the decision in Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT  00197  (IAC).   It  is
    asserted that there is no material error in the FtJ's decision.

14. Furthermore, it is said to be clear from [34] that no formal Article  8
    or s.55 arguments were advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing.

15. Before me Ms Everett relied on the rule 24 response.  It was  submitted
    that although the judge did not refer to 'best interests' or 's.55', on
    the facts there is nothing to indicate that the child's best  interests
    would not be met by staying with his mother.  He has no basis  of  stay
    in the UK and  could  go  to  India  with  her.   The  decision  in  EV
    (Philippines) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874 was relied on.

16. Even though the appellant has experienced great difficulties there  is,
    for example, no care order in place for the child,  and  no  reason  to
    conclude that he cannot be  with  his  mother.   It  is  unlikely  that
    contact with the child's father would be resumed. The  child's  primary
    focus would be towards his mother, having regard to the child's age.

17. Before me the appellant said that although the FtJ had decided that she
    could relocate in India, India is a very male dominated society and she
    would never be accepted.  The first question  she  would  be  asked  is
    where her husband was.  She would be unable to look after  her  son  in
    India as she is able to do in the UK.  She is afraid  for  his  safety.
    She has lots of support in the UK from social  services  and  from  the
    children's centre.  She would not be  able  to  have  that  support  in
    India.

    My Conclusions

18. In the grounds of appeal  before  the  FtT  it  is  asserted  that  the
    respondent had failed to consider and apply s.55  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's son.  The grounds go on to state that he has been a  victim
    of abuse by the appellant's former spouse, and returning the  child  to
    India would increase the risks of abuse that he may face at  the  hands
    of his father.

19. In that respect therefore, the best interests of the child  are  linked
    to the asserted risk to him (and to the appellant) at the hands of  the
    appellant's former spouse.

20. In the appellant's skeleton argument also before the FtT it states that
    the respondent  had  wrongly  failed  to  give  consideration  to  "A's
    children and their interests (sic)" when making the decision, referring
    to Article 3 of the UN Convention on the  Rights  of  the  Child.   The
    skeleton argument goes on to state that the respondent additionally did
    not comply with her duty under s.55 to safeguard the appellant's son.

21. It can be seen again therefore,  that  the  child's  circumstances  are
    linked to the protection claim, the reference being to safeguarding the
    appellant's son.

22. In the concluding paragraph of the skeleton argument  various  Articles
    of the ECHR are referred to, including Article 8, although no  distinct
    argument is advanced in relation to Article 8 at that point.

23. At [34] of his decision the FtJ said as follows:

         "I now turn to the appellant's appeal under Article 8 which  stands
         to be determined as a separate limb, based on the appellant's  life
         in the United Kingdom.  I record however that although the skeleton
         argument prepared for the appellant's appeal  raises  Article  8  -
         hence the reason why I  have  amended  the  grounds  of  appeal  to
         include a claim under Article 8 - no submissions as such have  been
         made under Article 8 in the skeleton  argument.   Neither  was  any
         submission made at the end of the hearing by  Ms  Delgado,  Counsel
         for the appellant, to argue that the appellant should be allowed to
         succeed under Article 8  as  a  separate  limb.   I  determine  the
         Article 8 ground of appeal as added to the skeleton argument  as  a
         separate limb and conclude as follows."

24. The FtJ then referred to the  Immigration  Rules,  authority,  and  the
    provisions of s.117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

25. It is clear from my recital of the grounds of appeal  to  the  FtT  and
    from what is set out  in  the  skeleton  argument  that  there  was  no
    independent Article 8  argument  advanced  on  paper  before  the  FtT.
    Furthermore, it is also  apparent  from  the  FtJ's  decision  that  no
    separate Article 8 argument was advanced before him.  What is  recorded
    at [34] about his 'amending' the grounds of appeal seems to me to be  a
    reference to the fact that the grounds of appeal  to  the  FtT  do  not
    include any distinct Article 8 argument but that the judge felt that he
    had to determine the  issue  because  the  matter  was  raised  in  the
    skeleton argument.

26. It is evident however, that the issue now  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal in terms of Article 8 and the best interests of the  appellant's
    son was never a matter that was advanced before the FtT.  Indeed,  even
    the grounds in relation  to  the  FtT's  decision  contain  barely  any
    particulars of the basis upon which an  Article  8  argument  could  be
    advanced with reference to the child's best interests.

27. I have for my part considered  all  the  material  in  the  appellant's
    bundle which could have any possible bearing on this  issue,  including
    the CAFCASS report, the final care plan for the child, the social  work
    reports, including the  independent  social  worker's  report  and  the
    family court judgment.  I cannot see in that material any basis for any
    distinct Article 8 argument.  Indeed, if it were thought on  behalf  of
    the appellant that there was  any  support  to  be  gleaned  from  that
    material for the appeal to be allowed  on  Article  8  grounds,  it  is
    reasonable to conclude that it would  have  been  referred  to  at  the
    hearing before the FtT.

28. In advance of the hearing before me an application had been made for an
    adjournment of the appeal whilst the appellant's solicitors  awaited  a
    decision from the legal aid authorities in respect of exceptional  case
    funding.  That application for an adjournment was refused by a judge of
    the Upper Tribunal.  A letter dated 14 March 2016 from the  appellant's
    solicitors refers to a support letter from Barnardo's, dated  14  March
    2016, said to be relevant to a  consideration  of  Article  8.   It  is
    seemingly acknowledged in the  solicitor's  letter  that  this  further
    evidence is not relevant to the question of whether the  FtT  erred  in
    law.  The letter was not before the FtT.

29. Returning to the issue of the FtJ's decision, whilst I do consider that
    it would have been preferable for him to have expressly referred to the
    best interests of the child, and s.55, I cannot see that his failure to
    have done  so,  which  is  the  distinct  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, amounts to an error of law.  Even if it is an error of  law,
    it is not one which in my  judgement  is  material.   The  judge  quite
    properly recognised that if there was a ground of appeal under  Article
    8 it needed to be determined, even though no  distinct  arguments  were
    put before him  on  the  issue.   It  is  unsurprising  therefore,  and
    understandable, that he dealt with the  matter  in  perhaps  a  broader
    fashion than he would have done had that ground in reality, or in fact,
    been relied on.

30. Furthermore, on the material that was before the FtJ, I cannot see that
    in any event any  distinct  Article  8  ground  of  appeal  could  have
    succeeded.  The FtJ was well aware of the fact that the appellant would
    be returning to India as a single mother; he referred to that  fact  on
    several occasions in his decision.  Her circumstances in  that  regard,
    and generally, were plainly taken into account in his  conclusion  that
    it would not be unduly harsh for her to return to a place of relocation
    in India with her young son.

31. Insofar as the grounds before me suggest that the respondent failed  to
    comply with the duty under s.55 to safeguard the appellant's son, as  I
    have already indicated the grounds before the FtT raise that  issue  in
    relation to the appellant's safety.  Separately, at [79] in the refusal
    letter, it is stated that the Article 8  Immigration  Rules  take  into
    account the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children  in
    the UK.

32. In conclusion therefore, I am not satisfied that there is any error  of
    law in the decision of the FtJ in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR  in
    any respect.







    Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            4/04/16


