
[pic]




                               UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at: Birmingham                         Determination sent

On: 21 July 2014                             On: 25 July 2014


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     TVN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Ms  Chandran,  instructed  by  Hammersmith  and  Fulham
                Community Law Project



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


For the purposes of this determination I refer to the Secretary of State  as
the respondent and to  TVN  as  the  claimant,  reflecting  their  positions
before the First-tier Tribunal.

The claimant is a national of Vietnam and was born in 1997. At the  date  of
the hearing before me he was 17 years old.

This is an appeal by the  respondent  against  the  determination  dated  20
March 2014 of First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach which allowed  the  claimant's
asylum and Article 3 ECHR appeal against  the  respondent's  decision  of  3
June 2013.

Judge Beach found the claimant's account was credible  and  that  he  was  a
young male trafficked to the UK with no family support in  Vietnam  and  has
been diagnosed with a mental health disorder,  specifically  a  Dissociative
Disorder that impairs his functioning. She found him to be  a  member  of  a
particular social group, as the serious harm he would face on  return  arose
from his profile  as  a  previously  trafficked  child  with  no  family  in
Vietnam. The appeal was therefore allowed  an  asylum  and  Article  3  ECHR
grounds.

The respondent brought a narrow challenge. Paragraph 25 of the  reasons  for
refusal letter contained an extract from the  COIS  report  dated  20  April
2012 which stated that there  were  some  shelters  in  Vietnam  for  former
victims of trafficking. Judge Beach had not  considered  that  evidence  and
therefore whether there would be sufficiency of protection and  an  internal
flight option for the claimant.

It did not appear to me that such  a  challenge  had  any  merit.  The  most
recent country material before Judge  Beach,  the  US  Department  of  State
"Trafficking in Person Report 2013: Vietnam" dated 18 June 2013 (TIP  2013),
 indicated that:

      "The  government  continued  to  pursue  prosecutions   primarily   in
      transnational sex  trafficking  cases,  and  overall  law  enforcement
      efforts were inadequate to address all forms of human  trafficking  in
      Vietnam."


and:


       "The  government  did  not  develop  or  employ  systemic  nationwide
      procedures  to  proactively  and  effectively  identify   victims   of
      trafficking among vulnerable populations, such as women  arrested  for
      prostitution and effectively identify  victims  of  trafficking  among
      vulnerable populations... "

and:
      "The government did not provide adequate legal protection from  forced
      labor or assistance to victims in Vietnam or abroad."



and:

      "There are no shelters or services specifically dedicated to assisting
      male victims, child victims or victims of labor trafficking,  although
      existing shelters reportedly provided services to some male and  child
      victims. NGOs report some victims opt not to stay at a victim  support
      facility or receive social services due to a  fear  of  social  stigma
      from identifying as a trafficking victim."

The country expert report commented on page 27 that:

      "... the procedure and mechanism  for  receipt  and  reintegration  of
      victims still lacks specific and concrete guidelines and suffers  from
      financial limitations, the weakness  of  concerned  authorities,  poor
      facilities etc. "

Judge Beach referred at [28] to the first two extracts set  out  above  from
the TIP 2013 and to others at [26] - [27] and [29]. I accept  that  she  was
referred to the extracts set out above  in  terms  by  Ms  Chandran  at  the
hearing as part of the submissions summarised at [14] - [17]. It appears  to
me that Judge Beach can be assumed to have had them in  mind  when  reaching
her conclusion at [40] that there was "a very  real  possibility"  that  the
claimant would be re-trafficked and they are a comprehensive answer  to  the
evidence relied on by the respondent at paragraph 25 of the refusal  letter.
It is therefore possible to accept that Judge Beach dealt  with  the  matter
correctly on the material that was before her, albeit this is  indicated  in
a very limited manner in the determination.

If I am wrong on that and there can be said to be an  error  in  failing  to
deal with the point made at paragraph 25 of the refusal letter, it  did  not
appear to me to one which could have been material to the  outcome  of  this
particular appeal. There was strong, more  recent  country  evidence  before
the First-tier Tribunal on the very limited  protection  available  to  this
claimant on return that, to my  mind,  was  more  cogent,  more  recent  and
attracted more weight than that in paragraph 25 of the  refusal  letter.  Ms
Chandran also pointed out that  the  information  at  paragraph  25  of  the
refusal letter related to victims of sex  trafficking  and  not  trafficked,
male children such as this claimant. There is  the  further  factor  of  his
mental disorder which restricts his ability to function  normally  and  that
is an additional factor preventing him from being able to  access  even  the
very limited resources that might be available to him. In short, it was  not
a material matter that could have led to a different outcome.

For these reasons, I did not  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal  disclosed an error on a point of law.

Having announced my decision, Mr Mills offered the claimant the courtesy  of
confirming  that  the  respondent  will  not  be  seeking  to  challenge  my
decision.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity
I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the claimant, a minor with a mental disorder.

Signed:     [pic]                            Date: 21 July 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




