
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05266/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 February 2015                           |On 26 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 USMAN AHSAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Skyner, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Usman Ahsan, is a citizen of Pakistan and was born on 24
    July 1979.  The appellant appealed against a decision of the respondent
    dated 16 July 2014 to remove him by way of directions under Section  10
    of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Fox) which, in a determination promulgated on 7  November  2014,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the  Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are several grounds of appeal.  The appellant claimed a  fear  of
    persecution in Pakistan because he asserts that he has been the  victim
    of a "false blasphemy charge".  He had  entered  into  a  "intellectual
    religious debate" with a mullah in 2006 and this, in turn, has  exposed
    him to the possibility of risk at the  hands  of  the  Lashkar-e-Jangvi
    (abbreviated to LeJ).  The grounds of appeal appear prima facie  to  be
    no more than a series of disagreements with the findings of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The grounds assert that it is arguable  that  the
    judge "failed to take material facts, explanations and  other  evidence
    into account before making his adverse credibility findings" but  I  am
    satisfied, having read Judge Fox's determination that  he  has  (as  he
    directed himself to do) considered all the evidence before reaching his
    findings of fact.  It is also clear from the determination  (especially
    [17]  et  seq)  that  Judge  Fox  was  similarly  unimpressed  by   the
    appellant's  poor  immigration  history.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had only claimed asylum after he had been discovered  working
    in a shop in the United Kingdom and  that  he  had  "attempted  to  use
    fusion (sic) misrepresentation" and other forms of deceit  including  a
    false identity.  The judge found at [21] that:

         "... the appellant's late claim for asylum nearly  one  week  after
         being arrested in the United Kingdom as  an  overstayer  without  a
         satisfactory  explanation  undermines  the   credibility   of   the
         appellant's claim to have come to  the  United  Kingdom  to  escape
         persecution."

 3. It has been long established  in  immigration  tribunals  that  a  poor
    immigration history may, in appropriate circumstances, be sufficient to
    undermine  entirely  the  reliability  of  an   appellant's   evidence.
    Occasionally, the immigration history may be so poor that there is  "no
    point whatsoever in the Adjudicator  [First-tier  Tribunal  Judge]  ...
    having to look in substance at the appellant's claim regarding what was
    supposed to have happened in [his country of origin]" as the IAT  found
    in TP (Credibility) Zimbabwe [2004] UKIAT 00159 at [11].  Although  the
    judge has not referred to  that  case,  it  is  quite  clear  from  his
    determination that he has followed  the  principle  articulated  in  it
    although the judge did not limit  his  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility to his immigration history; he also found that  damage  was
    caused to the appellant's credibility by his failure, in his  screening
    asylum interview, to make no reference at all to LeJ (referring only to
    having been attacked by "robbers").  I am satisfied that the judge  has
    considered  all  relevant  material  evidence  which  he  should   have
    considered and that he  has  not  taken  into  account  any  irrelevant
    matters (R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982).   He  has  reached  an  outcome
    which  was  plainly  available  to  him  on  the   evidence.   In   the
    circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.



NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date 26 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
