
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: AA/05141/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Notice sent                  |
|On:  19 September 2013                        |On: 19 September 2013        |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                              Mr Vladimir Ramaj
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania. He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  13  May  2013.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  this  appeal  on   Article   3   and
    Humanitarian Protection grounds, in a determination signed on  30  July.
    These findings have not been challenged by the Secretary of State.

 2. The First-tier  Tribunal,  however,  dismissed  the  appeal  brought  on
    Refugee Convention grounds. The  appellant  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal against this conclusion on the 21 August 2013.

 3. By way of a letter to the Upper Tribunal dated  18  September  2013  the
    appellant, although  maintaining  he  is  entitled  to  Refugee  Status,
    requests, for pragmatic  reasons,  permission  to  withdraw  his  appeal
    before the Upper Tribunal.

 4. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as  a  whole,
    and observing that (i) the appellant is legally represented and (ii) the
    Secretary of State was successful before the First-tier Tribunal on  the
    Refugee Convention ground, I give consent to the appellant  to  withdraw
    his case.

 5. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 6. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 19 September 2013











































