
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05297/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 October 2014                           |On 3 December 2014            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                             mariana efiok ekop
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Paul Corben, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who first came to  the  UK  as  a
    student on 3 March 2004.  As a result  of  various  extensions  to  her
    leave she has remained in the UK since her first arrival.  One  of  her
    applications was to settle as the spouse or partner of a person present
    and settled here.  At that time the appellant was  here  as  a  Tier  4
    Migrant.  That application was refused on 20 May 2013 and a  subsequent
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
    Knowles on 13 January  2014.   A  subsequent  attempt  to  appeal  that
    decision was also unsuccessful.

2.   An essential feature of the oral submissions before the Upper  Tribunal
    was the fact that the appellant  apparently  fell  into  a  trap.   She
    claims that her ten years of lawful residence came to end on  29  March
    2014.  Apparently, her rights to appeal had come to an end on  5  March
    2014.  The appellant became an illegal overstayer at that  point.  This
    disqualified her from applying under the rules.

3.   To remedy this, the appellant made an application for asylum on 7  July
    2014 which was also refused.  The  respondent  issued  a  supplementary
    refusal letter to deal with that application on 8 August 2014.   On  19
    August 2014 Immigration Judge Gibb ("the Immigration Judge") heard  the
    appellant's appeal at Yarl's Wood.  He decided, having carried  out  an
    assessment, that there  were  unusual  circumstances  on  the  material
    before him which enabled him to find that  it  would  be  unjustifiably
    harsh to return the appellant to Nigeria.  Accordingly, he allowed  her
    appeal on the basis that  Article  8  ("Article  8")  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR") was engaged so as  to  prevent  her
    removal from the UK.

4.   The present appeal is therefore by the respondent against the  decision
    of the Immigration Judge to allow the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to refuse her  claim  on  human  rights  grounds.
    Following the appeal to the Upper Tribunal there was an initial refusal
    by Immigration Judge  Ievins  and  an  initial  refusal  on  a  renewed
    application before Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson. However, Judge Gleeson
    subsequently decided there had been a procedural error.  The procedural
    error is referred to in paragraph 1 of her  grant  of  permission.   In
    particular, she had found the appeal to be by  the  appellant  when  in
    fact it was by the respondent and therefore had the effect  of  finally
    disposing of the matter.  She made her decision by reference to Rule 43
    of the Upper Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2008.  In particular, the Upper
    Tribunal Judge identified two principal criticisms of the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal which amounted to arguable errors of  law.   In
    particular it was arguable that:

    (1)  the Immigration Judge  had  erred  in  considering  the  "unusual"
         circumstances of the case when that was not the correct test as set-
         out in recent case law on Article 8;


    (2)  the Immigration  Judge  had  apparently  not  attached  sufficient
         weight to the earlier adverse decision of Immigration Judge Knowles
         having  regard  to  the   leading   case   of   Devaseelan   [2001]
         HR/A3442/001.


5.   A hearing was fixed for 29 October 2014 in light  of  which  the  usual
    directions were issued limiting evidence to that before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

The Hearing

6.   I heard submissions by both representatives.   The  appellant  attended
    the hearing but did not give any oral evidence.

7.   Mr Corben began  by  explaining  that  he  had  not  received  all  the
    documents before the Tribunal.  In particular, he later  explained,  he
    did not believe that he had the first notice of  appeal  considered  by
    Judge Ievins.   However  he  did  not  claim  that  he  was  materially
    handicapped by the absence of that document and the issues  before  the
    Tribunal were carefully identified by Mr Avery at  the  outset  of  the
    appeal hearing.

8.   Mr Avery began his submissions by explaining  that  the  appellant  had
    built up significant ties in the UK but the  circumstances  had  to  be
    compelling before the appellant could bring herself within the ambit of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration   Rules.  This case did  not  satisfy
    those criteria.  Furthermore, the  Immigration  Judge  appeared  to  be
    saying that the appellant was in a"near miss"  situation  and  to  have
    allowed the appeal on that basis.  This was  the  wrong  approach.   He
    also explained that the case of  Devaseelan  required  the  Immigration
    Judge to have regard to the findings of the earlier Tribunal but he had
    failed to do so.  In summary, the appellant had no expectation that she
    would be allowed to remain in the UK at  the  end  of  her  leave.  The
    absence of any criminal behaviour by her  or  the  fact  that  she  had
    established some private life here after many years  of  residence  did
    not justify the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  her  to
    remain on the grounds of Article 8.

9.   Mr Corben began with a preliminary objection to the way the matter  had
    come before the Upper Tribunal.  He said that Judge Gleeson had not, in
    his submission, jurisdiction to re-open the question of permission.  He
    referred me to paragraph 43 of the Procedure Rules and in particular to
    sub-paragraphs (1)-(2) thereof.  He said that the decision to set aside
    on grounds  of  procedural  irregularity  in  the  earlier  refusal  of
    permission was wrong.  Judge Gleeson had considered  the  matter  as  a
    procedural irregularity when in fact there was  no  such  irregularity.
    He submitted by reference to a number of other Procedure Rules that she
    had construed the relevant Rule incorrectly.  Her decision  was  "ultra
    vires".  He then turned to the merits and said that the  appellant  had
    been lawfully in the UK from April 2004 to March 2014 (ten  years  less
    nine days).  A 28 day period of overstaying would have been ignored but
    unfortunately the appellant had failed to spot this.  It  was  in  that
    context that  her  private  life  needed  to  be  considered.   It  was
    submitted indeed, that this changed "everything"  and  fully  justified
    the decision by the First-tier Tribunal.  I was referred  to  paragraph
    56  of  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   where   the
    Immigration Judge had referred to "weighty matters" in support  of  the
    appellant's claim.  However, as far as the  "near  miss"  argument  was
    concerned I pointed out  to  Mr  Corben  this  appeared  to  have  been
    rejected by the Immigration Judge.  Mr Corben rejected  the  Devaseelan
    argument reminding the Tribunal as to exactly what that case said.   He
    referred, in particular, to paragraphs 37-38 of that decision.  He said
    that Judge Knowles was dealing with  a  different  situation  and  that
    departure from his decision was therefore justified.  It was not  clear
    in what respects the factual circumstances before  Judge  Knowles  were
    different from those before Judge Gibb.

10.  Mr Avery briefly replied on behalf of the respondent to  say  that  the
    appellant had not raised the procedure argument prior to  the  hearing,
    despite having over one month to deal with the point raised from  Judge
    Gleeson's grant of permission dated 19 September 2014.  The  point  was
    an entirely  technical  one  which  would  have  required  considerable
    research by him.  He had not come prepared to deal with this and I  was
    invited to dismiss it for the lack of proper notice having  been  given
    in accordance with the requirement for procedural  fairness.   Although
    the Immigration Judge appeared to have rejected the argument  that  the
    appellant was a "near miss" person he ought to  have  attached  greater
    weight to Judge Knowles's decision.

11.  At the end of the hearing I decided it was  not  appropriate  to  allow
    the appellant to advance an argument that permission to  appeal  should
    not have been given as the respondent had not been given advance notice
    of this application.  It  was  inappropriate  to  prevent  the  parties
    addressing the Tribunal on the merits of the  appeal  in  circumstances
    where both parties had come prepared to address the substantive issues.
    I reserved my decision on the error  of  law  issue  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Discussion

12.  The appellant is a Nigerian national, who originally came to the UK  as
    a student in 2005 and has subsequently stayed  on  a  number  of  other
    bases.  She sought leave to remain as a person present and settled here
    but that application was rejected by the respondent in  May  2013,  who
    decided to make removal directions under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

13.  The appellant unsuccessfully appealed  that  refusal  decision  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FTT").  The matter came before Judge Knowles on 3
    January 2014 and was dismissed by him on 13 January 2014.  He found the
    appellant's account of having been married to Mr  Tshibamba-Mpia  ("the
    sponsor"), a British citizen, to be fabricated for the purposes of  her
    immigration application.  There was no loving relationship between them
    and her husband had not even attended the  hearing  to  give  evidence.
    She also claimed to have a close relationship with his  two  daughters,
    Regine and Grace.  There were letters or  greetings  cards  from  those
    children to their father or to the appellant but the Immigration  Judge
    was far from persuaded about any of this evidence.

14.  A subsequent appeal against the decision by Immigration  Judge  Knowles
    to dismiss the appeal against the refusal of leave to  remain/to  issue
    removal directions failed when Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Davey
    found the decision disclosed no arguable  errors  of  law  and  refused
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Indeed,  the  adverse
    credibility findings were allowed to  stand  and  paragraph  7  of  his
    refusal of permission notes that there was "no challenge to the judge's
    conclusion with reference to  Gulshan  ([2014]  UKUT  640  (IAC))  that
    Article 8 ECHR was not engaged outside of the Immigration Rules".

15.  According to Immigration Judge Gibb, whose decision was promulgated  on
    19 August 2014, the appellant became an overstayer on  10  March  2014.
    On 7 July 2014 she claimed  asylum  on  the  grounds  that  she  was  a
    lesbian.  This was  rejected  by  the  respondent  on  8  August  2014.
    Immigration Judge Gibb  had  to  deal  with  her  appeal  against  that
    decision.  In the material parts of his determination, he  found  there
    to be "unusual facts" which he felt were compelling.  These led him  to
    conclude that the appellant should be allowed to remain under Article 8
    of the ECHR despite being  unable  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

16.  In a notice of decision dated 19 September 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gleeson decided to revise her earlier decision to refuse permission  to
    appeal to the respondent.  She gave her permission that it was  in  the
    interests of justice to do so pursuant  to  Rule  43  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   That  Rule  allows  the  Upper
    Tribunal to set aside "a decision which disposes  of  the  proceedings"
    and re-make the decision or the relevant part of it.

17.  It was argued before me that none of the conditions in paragraph  43(2)
    of those Rules were in fact met.  However,  it  would  seem  that  sub-
    paragraph (2) (d) would have applied here and therefore Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gleeson was entitled to exercise her discretion under that  Rule.



18.  There were two fundamental points raised in this appeal:

    (1)  Judge Gibb failed to have adequate regard to the guidance given by
         the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in the case  of  Devaseelan  [2002]
         UKIAT 00702*.


    (2)  Judge Gibb failed to address the correct test under Article  8  of
         the ECHR having regard to the case law including the case of  Nagre
         [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).


19.  The grounds are set out clearly and succinctly by the  respondent.   In
    relation to the Devaseelan point Judge Gibb failed to have  any  regard
    to the context of the decision reached by Immigration Judge Knowles and
    the absence of any material change in circumstances.   Essentially,  as
    Immigration Judge Gibb found, the appellant had deliberately set out to
    deceive the Immigration Judge  about  the  nature  and  extent  of  her
    relationship with  her  husband.   At  paragraph  29  of  Judge  Gibb's
    determination he points out that the appellant, with full knowledge  of
    Judge Knowles's mistake, had deliberately not told the judge  that  she
    and her husband were no longer "together".  Later in his  determination
    (at paragraph 57) he accepted that the marriage  was  not  genuine  and
    that there was "some attempt by the appellant to deceive the  judge  at
    this hearing" (referring to  the  hearing  in  January  2014).   It  is
    surprising therefore that Judge Gibb also concluded that  it  had  "not
    been established that this was not a genuine marriage" in paragraph  29
    of his determination.  These facts ought to  have  led  Judge  Gibb  to
    conclude that the appellant essentially had no continuing  family  life
    in the UK, including any contact with the sponsor's children, and  that
    her credibility was highly doubtful.   Immigration  Judge  Knowles  had
    reached comprehensive findings which had not been  attacked  on  appeal
    earlier the same year.  There appears to have been no  material  change
    in circumstances since the hearing  in  January  2014  and  Judge  Gibb
    should have adopted as his starting  position  the  decision  of  Judge
    Knowles  having  regard  to  the  Devaseelan  guidance.  That  guidance
    includes treating earlier decisions as authoritative on the  facts  and
    issues argued before the tribunal in question.   Judge  Gibb  ought  to
    have concentrated on  any new matters arising. There appear to be  none
    that are material.  He should have been conscious of the need to ensure
    consistency of approaches as between the two Tribunal hearings.  I find
    that Immigration Judge Gibb did not have proper an adequate  regard  to
    the guidance given in the Devaseelan case.

20.  Turning to Article 8 of the ECHR, the  circumstances  in  which  it  is
    justified to depart from the requirements  of  the  Rules  need  to  be
    "compelling" or  the  consequences  of  removal  "unjustifiably  harsh"
    before this Article may be invoked to  prevent  a  removal  that  would
    otherwise  be  lawful.   The  context  in  which  the  hearing   before
    Immigration Judge Gibb took place was that the appellant had, based  on
    his own findings, made a hopeless claim for asylum and for human rights
    protection under Article 3 of the ECHR on 7 July 2014  as  well  as  an
    unmeritorious application under 276B of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  a
    means of  preventing  her  removal.   Immigration  Judge  Gibb  himself
    correctly concluded that there was no merit in those claims and I  note
    that Mr Corben, who represented the appellant  at  the  hearing  before
    Judge Gibb, decided not to even pursue the  claim  under  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules (see paragraph 11 of the determination).  Gulshan and
    Nagre, are referred to by Immigration Judge Gibb.  However, I find that
    the learned Immigration Judge did not adequately consider or apply  the
    test set out in those cases.  Two stages are necessary:

    (1)  Whether the application should succeed under the Rules?


    (2)  If not, whether there were compelling circumstances  or  otherwise
         unjustifiably harsh consequences of removal requiring the  Tribunal
         to go beyond the Rules?


21.  The Immigration Judge characterised the case as "unusual"  and  treated
    this as synonymous with "exceptional" and referred to the cases  of  MM
    Lebanon and the case of Patel but it  seems  that  in  fact  there  was
    nothing "compelling" or "unusual"  about  the  appellant's  case.   The
    appellant had fabricated a relationship with her UK sponsor,  pretended
    to be a lesbian, which the Immigration Judge rejected, but had in  fact
    formed no family life in the UK.  The Immigration Judge failed  to  pay
    adequate regard for the need to control unauthorised  and  uncontrolled
    immigration into the UK, which was a weighty factor.  This  is  despite
    referring to the changes introduced to the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002, part 5A by Section 19 of  the  Immigration  Act  2014.
    Immigration Judge Gibb himself concluded that  he  had  been  presented
    with a witness statement which was described as  "weak  in  credibility
    terms"  in  paragraph  25,  that  the  appellant's  evidence  had  been
    "misleading in places" and he gave "negative weight to  the  timing  of
    her claim".  He did not accept her evidence that she had broken up  the
    marriage to the sponsor because of being a lesbian, indeed, he did  not
    accept that she was a lesbian at all.

22.  The Immigration Judge identified a "sliding scale" of  cases.   On  one
    side of the scale were those cases where the Immigration Rules  were  a
    complete code, such as those involving foreign criminals,  but  on  the
    other were those cases where a  "proportionality  test"  was  required.
    However,  having  said  that  the  case  was  "finely   balanced"   the
    Immigration Judge then  failed  to  take  account  of  all  factors  in
    reaching  his  conclusions.   Having   concluded   that   the   ongoing
    relationship  with  the  sponsor   was   essentially   fabricated   the
    Immigration Judge ought to have gone on and  considered  whether  there
    were any factors that made her case compelling.  The  factors  referred
    to in paragraph 58 of  the  determination  were  simply  neutral.   The
    factors set out in paragraph 34 were material but I  am  not  persuaded
    that they were sufficiently material to lead  any  reasonably  directed
    Tribunal to conclude that the appellant could not be removed  from  the
    UK.  In particular, she has described as having studied and  worked  in
    the UK, to having friendships and to attending church  regularly.   She
    is  also  said  to  have  suffered  medical  conditions  of  the  types
    described, although none of them were said to have  qualified  her  for
    any right to remain in the  UK  under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR.   The
    Immigration  Judge  also  took  into  account  her  overall  length  of
    residence.   However,  he  failed  to  consider  the  need  to  respect
    immigration control and the fact that the appellant's presence  in  the
    UK had been governed by the terms of her leave.  She had no expectation
    of any right to remain here beyond that leave.

My Conclusions

23.  The Immigration Judge's conclusion that the  appellant's  circumstances
    were such that she had an "unusual and significant private life ties to
    the  UK  built  up  over  a  significant  period"  which  rendered  the
    respondent's decision "disproportionate" was one that is unsustainable.
     The factors in this case had  been  fully  taken  account  of  by  the
    earlier determination of Judge Knowles  and  in  any  event  there  was
    nothing "compelling" or "unusual" about the facts.  The  appellant  had
    formed a private life in the UK in the full knowledge  that  she  would
    have to return to Nigeria at the  end  of  her  stay  and  not  in  any
    expectation that she should be allowed to permanently settle in the UK.



24.  Having regard to  the  case  law  summarised  above  I  have  therefore
    concluded that  there  is a material error in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal and that decision should be  set  aside  and  substituted
    with the decision of the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

The Upper Tribunal finds a material of law in the  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal.  It therefore sets aside that decision.  The  appeal  by  the
Secretary of State is allowed.  The following decision is substituted.

The appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  further
leave to remain and/or to issue removal directions is dismissed.

The appeal has unsuccessful and I therefore make no fee award.

There has been no request for, and I do not make any anonymity direction.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



