
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05581/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 October 2013                            |On 30 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     ks
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:


For the Appellant: Mr S. Muzenda, Solicitor
For the Respondent: Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 23 April  1981.  Her
       appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 30 May  2013  to
       remove her to Zimbabwe was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Flynn after a hearing on 12 July 2013. Permission to  appeal  having
       been granted, the appeal came before me.

    2. The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was on asylum and human rights
       grounds, the latter including matters concerned with the appellant's
       health. A very brief summary of the basis of the appeal suffices  to
       put into context what follows.

    3. The appellant claims to come from a rural part of Zimbabwe. She came
       to the UK as a student. In the UK she became a member of the MDC and
       Restoration of Human Rights group ("ROHR"), participating in various
       activities, until ill-health caused  her  to  have  to  cease  those
       activities.  She fears persecution  on  return  on  account  of  her
       support for the MDC which she would continue when she  returns.  She
       would be questioned on return  at  the  airport  which  would  be  a
       difficult  experience  for  her  because  of  her   various   health
       conditions. On questioning she would say that she  did  not  support
       Zanu-PF and intended to work for the MDC.  The  appellant  would  be
       required to demonstrate loyalty to the regime. She would not be able
       to relocate to Harare.

Submissions

    4. Mr Muzenda relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  I
       was referred to  the  decision  in  HS  (returning  asylum  seekers)
       Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00094 in terms of the risk of  questioning  on
       return. The mere fact of being refused asylum  in  the  UK  was  not
       sufficient to establish risk but she would be  of  further  interest
       and would be subjected  to  further  interrogation.  The  First-tier
       judge was wrong to state that the appellant would be unlikely to  be
       questioned on return.

    5. The delay in claiming asylum was not even the six years from when it
       is said she had a fear of return. She would not have claimed  asylum
       from the first day of attending a political meeting.

    6. There was no sufficient basis for the judge to have  concluded  that
       the appellant stopped her political activities in the UK because she
       had lost interest. There was medical evidence  which  supported  her
       account in this respect.

    7. Even though there is  no  indication  from  the  determination  that
       submissions had been made  in  relation  to  the  reasonableness  of
       internal relocation, it is likely  that  submissions  on  the  point
       would have been made. The point was in any event an obvious one.

    8. So far as Article 8 is  concerned,  it  was  conceded  that  at  the
       hearing it had been said on behalf of the appellant that  Article  8
       was not a "forceful" ground.

    9. It was also accepted that during the course of the hearing the judge
       had allowed the appellant suitable breaks and ensured that  she  was
       able to give her evidence. It  was  not  suggested  that  there  was
       procedural unfairness in this respect on the part of the  First-tier
       judge.

   10. Mr Tarlow relied on the 'rule 24' response. The judge had considered
       the evidence in relation to the appellant's political activities and
       the extent to which that would create a risk on return. There was no
       medical evidence addressing the question of why the  appellant  gave
       up her political activities.

   11. Although in considering Article 8 the judge did  not  refer  to  her
       medical conditions, she was obviously aware of them.

   12. The primary finding was that the appellant could return to her  home
       area, therefore any error in the assessment of  internal  relocation
       is not material.

   13. Despite what is said about questioning on  return,  the  appellant's
       political activities were some years ago in the  UK  and  would  not
       generate further interest.

   14. In reply it was submitted that the appellant intended  to  carry  on
       her political activities on return. On questioning she would not  be
       able to articulate her  position  because  of  her  medical  issues.
       Following the screening interview the appellant had  been  given  an
       apology by the UKBA for the way the interview was  conducted.  There
       was evidence from the  asylum  interview  that  she  had  difficulty
       answering questions.

My assessment
   15. In CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]  UKUT
       00059(IAC), the  Tribunal  referred  to  the  guidance  in  HS.  The
       Tribunal did not purport to give country guidance on  the  issue  of
       risk at the  point  of  return  at  the  airport,  confining  itself
       expressly to stating that it  was  giving  country  information.  It
       stated that the fresh evidence regarding the position at  the  point
       of return does not indicate  any  increase  in  risk  since  country
       guidance was given in HS.  It went on to conclude that the available
       evidence as to the treatment of those  who  have  been  returned  to
       Harare Airport since 2007 and the absence of any  reliable  evidence
       of risk there means that there is no justification for extending the
       scope of those who might be regarded by the CIO as an MDC activist.

   16.  Mr Muzenda did not seek to support his argument as to risk  at  the
       point of return with  reference  any  background  evidence,  relying
       solely on the decision in HS. The relevant paragraphs of HS are  the
       following:

                                                          "
             "264.     The  CIO  has  taken  over  responsibility  for  the
                  operation of immigration control  at  Harare  airport  and
                  immigration officers are being replaced by  CIO  officers.
                  We accept also that one of the  purposes  of  the  CIO  in
                  monitoring arrivals at the airport is  to  identify  those
                  who are thought to be, for whatever reason, enemies of the
                  regime. The aim is to detect those of interest because  of
                  an adverse military or criminal profile. The main focus of
                  the operation to identify those  who  may  be  of  adverse
                  interest remains those who are perceived to be politically
                  active in support of the opposition. But anyone  perceived
                  to be a threat to or a critic of the regime  will  attract
                  interest also.


              265.     The fact that the CIO has taken over  responsibility
                  for monitoring all returning passengers at Harare  airport
                  is not something that  effects  the  level  of  risk.  The
                  evidence before AA(2) was that all deportees  were  handed
                  over to the CIO for questioning in  any  event.  Then,  as
                  now, those deportees will have been identified in  advance
                  from the passenger manifest and the CIO will have formed a
                  preliminary view as to  which,  if  any,  are  of  further
                  interest.


              266.         Large numbers of  passengers  pass  through  the
                  airport. The CIO continues to  recognise  that  it  cannot
                  question everyone; and so there is a screening process  to
                  identify those who might merit closer examination. We  see
                  no reason to suppose that the heightened role of  the  CIO
                  would change this. There are now additional  demands  upon
                  the CIO as it is responsible for monitoring all passengers
                  passing  through  the  airport,  both   on   arrival   and
                  departure. We have set out the evidence that indicates  in
                  whom the CIO has  an  interest.  This  will  be  those  in
                  respect of whom there is any reason to suspect an  adverse
                  political,  criminal  or  military  profile  of  the  type
                  identified in AA(2). In addition, those  perceived  to  be
                  associated with what have come to be identified  as  civil
                  society organisations  may  attract  adverse  interest  as
                  critics of the regime.


              267.         There is no evidence  that  ordinary  passengers
                  returning  from  the   United   Kingdom   experience   any
                  difficulty in passing through the airport.  In  fact,  the
                  evidence is to the contrary. Nor is there a real risk that
                  those returning to Zimbabwe after being refused  leave  to
                  remain after the leave initially granted has  expired  are
                  regarded with  suspicion  or  treated  otherwise  than  as
                  ordinary travellers.


              268.         Nor is there evidence of any consistent  pattern
                  of treating any differently those  who  have  not  claimed
                  asylum in the United Kingdom but who  have  been  forcibly
                  removed to Zimbabwe because they have been  refused  leave
                  to enter or remain. There is no evidence that any  of  the
                  twenty three "immigration deportees" removed since  August
                  2006 have  experienced  any  such  difficulties.  We  have
                  accepted  that  all  those  who  are  deportees  will   be
                  identifiable as such upon return to Harare airport and  so
                  will generally be subjected to some enquiry  before  being
                  allowed to pass through the airport."

   17. Although not all returnees are questioned, of note is [268]  to  the
       effect that all deportees will be identifiable as such  upon  return
       to Harare airport and so will be subjected to  some  enquiry  before
       being allowed to pass through the airport.  In  these  circumstances
       the First-tier judge's conclusion at  [46]  that  the  appellant  is
       unlikely to be questioned at the airport is not a  sustainable  one.
       What the consequences of any questioning would be is another matter.
       That depends to  some  extent  on  the  judge's  other  findings  in
       relation to the appellant's political activities, her intentions and
       motives.

   18. I do not accept that there is any merit in the complaint  about  the
       judge's findings in terms of the timing of the appellant's claim for
       asylum. It appears from  [34]  of  the  determination  that  it  was
       submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  the  delay  in  claiming
       asylum was not  the  ten  years  contended  for  on  behalf  of  the
       respondent, but six years. Indeed, what was argued on behalf of  the
       appellant as recorded at [34] is  consistent  with  [32]  where  the
       judge set out the submissions on behalf of the appellant. I  mention
       this because in submissions to me Mr Muzenda,  who  represented  the
       appellant before the First-tier Tribunal, argued that the delay  was
       not even six years.

   19. The judge referred at [35] to  the  appellant's  evidence  that  her
       mother sent her to the UK so that she would  be  safe  "which  is  a
       clear indication that the appellant had at least some degree of fear
       when she entered the UK." He also referred  to,  and  accepted,  her
       evidence that she  believed  that  her  aunt  would  take  steps  to
       regularise her status, but did not find it credible that  she  would
       have maintained that belief until she left  her  aunt's  house  some
       five years later. He also  noted  that  even  after  recovering  her
       passport and realising that  no  steps  had  been  taken  there  was
       nothing  to  show  that  she  undertook  any  further   action   for
       approximately five years. She had said in her witness  statement  at
       [9] that her claim was based on her sur place activities but did not
       claim to have been involved in them prior to 2007.

   20. On any view,  on  the  judge's  analysis  of  the  facts,  which  is
       supported by the evidence, there was a delay of several years before
       the appellant claimed asylum. That is a matter that  the  judge  was
       entitled to take into account. At [37] she  stated  that  this  "has
       caused some damage to her credibility" and that  she  has  therefore
       "treated her evidence with a degree of caution."

   21. In relation to the appellant having ceased political  activities  in
       the UK, the judge noted that she had not been involved in  political
       activities for more that  two  years  (see  [38]).  That  conclusion
       follows from the appellant's evidence recorded at [17] and [25] (two
       and a half years), and no complaint is made about  that  finding  of
       fact. The complaint is in terms of the judge's conclusions as to why
       she stopped those activities. The appellant's case is that it was as
       a result of her medical conditions, set out at [4] and  referred  to
       elsewhere in the determination. At [4] those conditions are recorded
       as dyslexia, dyspraxia, thyroid eye disease, ADHD, and back pain.

   22. At [39] Judge Flynn referred to the respondent's submissions to  the
       effect that the medical evidence did not support the claim that  she
       stopped her political activities  because  of  her  health,  and  he
       accepted that submission. It is not the case that the  judge  failed
       to take into account the medical evidence.  She  did  take  it  into
       account and referred to it more than once in the determination.  She
       also noted that the claim that she stopped  her  political  activity
       because of her health was inconsistent with her continued membership
       of her Church. No complaint is raised before me in relation to  that
       aspect of the findings.

   23. There was medical evidence to support the appellant's claim that she
       has the conditions she referred to, that evidence being both in  the
       appellant's and respondent's bundles. However, the grounds of appeal
       to the Upper Tribunal do not identify any medical evidence that  was
       before the First-tier judge which refers  to  the  reasons  for  her
       having given up her political activities in the UK,  and  none  were
       referred to at the hearing before me.

   24. The judge took into account the appellant's explanation for  ceasing
       political activity, and gave reasons for rejecting that account. The
       conclusion  that  the  appellant  had  lost  interest  in  political
       activity more than two years ago  is  a  sustainable  one,  being  a
       reasonable inference from the evidence.

   25. In this  context  it  is  argued  that  the  findings  at  [50]  are
       inconsistent. The judge there stated that "I am satisfied  that  the
       appellant lost any interest she may have possessed in  politics  and
       human rights more than two  years  ago...I  am  satisfied  that  her
       original involvement with  the  MDC  and  ROHR  was  principally  to
       bolster her asylum claim."  I  do  not  accept  that  there  is  the
       inconsistency contended for in terms of the conclusion that she  had
       an interest in politics yet only  became  involved  to  bolster  her
       claim. Judge Flynn referred to "any interest she may have possessed"
       and stated that her  "original  involvement"  was  "principally"  to
       bolster her claim. She did not in fact conclude that  the  appellant
       really did have a commitment to political activity for its own  sake
       and without an underlying motive.

   26. She noted at [43] that the appellant  did  not  participate  in  any
       political  activities  in  Zimbabwe.  She  made  her   claim   after
       significant delay. At [38] the judge made findings as to the  extent
       of her political activities in the UK  which  were  that  they  were
       "intermittent and were not at a high level". She accepted  that  the
       appellant had taken part in some fund-raising events such as selling
       T-shirts but not that she was involved in soliciting donations or in
       the recruitment of  members  and  supporters.  She  found  that  the
       appellant  was  not,  to  the  use  the  words  of  the  appellant's
       statement, "making a significant contribution to  the  struggle  for
       liberation." It has not been suggested that those findings as to the
       extent of the appellant's activities are unsustainable.

   27. Against this background the  judge  was  entitled  to  come  to  the
       conclusions that she did about the appellant's interest in political
       activity, such as it was, having ceased more  than  two  years  ago.
       Thus, she  was  entitled  to  conclude  at  [50]  that  it  was  not
       reasonably likely that the appellant will take part in  politics  in
       the future on return or that she would be forced to  lie  about  her
       political beliefs.

   28. It is plainly relevant whether or not the appellant's home area is a
       rural area of Zimbabwe, given the present country  guidance  on  the
       issue. However, there is no merit in the assertion in the grounds to
       the effect that the judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
       rejecting the appellant's claim that she comes from  a  rural  area.
       The grounds assert that "there was no evidence to show that  it  was
       anything else either." However, as Mr Muzenda  acknowledged,  it  is
       for the appellant to establish that matter, it  being  an  issue  of
       obvious significance. The judge was entitled to reject her  evidence
       in that  respect,  in  the  context  of  an  account  in  which  the
       appellant's credibility was found wanting in  significant  respects.
       In passing, I note that no background evidence was put before me  to
       support any express or implied suggestion that  the  judge  made  an
       error as to fact in terms of whether the appellant's home area is  a
       rural area.

   29. Having come to the view that there  was  no  error  of  law  in  the
       judge's primary assessment in terms of  risk  to  the  appellant  on
       return to her home area, whatever may be said about her  conclusions
       as to the reasonableness of internal relocation is irrelevant.

   30. Returning then to the error in the  judge's  conclusions  about  the
       questioning of the appellant at the point of return at the  airport.
       Whilst [268] of HS suggests that the appellant would be  subject  to
       some enquiry, it is not reasonably likely that  that  enquiry  would
       reveal anything other than that the appellant  does  not  intend  to
       pursue any political activity in Zimbabwe and that  her  involvement
       in such activity in the  UK  was  principally  to  secure  residence
       status in the UK. She would also be able  truthfully  to  state,  if
       asked, that her political activities ceased  over  two  and  a  half
       years ago. This is in line with the judge's findings.

   31.  Whilst  it  could  be  said  that  the  appellant  would  find  any
       questioning difficult in the light of her health  conditions,  there
       is nothing to indicate that that would arouse heightened interest in
       her.

   32. Thus, whilst I am satisfied that the judge erred in concluding  that
       the appellant would be unlikely to be questioned at the airport,  in
       so far as that could be characterised as an error of law, it is  not
       one that requires the decision to be set aside because it could  not
       have affected the outcome of the appeal, on the evidence before her.

   33. In relation to Article 8, it is said in the grounds that  the  judge
       failed to undertake the  balancing  exercise  appropriately,  taking
       into account the appellant's length of stay and her medical history.
       It is also said that the  UK  had  assumed  responsibility  for  her
       medical condition "to the extent that  they  are  testing  some  new
       drugs on the [appellant]".

   34. In the assessment of the Article  8  ground,  Judge  Flynn  did  not
       expressly refer to the appellant's health conditions. It would  have
       been preferable for her to have done so. However, it is  clear  from
       the determination that she was aware of them. It seems to me  to  be
       unlikely that she did not take them into  account  when  considering
       proportionality. At [54] she dealt with the  appellant's  health  in
       the context of Article 3. In the next paragraph but one she went  on
       to consider Article 8. At [62] she  concluded  that  there  were  no
       particular compassionate circumstances, and she concluded  that  her
       personal circumstances, amongst other things, were not  such  as  to
       make her removal disproportionate. She also referred to her  "length
       of residence in the UK".

   35. I am satisfied that the judge conducted the proportionality exercise
       appropriately and did not fail to take  into  account  any  material
       factors, in particular the appellant's health. Even if she failed to
       take her health into account, the medical evidence that  was  before
       her was not such as would or could have led to a different  outcome.
       It is also to be born in mind that the appellant  said  in  evidence
       that she has her mother still in Zimbabwe.

   36. Significantly, it was  said  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  by  her
       representative, recorded at [31], that the appellant did not have  a
       forceful Article 8 case. If the judge's articulation of her  reasons
       for finding that the appellant's removal was proportionate  was,  on
       one view, light on detail, that is hardly surprising given  the  way
       the Article 8 ground was advanced before her.

   37. I do not accept that it could be  said  that  the  UK  had  accepted
       responsibility for the appellant's treatment by virtue of  some  new
       drugs being tested on her. Even  if  such  responsibility  had  been
       assumed, on the facts of this appeal that would  not  have  rendered
       her removal disproportionate.

   38. In conclusion, I am not satisfied that there is any error of law  in
       the decision of the First-tier Tribunal except in  relation  to  the
       issue of questioning at the point of return. However, that is not an
       error of law that means that the decision should, in my  discretion,
       be set aside.

Decision

   39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision however, is not set aside  and
       the  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on   asylum,   humanitarian
       protection and human rights grounds stands.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.









Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 18/10/13
