
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05955/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 October 2017                            |On 19 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     ms
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lewis, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq aged 65 who arrived in  the  UK  in
    November 2013 and claimed asylum in February 2013.  On  26  March  2015
    the respondent made a decision refusing his asylum claim and to  remove
    him by way of directions.  His appeal was heard at Taylor House  on  10
    April, with Judge Mulholland of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (FtT)
    presiding.  In a decision sent on 9 May 2014 she dismissed his appeal.

2.   The grounds of appeal had two main prongs.  The first raised  an  issue
    of procedural fairness.   It  was  submitted  that  by  her  manner  of
    conducting the hearing the judge had displayed bias.  The second  prong
    contains challenges to the judge's treatment of the expert witness  and
    the witness statements of the appellant's wife and friend.

Procedural fairness

3.   As amplified by Mr Lewis the focus of the first  prong  of  the  appeal
    ground was on what happened at the outset of the hearing when the judge
    was informed that a witness was late.  There are  several  accounts  of
    what transpired.  At paragraph 23 the judge records that:

     "I commenced the hearing at 1005hrs.  A short adjournment  was  sought,
         as the Appellant's witness had not arrived.  I was informed that he
         was in the security queue of the building and that the  Appellant's
         representative required time to speak with him before the  hearing.
         I granted a short  adjournment  until  1020am.   I  reconvened  the
         appeal only to be informed that the  Appellant's  witness  had  not
         been in the security queue as claimed  but  instead  was  lost  and
         still trying to make his way to the hearing  centre.   I  adjourned
         again and resumed the hearing until 1045hrs."

4.   I also have the more detailed comments which the  judge  was  asked  to
    provide in response to the grounds of  appeal.   The  judge  states  as
    follows:-

         "I have been asked to  provide  my  comments  in  relation  to  the
         hearing, which took place at Taylor House, London on 10 April 2017.


         I can see from the information contained in the grounds  of  appeal
         that  some  criticism  has  been  made  about   my   comments   and
         determination, asserting that I have  displayed  an  appearance  of
         bias resulting in the appellant being deprived of a fair hearing.


         I commenced the hearing  at  1005am.   I  was  advised  by  Counsel
         appearing on behalf of the appellant that the  appellant's  nephew,
         AAM, was in the security queue in the  building  and  that  Counsel
         required to speak to him for five minutes.  I should point out that
         I use the term adjournment as  that  term  is  commonly  used  when
         interrupting the hearing for a short time.  I left the hearing room
         at 1010am and returned at 1020am, at which time I was informed that
         the appellant's witness was not in fact in the building  as  I  had
         previously been informed, but was lost  and  should  be  at  Taylor
         House by 1030am.  Counsel failed to provide an  explanation  as  to
         why I had been misled.  I  suggested  that  we  start  hearing  the
         appellant's evidence as he was present and I would allow a break in
         between witnesses for Counsel to speak to the  appellant's  witness
         before calling the appellant.  I expressed  my  dissatisfaction  at
         the time that had been wasted by being misled and the cost to other
         court users and the taxpayer.  Had I  known  that  the  appellant's
         witness was not in the building but instead was lost, I would  have
         considered whether to start another case.  I always speak with  the
         Clerk before commencing.  I cannot remember specifically the  order
         of business that day, but it is not  unusual  to  be  advised  that
         interpreters and/or Counsel is (sic)  not  available  as  they  are
         required in another hearing room.  I would have made  the  decision
         to  start  with  this  appeal,  as  Counsel,  the  respondent,  the
         interpreter and the appellant were all present.   I  cannot  recall
         what the position was for the rest of the cases on the list.


         I agreed to the second short adjournment until 1030am and left  the
         hearing room.  At 1037am I was  informed  by  the  clerk  that  the
         witness had just arrived.  I waited in chambers  until  10.45am  to
         allow Counsel to speak to the witness.   When  I  returned  to  the
         hearing room Counsel acknowledged that she had the  opportunity  of
         speaking with the witness and was ready to continue.  At  no  point
         did she indicate any difficulty with the hearing proceeding  before
         me or any concern that the appellant may have had.  At no point did
         the appellant appear distressed.


         It has been mentioned that I treated the appellant as a  vulnerable
         witness.  I did so because he was in receipt of regular healthcare.
          He suffered from musculoskeletal pain  and  urology  problems.   I
         followed the Practice Directions and provided a full explanation to
         the appellant and asked him to  let  me  know  immediately  if  any
         difficulty arose or he needed a break.  I kept  this  matter  under
         continual review throughout the hearing.   I  was  not  advised  by
         Counsel or the appellant of any perceived or actual difficulty  and
         none were apparent to me.  The hearing proceeded in the  usual  way
         without event."

5.   Produced before  me  there  are  two  witness  statements  from  Rachel
    Francis of One Pump Court Chambers who represented the appellant before
    the FtT judge.  In broad terms her first witness statement confirms the
    judge's chronology of what happened but makes the observation  that  at
    an early stage of the hearing the judge "presented as vexed. She states
    that "[t]his was clear to me from her approach, manner and the time  of
    her response to my request [for some time to take further  instructions
    from the late witness]".  Ms Francis also  observed  that  the  judge's
    conduct  caused  the  appellant  to  become  "visibly  distressed"  and
    "worried ... that [the judge] would not listen  to  him".   Ms  Francis
    also produced her 'Note of Hearing'.

6.   In a further witness statement dated 26 October 2017 Ms Francis  states
    that she regrets not having raised the issue of the appearance of  bias
    during the appeal hearing itself.  She gives as her reasons that:

     "I was extremely conscious that the tension in the hearing was  already
         high.  [The judge] clearly presented vexed, her manner was  hostile
         and the Appellant was very distressed.  I did not wish  to  add  to
         these difficulties by raising the sensitive matter of  the  judge's
         appearance of bias.  Secondly, I am a junior practitioner.  I  have
         never raised an issue of appearance of bias before".

7.   There are also statements from the appellant, the interpreter  and  two
    of his witnesses.  These broadly corroborate Ms Francis's account.  The
    appellant avows that although he could not understand  what  was  being
    said between the judge and his Counsel,  the  judge  "had  an  agitated
    expression and from the way she  was  talking  to  my  Counsel  it  was
    obvious that she was not pleased and in a bad mood.  She  was  shouting
    at Counsel".  He remembers "having the horrible feeling that I had done
    something wrong and the judge was angry with me ... I  felt  hopeless".
    The interpreter Mr Abood  Tuma  refers  to  the  judge  becoming  "very
    irritable" when the witness had still not arrived and "was shouting  at
    Counsel".  He described the appellant as panicked, stressed and worried
    by the judge's conduct.  The interpreter concludes:

     "I have been an interpreter for over 25 years  and  I  have  worked  at
         least 9 years as a medical counsellor for  Medical  Foundation  for
         victims of torture.  Accordingly, I know how  vulnerable  witnesses
         should be treated.  I am at Court at least once a week and  I  have
         never seen a Judge act like this".

8.   There is also the witness statement from the appellant's  nephew  whose
    lateness was the subject of discussion at the outset  of  the  hearing.
    After explaining why he had been late he states that when he went  into
    the court "I could tell the judge was angry, although he  did  not  now
    what about".  He  found  her  anger  "intimidating  and  this  made  me
    nervous".

9.   There was no witness statement  from  the  Presenting  Officer  and  Mr
    Melvin was unable at the hearing to produce  any  file  note  from  the
    gentleman in question.  After I made an oral  direction  requiring  the
    Presenting Officer concerned to  provide  a  witness  statement  within
    seven days of the hearing, I was informed by Mr Melvin at  the  end  of
    the hearing that he had left the Home Office  and  gone  to  Australia.
    Subsequently I received a letter from Mr Melvin  stating  that  he  had
    tried to contact Mr Apparicio to obtain a witness statement that  would
    give an indication of events at the hearing. He confirmed that  he  had
    been informed that Mr Apparicio left the Home Office in mid-April  2017
    and relocated to Australia. He attached a copy of  the  appeal  hearing
    minutes "which gives no indication of anything  untoward  occurring  at
    the hearing".  The minute itself, dated 11 April 2017,  states  at  the
    end that "The situation  in  Iraq  significantly  different  than  that
    outlined in the refusal letter. Aps account  was  credible,  consistent
    and his answers in cross-examination appeared genuine  and  honest.  In
    light of this, it is probable IJ will  allow  the  appeal  and  perhaps
    rightly so".  On 6  November  the  appellant's  solicitors  wrote  that
    whilst it was accepted that the Presenting Office does not  record  the
    attitude of the Judge the Counsel who was instructed confirmed that  he
    [the PO] looked 'surprised' at the conduct  of  the  Judge  during  the
    course of the appeal.  The letter concludes by  saying  that  "[i]t  is
    respectfully contended that the impression recorded by  the  Presenting
    [Officer] compared to that recorded by the judge is  quite  marked  and
    does in fact provide  corroboration  of  why  the  appellant  may  have
    perceived the Judge to have been biased in her assessment of him during
    the course of the appeal".

The substantive grounds

Evidence of Ms Guest

10.  The first two of the substantive grounds  of  appeal  allege  that  the
    judge failed  to  consider  the  report  of  Ms  Guest,  a  documentary
    filmmaker and photographer within the  framework  of  her  claimed  and
    actual expertise.  The principal paragraph in which the judge addresses
    Ms Guest's report is paragraph 86:

     "I am satisfied that  Miss  Guest  has  not  properly  considered  this
         matter.  The Appellant has produced little evidence  of  functional
         impairment yet Miss Guest assumes it.  She wrongly assumes he would
         be without the support of his wife, relatives and friends who  live
         in Karbala and would be available to  assist  the  Appellant.   She
         provides information  of  the  health  system  in  Iraq,  including
         hospitals and private medical centres and I can find no  reason  to
         assume that this Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  access  these
         resources.  She considers the situation in Baghdad and not  Karbala
         and finds that there is a risk of kidnapping  for  this  Appellant.
         Accordingly there is nothing in this report that convinces me  that
         this Appellant would be at risk on account of his health and age."

11.  I am not persuaded that these two grounds are made out.  The thrust  of
    Ms Guest's report is an assessment of the  healthcare  system  in  Iraq
    based on her working there between 1998  and  2004.   As  a  source  of
    objective evidence about the  correct  situation  in  Iraq  Ms  Guest's
    evidence had clear limitations.  She was not a country expert on  Iraq.
    Her own direct knowledge was over thirteen years old.  Her  report  did
    not deal with health facilities in the appellant's home area.   Despite
    lacking credentials as a country expert she ventured  opinions  on  the
    risks of kidnapping that were beyond her own  expertise.   Further,  to
    the extent that she purported to assess the difficulties the  appellant
    would face on return related  to  his  medical  problems,  she  clearly
    failed to apprise herself of the medical evidence in existence relating
    to the appellant.  Whereas Ms Guest records the appellant as  suffering
    from severe osteo-arthritis, that is contradicted by the medical report
    at p. 163 of the bundle which records that there were "no  overt  signs
    of osteo arthritis".  As is acknowledged in the appellant's grounds  Ms
    Guest simply relied on the appellant's own statement at p. 19  that  he
    suffered from osteoarthritis.

12.  The next substantive ground maintains that  in  assessing  the  witness
    statements of the appellant's wife and  friend  as  "self-serving"  the
    judge failed to have regard to material evidence.  Reliance  is  placed
    on the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application of
    SS) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  ("self-serving"
    statements) [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC).

13.  I do not consider that the judge can  be  said  to  have  erred  merely
    because she described these two individuals as "self-serving".  As  the
    UT observed in the aforementioned judgment, the expression itself tells
    us little or nothing and what matters is whether  it  is  supported  by
    adequate reasons.

14.  However, Mr Lewis still has a point here.  The judge's  reasons  either
    amount to a mere reliance on the self-serving character of the evidence
    (in itself a reason empty of content)  or  to  reliance  on  extraneous
    features of the witnesses' evidence.

15.  As an example of the former, it is pertinent  to  address  Mr  Melvin's
    submissions on this matter.  Mr Melvin seeks to  mitigate  the  judge's
    reference to the witnesses' evidence as self-serving by noting that the
    judge restricted herself to saying that their statements "could be self-
    serving", not that they were.  I do not find that this language redeems
    the judge's clear reliance on this feature.  At paragraph 68 the  judge
    said that the nephew's assertion that the appellant was a member of the
    Al Dawaa Party "could be true"; yet the only reason given for rejecting
    this was that this statement "could be self-serving".

16.  As an example of the  latter,  the  judge's  rejection  of  the  wife's
    evidence for being (or capable of  being)  self-serving  was  at  first
    sight unobjectionable in that she noted that it was "vague and  lacking
    in detail".  However, as regards her explanation for the wife's failure
    to provide a full statement (fear of reprisals), the judge rejected  it
    - "I would have expected her to do all she could to assist her  husband
    save his life, which in turn would entitle her to family reunification"
    (paragraph 70).  In light of that assessment, the conclusion  that  her
    evidence "could be self-serving to bolster the  Appellant's  claim"  is
    hard to follow as it stands.  If anything her statement in this respect
    was the opposite of self-serving.

17.  Although not clearly set out in the written grounds Mr Lewis  expressed
    a concern during  the  hearing  about  the  judge's  apparent  lack  of
    appreciation of the complexity of the appellant's claim about the risks
    he faced in Iraq following his experiences in Iraq and Syria.  He  took
    particular issue with the judge's treatment  at  paragraph  67  of  the
    appellant's return to Karbala given the known risks he  said  he  faced
    there: In my judgement this concern is real.  At  paragraphs  39-40  of
    his witness statement the appellant had offered an explanation for  his
    return to Karbala, stating he had "nowhere else  to  go"  and  that  he
    "thought [he] could hide out".  At the very least the judge should have
    addressed this explanation and made clear why it was not accepted.

18.  I am persuaded that the judge's reasons for rejecting the  evidence  of
    the appellant's wife and nephew are vitiated by legal error capable  of
    having a material effect on the outcome  of  the  appeal.  The  judge's
    treatment of the  appellant's  explanations  regarding  his  return  to
    Karbala was also deficient.

19.  I shall not address ground 5 except to observe  that  I  regard  it  as
    makeweight.

Procedural fairness

20.  So far as the relevant legal principles are concerned, in  relation  to
    the issue of unfairness consisting of an  appearance  of  bias,  it  is
    common  ground  that  they  are  clearly  and  accurately  set  out  in
    Alubankudi (Appearance of bias) [2015] UKUT 00542 (IAC).

21.  In light of my finding of a material error in the judge's treatment  of
    the evidence of the appellant's wife and nephew,  it  is  not  strictly
    necessary for me to reach  a  firm  view  on  the  procedural  fairness
    ground.  Indeed there is an important reason why it would be  premature
    of me to do so because, whilst the judge was afforded  the  opportunity
    to respond to the grounds of appeal, those as drafted did  not  upbraid
    the tone and manner of the judge's remarks but their contents (she  was
    said to have made "a strong remark against the appellant's  witness  at
    the outset", one that was "highly pejorative in nature").  The  judge's
    further comments made in response  to  Tribunal  directions  were  made
    without  sight  of  Ms  Francis's  two  statements  or  those  of   the
    interpreter, appellant and nephew summarised above. Only the latter set
    of  statements  highlight  concerns  about  tone  and  manner  and   in
    particular refer to the judge  shouting.  The  judge  has  not  had  an
    opportunity to respond to those allegations.

22.  Nevertheless, it may assist the parties if I  record  my  understanding
    of the evidence that I do have before me, incomplete as it is.  On  the
    basis of that evidence and the submissions I heard, I  see  significant
    weaknesses in Mr Lewis's submission.  As he acknowledged, it is  to  be
    expected that if Counsel experiences judicial conduct  giving  rise  to
    the appearance of bias, he or  she  should  raise  the  matter  at  the
    hearing or, if for some reason that is felt too difficult, as  soon  as
    possible thereafter.  No  complaint  was  raised,  however,  until  the
    appellant was sent the decision  dismissing  his  appeal.   If  Counsel
    takes a contemporaneous Note of proceedings at which  a  judge  behaves
    inappropriately one would normally expect that  to  have  been  written
    down in such a Note somewhere.  Mr Lewis acknowledged as much.  But  it
    was not.

23.    When I speak above of incomplete  evidence  I  particularly  have  in
    mind  the  absence  of  any  witness  statement  from   Mr   Apparicio.
    Nevertheless we do have his minute and it makes  no  note  of  untoward
    tone or manner or other questionable conduct on the part of the  judge.
    Ordinarily it would be expected that a  Presenting  Officer  file  note
    would record something where it was felt a judge had not conducted  the
    hearing fairly. Mr Melvin said it was his own practice to do so and  he
    understood it to be good HOPO practice. Given that Mr Apparicio is  not
    available to clear the matter up, it is difficult  to  place  too  much
    weight on the absence of any comment on the judge's  conduct,  but  the
    note certainly does not really help the appellant's main argument about
    unfairness.

 24. Another feature of the evidence that  does  not  help  the  appellant's
    argument is that the judge appears to have taken all the  proper  steps
    you would expect in dealing with the absence of a witness said to be on
    his way. There can be no suggestion she rode roughshod  over  Counsel's
    request for short adjournments and she also allowed time for Counsel to
    confer with the witness beforehand.

25.  The main allegation, that of a judge shouting, must also be  considered
    with  some  care.  Shouting  per  se  does  not  evince  any   judicial
    misconduct. If for example there is a disturbance amongst the public in
    courtroom shouting may sometimes be necessary to  restore  order.  That
    said, there is nothing to suggest that there was such a context in this
    case.

26.  Criticism is made in Ms Francis's first statement of the fact that  the
    judge had stated that court time was expensive and delay was a waste of
    taxpayer's money.  In her first witness statement Ms Francis said:

     "I was very struck by this comment.  I  have  represented  hundreds  of
         clients in immigration and asylum cases and have appeared  in  over
         140 hearings in the FtT and UT and in the Administrative Court.   I
         have never heard a comment like this made by a judge ...".

27.  As I observed in discussions with Mr Lewis, for judges to remind  users
    of the importance of avoiding delay given  costs  that  accrue  to  the
    taxpayer is quotidian and indeed it would  be  remiss  if  judges  said
    nothing about delays. Ms Francis's above statement also  jars  somewhat
    with her description of herself as junior and inexperienced. I am  sure
    she was expressing how she  viewed  herself,  but  in  relative  terms,
    someone who has appeared in over 140 hearings is not inexperienced.

28.  At the same time (and this  was  a  point  more  forcibly  made  by  Ms
    Francis in the same witness statement) it was an important  feature  of
    this case that the appellant was a vulnerable witness.  The  fact  that
    the judge acceded to Ms Francis's request that the appellant be treated
    as a vulnerable witness and undertook to follow the Joint  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 2 of 2010 (see paragraph 21 of her  decision)  can  be
    said to point to  her  readiness  to  treat  the  witness  sensitively.
    However, it is not clear to me that the judge considered the fact  that
    her interactions with the appellant's Counsel might have an  impact  on
    the  appellant's  ability  to  give  evidence  and  in  the  supportive
    conditions described in the Guidance Note.  Even assuming that in these
    interactions the judge was being no  more  than  robust,  such  conduct
    could be perceived by a vulnerable appellant in a different way than  a
    normal appellant.  To be balanced against that, the Presenting  Officer
    at least appears to have thought that the witness was able  to  give  a
    good account of himself and indeed the  HOPO  seemed  fairly  sure  his
    appeal was going to be allowed because he struck him as credible.

29.   Whilst I do  not  have  sufficient  evidence  before  me  to  reach  a
    definitive conclusion  on  these  competing  considerations,  I  cannot
    exclude that in her reaction to Counsel's submissions regarding a  late
    witness the judge may (inadvertently or otherwise) have lost  sight  of
    the relevance of the appellant being a vulnerable witness  to  how  his
    evidence should have been approached.


Notice of Decision

30.  For the above reasons:

     The FtT judge materially erred in law and her decision is set aside.

     In light of the history of this case, I direct that it be  remitted  to
    the First-tier to be heard by a judge (other than Judge Mulholland)  or
    judges chosen by the Resident Judge.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:24 November 2017
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




