



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05264/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th August 2013                             |                           |
|Prepared                                        |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts
                       Upper Tribunal Judge CLIVE lane

                                   Between

                                 ayoub sadiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Ficklin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Wardle, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, Ayoub Sadiq, was born on 26th February  1985  and  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan. He first arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  25th
    March 2012 having been granted a Tier 4 Student  visa.  On  16th  April
    2012 he claimed asylum, stating that as an Ahmadi he faced  persecution
    in Pakistan.

 2. His application for asylum was refused on 11th May and a  decision  was
    made to refuse him leave to enter the UK. The Appellant  appealed  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal on 27th June 2012.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed his  appeal;  the  Appellant  sought  permission  to
    appeal that decision and on 29th November 2012 the Upper Tribunal found
    an error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision and remitted  the
    matter to be heard again before a different First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips QC and on 3rd
    April 2013, Judge Phillips QC , having heard  evidence,  dismissed  the
    Appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds;  namely   asylum,   Humanitarian
    Protection and human rights.

 4. The Appellant now appeals with permission to the Upper Tribunal.  Judge
    Kebede in granting permission said,

         "1.  It is asserted, in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal,
         that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by failing to  make  clear
         findings on the level of the Appellant's activities  in  connection
         with his Ahmadi faith in Pakistan and in the United  Kingdom;  that
         he failed to address a letter  submitted  from  the  Ahmadi  Muslim
         Association UK; that he failed to make adequate findings in  regard
         to the evidence of the witness in  regard  to  his  involvement  in
         activities in the United Kingdom; that he  failed  to  make  proper
         findings on the expert evidence; that he erred in  his  application
         of the evidence to the guidance in MN and others (Ahmadis - country
         conditions - risk) CG [2012]  UKUT  389;  and  that  he  failed  to
         consider the Appellant's evidence in the context of the guidance in
         HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010]  UKSC
         31.

         2.   I consider that there is arguable merit in the grounds".

 5. The facts of the Appellant's claim are  set  out  in  detail  in  Judge
    Phillips QC's determination at paragraph 16.


         "The details of the Appellant's  claim  appear  in  quite  detailed
         statements of 18th June 2012 and 1st March 2013, and in the  record
         of the substantive asylum  interview,  and  in  his  oral  evidence
         before me.  The Appellant adopted the contents of  his  statements,
         which can be  found  at  pages  1-14  of  the  Appellant's  bundle.
         Essentially, the Appellant's account may be summarised as  follows.



   1)  The Appellant was born in  Faisalabad.   He  lived  near  the  Muslim
      Colony in Rabwah, a mainly Sunni Muslim non-Ahmadi area.   His  family
      are Ahmadi.  He has  dedicated  himself  to  Jama'at  Ahmaddiyya.   He
      suffered harassment, including being  the  victim  of  stone-throwing,
      from members of the  Sunni  Muslim  community.  (It  would  have  been
      helpful if Judge Phillips  QC  had  noted  that  Rabwah  is  generally
      speaking an Ahmadi area. It appears that the Appellant  despite  being
      an Ahmadi did not actually live in the Ahmadi area of that city).


   2) The Appellant taught the Koran to  children,  not  all  of  whom  were
      Ahmadi, at a local mosque.  He did not talk  about  the  Ahmadi  faith
      unless he was asked about it.


   3) In the summer of 2008, whilst teaching the Koran,  the  Appellant  was
      attacked by Qazi Sulaman Usmani and his friends.    Sulaman Usmani  is
      a local scholar and the son of Qaari Shabeer Ahmad Usmani, a  Khatm-e-
      Nabuwat (KN) Molvi and a senior leader of the Mosque.  Sulaman  Usmani
      had caused trouble for him whilst they were at school and  thereafter.
      His clothes were torn, and his mobile phone was stolen.  He was warned
      that if he went to the police a FIR would be lodged  against  him  for
      preaching the Ahmadi faith.  He and his family moved to a house on the
      other side of Rabwah.


   4) The Appellant received threatening phone calls from individuals acting
      under the direction of Sulaman Usmani.

   5) In late 2008, the Appellant began working  as  a  bakery  salesman  in
      Sarghoda.  He experienced difficulties when people were told not to do
      business with him, and posters were produced by the KN denouncing him.




   6) In August 2009, after some six months, the Appellant moved  300  miles
      from Sarghoda to work in Mianwali.  His problems continued.

   7) On 6th December 2009, the Appellant's home was attacked  by  KN.   His
      mother, brother and sister were held at gunpoint whilst a  search  was
      made.  The Appellant returned  from  the  mosque.   The  incident  was
      reported to the police.  A FIR  was  lodged  at  the  request  of  the
      Appellant's father  on  9th  December  2009.    Two  KN  members  were
      arrested and released, and the police did not otherwise assist.


   8) The Appellant continued to receive threats.  In early 2010,  he  moved
      to Faisalabad and stayed with a relative.   His  family  continued  to
      experience difficulties.  In June 2010, the KN lodged  a  FIR  against
      his father and grandfather.  His grandfather was held  in  prison  for
      six months on an unfounded allegation that they were selling drugs  in
      their  dry  fruit  shop.   His  father  is   facing   on-going   court
      proceedings.


   9)  On one occasion, whilst travelling  by  car  past  Sarghoda,  he  was
      chased by two armed men whom he believed to be KN.  He escaped.


  10)  In August 2011 he resumed working for Haji Arshad.  This upset Haji
      Arshad's brother, Haji Nadeem.


  11)  In 2011, the Appellant moved his business to Multan, Jhang  and  Toba
      tek  Singh,  hundreds  of  miles  from  Sarghoda.   The  victimisation
      continued, and the KN continued to seek him.


  12) In 2012, the Appellant was informed by a  friend  that  his  house  in
      Rabwah had been visited by the police.   The  Appellant's  father  was
      informed by the police that on 1st January 2012  Qazi  Sulaman  Usmani
      had lodged a FIR against the Appellant for preaching.  The Appellant's
      father agreed to pay the police a bribe of  400,000  rupees  in  order
      that the matter would not proceed.


  13)  The Appellant received threatening calls to the effect  that  the  KN
      would not spare him, because he had not  ceased  his  preaching.   His
      father arranged for  an  agent  to  obtain  a  student  visa  for  the
      Appellant.  On 25th March 2012, the Appellant travelled to the UK.


  14)  Whilst in the UK, the Appellant found out how to  claim  asylum.   He
      fears the police, and he fears that he would be tortured or killed  by
      KN on account of his Ahmadi faith, and cannot relocate  safely  within
      Pakistan.


  15)  Whilst in the UK, the Appellant has introduced several people to  the
      Ahmadi mosque in Huddersfield.  In his witness  statement  dated  18th
      June 2012, the Appellant describes his  religious  activities  in  the
      UK."

 6. There are five grounds of appeal before us which allege:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  by  failing  to  make  clear
         findings on the level of the Appellant's activities  in  connection
         with his Ahmadi faith in Pakistan and in the UK.

     ii) He failed to address a letter  submitted  from  the  Ahmadi  Muslim
         Association UK.

    iii) He failed to make adequate findings in regard to  the  evidence  of
         the witness.

     iv) He failed to take into account and  properly  evaluate  the  expert
         evidence.

      v) He failed to take into account and apply the Country  Guidance  and
         to assess whether  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  international
         protection in line with MN and Others (Ahmadis - country conditions
         -risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 389.

 7. Mr Ficklin, on behalf of the Appellant,  adopted  the  grounds  seeking
    permission. He accepted that grounds (i) and (ii) could be  dealt  with
    together and submitted there was a failure by the Judge to  make  clear
    findings on the Appellant's level of activities, especially in the  UK.
    He said it was not clear from the determination whether the  Judge  had
    considered if the Appellant had received attention at the hands of  the
    authorities locally i.e. did the Appellant have  a  local  profile  and
    whether the Judge was accepting the truth of the activities  which  the
    Appellant claimed he underwent  in  Pakistan.  He  submitted  that  the
    Judge's  conclusions  at  paragraph  27  of  the   determination   were
    inadequately reasoned.

 8. We conclude that in his determination the  Judge  found,  after  taking
    into account all the evidence before him, that he could not accept  for
    the most part, that the Appellant was a credible  witness.  Looking  at
    paragraphs 28 to 33 the Judge sets out in detail,  substantial  reasons
    why he  arrived  at  this  conclusion.  When  looking  particularly  at
    paragraph 35 the Judge states,

         "...I do not find the  Appellant's  claims  credible  that  he  has
         received particular attention in his home region, or  that  he  has
         received  attention  away  from  his  home  area.  The  Appellant's
         accounts of the unwelcome attention that he claims to have received
         are not consistent".

    There then follows a set of reasons why the Judge found the Appellant's
    claims inconsistent. For example, at paragraph 37, the Judge finds that
    the Appellant is someone with  a  low  profile  of  activity  and  this
    impression is reinforced by the  Judge's finding that the Appellant has
    made no claim that any  religious  activities  in  regions  other  than
    Rabwah, have brought him to the attention of KN or the authorities.

 9. The second ground which Mr Ficklin accepted comes together with  ground
    (i), is that the Judge failed to make reference to the Ahmadi community
    letter detailing the Appellant's activities in the UK. However, we find
    that a Judge is not obliged to refer to each and every item of evidence
    in the reasons given for rejecting a  claim  and  we  observe  that  in
    paragraph 12 of his determination, the Judge notes that the Appellant's
    bundle runs to 258 pages and he records  that  he  has  considered  the
    documentary evidence. Looking at paragraph 16  (15)  it  is  clear  the
    Judge was well aware of the Appellant's UK activities. We are satisfied
    therefore that the Judge made  clear  findings  on  the  level  of  the
    Appellant's activities in connection with his Ahmadi faith in  Pakistan
    and in the UK and that the failure of the Judge to mention  the  letter
    from the Ahmadi Association in the UK does not amount to an error.

10. The next challenge to the Judge's determination is  a  claim  that  the
    Judge failed to make adequate findings in regard to the evidence of the
    witness Mr Bhatti and failed to properly assess the expert evidence  of
    Mrs Moeen. This is a challenge that we do not accept has been made out.
    The Judge records quite clearly that he heard evidence from  Mr  Bhatti
    but records at paragraph 39 that Mr Bhatti did not know  the  Appellant
    in his home country and has known  him  only  since  June  2012,  three
    months after the Appellant's arrival in the UK. So far  as  the  expert
    evidence is concerned the Judge points  out  that  the  expert  herself
    observed that her evidence is subject to  the  Tribunal's  findings  in
    respect of the truth or falsity of the  Appellant's  claim.  Therefore,
    the expert's evidence has to be looked at in the context that the Judge
    found with good reason, that he could  not  accept  much  of  what  the
    Appellant claimed.

11. The final challenge to the Judge's determination is a failure  to  make
    findings on discretion. The first question a decision maker must ask is
    whether the claimant genuinely is an Ahmadi. The Judge was so satisfied
    in this case.

12. The next step involves an enquiry into  the  claimant's  intentions  or
    wishes as to his faith  if  returned  to  Pakistan.  This  is  relevant
    because of the need to establish whether it is of particular importance
    to the  religious  identity  of  the  Ahmadi  concerned  to  engage  in
    paragraph (ii) (a) behaviour as identified in MN and Others. The burden
    is on the claimant  to  demonstrate  that  any  intention  or  wish  to
    practice and  manifest  aspects  of  the  faith  openly  that  are  not
    permitted  by  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code  is  genuinely  held  and  of
    particular  importance  to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  religious
    identity. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also be relevant.

13. In this case, the Judge found with good reason that much  of  what  the
    Appellant told him about his activities  in  Pakistan  was  simply  not
    credible. He  therefore  concluded,  as  was  open  to  him,  that  the
    Appellant was practising his faith, if at all, at a low  level.  It  is
    clear from the determination that the Judge found that the Appellant is
    in general unable to be able to show that he  wishes  to  practise  and
    manifest his faith openly on return to Pakistan. Mr Ficklin  complained
    that the judge had failed to make clear findings as to the relevance to
    this enquiry of the appellant's activities in the  United  Kingdom.  It
    is, in our opinion, clear that, although the judge has not said  so  in
    terms, he found that the appellant's activities on behalf of the Ahmadi
    community in the United Kingdom had  been  arose  from  his  desire  to
    impress the Tribunal and to support his claim for asylum and they  were
    not persuasive evidence of the strength of his Ahmadi faith.

DECISION

14. Appeal dismissed.




Signature
                                        Dated
Upper Tribunal Judge Christine Roberts

