
IAC-AH-DP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05146/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th November 2014                           |On 16th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                          ms praveena mahendrarajah
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjahy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5th November 1992.  The
    Appellant claimed to  have  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  19th
    September 2011 using a student visa valid from 7th  September  2011  to
    1st October 2011.  She returned to Sri Lanka on  6th  August  2012  and
    came back to the UK on 4th September 2012.  On 17th September 2012  she
    claimed asylum.

 2. On 17th July 2012  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application stating that it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    arrested, detained and tortured by the Sri Lankan  authorities  due  to
    her connection with the LTTE and that she was not considered to  be  at
    risk on return.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge JDL Edwards sitting at Hatton Cross on 4th September 2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated the same day the  Appellant's  asylum  appeal
    was dismissed as was her human rights  appeal  and  the  Appellant  was
    found not to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 4. On 22nd September 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On 1st October 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Landes
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Landes found that it was  arguable
    as set out at paragraph 2 of the grounds that the judge had  not  given
    adequate reasons for finding that the medical report did not  fit  with
    the Appellant's account.  Judge Landes noted  that  the  Appellant  was
    examined on 1st November 2012 and therefore although  the  scars  would
    strictly speaking have to be slightly more than eight weeks old if they
    were inflicted as the Appellant had indicated they could be two  months
    old.  The grounds indicate that the judge did not explain why he  found
    that it was unlikely that the Appellant  would  have  been  ill-treated
    shortly before her release.

 5. Judge Landes gives a fairly detailed analysis at paragraph 2 and  3  of
    his grant of permission of the evidence concluding that it was arguable
    that if the judge's approach to the medical report  was  wrong  in  the
    sense that he did not give adequate reasons for rejecting the causation
    of scarring before  considering  the  evidence  as  a  whole  that  his
    approach to the  medical  evidence  infected  his  general  credibility
    findings.  He further concluded that it was  arguable  that  inadequate
    reasons were given as set out at paragraph 5 of the grounds.  He made a
    finding that whilst it was right that the judge did  not  consider  the
    detail about the claim to a family life made by the Appellant  and  her
    husband in the light of the fact that the Appellant's husband  had  not
    been recognised as a refugee the judge's concluding findings about  the
    proportionality of removal would seem apt in any event in  the  context
    of a marriage of short duration after the Appellant had claimed asylum.
     However for the avoidance of doubt despite those comments Judge Landes
    did not restrict the grounds which may be argued.

 6. On 20th October 2014 the Secretary of State responded  under  Rule  24.
    Paragraph 3 of the Rule 24 response sets out succinctly  the  Secretary
    of State's position namely  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    entitled to find that the scars were not caused by the alleged  torture
    carried out in Sri Lanka and that the judge gave  adequate  reasons  at
    paragraph 32(d) for finding that the scars  were  not  for  the  reason
    given by the Appellant.  Further  the  Secretary  of  State  relies  on
    paragraphs 33 and 34 of the determination for rejecting the Appellant's
    credibility.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is material error of law in the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appears by her  instructed  Counsel
    Mr Paramjahy.  Mr Paramjahy has experience of this matter in that he is
    the author of the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He did  not
    appear before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State  appears
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Kandola.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Paramjahy starts by advising that paragraph 6 is  withdrawn  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  However his initial thrust is that at paragraph  17
    of the determination despite  having  cited  relevant  authorities  the
    judge has failed to make any consideration whatsoever of  the  relevant
    case law.  He submits that this is  a  "Robinson  obvious"  point.   He
    further submits that the failure of the Immigration Judge  to  look  at
    the medical evidence  completely  undermines  the  credibility  of  the
    determination.  He refers to the  authorities  of  GJ  (post-civil  war
    returnees) (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and MP (Sri Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829,  considered  a  considerable  amount  of  the
    background evidence that relates to former involvement  with  the  LTTE
    and confirmed in the latter authority  that  protection  can  still  be
    claimed despite the end of the war.  However he submits  that  this  is
    not merely a case of disagreement about the medical evidence  and  that
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  provided  no  rationale  at  all  for
    rejecting Dr  Lingam's  clinical  findings  as  to  the  causation  and
    consistency of the Appellant's scars.   Further  he  submits  that  the
    judge materially erred in law  in  his  consideration  of  the  medical
    evidence and that the  evidence  is  clinically  corroborative  of  the
    Appellant having  been  ill-treated  in  Sri  Lanka  and  the  clinical
    findings as to the consistency and the causation of the scars are  that
    they are "typical".  He submits that there are no  presenting  features
    in the Appellant's evidence that could lead the  Tribunal  to  conclude
    that the Appellant's scars were caused in any other way other than  her
    having been detained and ill-treated by the Sri Lankan authorities  and
    that therefore it can be concluded that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred in law firstly by commencing  his  assessment  of  the
    Appellant's case by looking at the medical evidence and then  assessing
    the credibility and secondly he has simply failed to  engage  with  the
    correct legal approach to be taken to an  assessment  of  scarrings  in
    appeals of this nature.

 9. Mr Paramjahy takes me to the findings of Judge Edwards in particular at
    paragraphs 30 and 31.  He submits that the approach  of  the  judge  is
    completely wrong therein and that he has failed to look at the  medical
    evidence and thereinafter gone on to assess credibility  and  that  the
    medical evidence was material because the Appellant's allegation of ill-
    treatment has been made at an early stage.  He further  concludes  that
    the Rule  24  reply  does  not  engage  with  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account and has to be looked at  against  the  medical  and
    factual background.

10. In response Mr Kandola states that the background evidence was cited at
    paragraph 17 and 30 of the judge's determination and submits  that  the
    judge has considered the medical evidence before making  an  assessment
    of credibility.  He submits that the judge's reasoning at paragraph  31
    is clear and that the findings that the judge has made at paragraph  39
    are ones that were open to him.  He asked me to find that there  is  no
    material error of law and to dismiss the appeal.

11. In response Mr Paramjahy asked me to give very careful consideration to
    paragraph 31 of the determination and submits that the fourth  sentence
    therein indicates that the judge  had  got  the  date  wrong  when  the
    Appellant saw Dr Lingam and that consequently there was also a  factual
    mistake in the judge's analysis and not just a mere  disagreement  with
    the findings in the determination.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on the Error of Law

14. The central thrust of the Appellant's submissions are that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge provided no  rationale  at  all  for  rejecting  Dr
    Lingam's clinical findings as  to  the  causation  and  consistency  of
    findings that he made of the Appellant's scars.  Dr Lingam had  reached
    a conclusive opinion as to the age of the scars within his report  that
    the scars were nearly eight weeks old and  acknowledged  that  that  is
    actually inconsistent with the analysis put on them as to the  date  of
    the scarring by the judge at paragraph 31 of his determination.  As  is
    pointed out to me Dr Lingam did not see the Appellant on  1st  December
    as appears to have  been  the  submission  from  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge started his analysis.  There is consequently  a  factual
    error in the determination which I am satisfied renders it unsafe.   As
    to whether another judge will come to the  same  conclusion  then  that
    clearly is a matter for any re-hearing.

15. Further it is therefore appropriate to  conclude  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge materially erred in law  in  his  consideration  of  the
    medical evidence.  On re-hearing of the matter  it  would  be  for  the
    judge  to  determine  whether  that  medical  evidence  is   clinically
    corroborative of the Appellant having been ill-treated in Sri Lanka and
    as to whether the clinical findings  as  to  the  consistency  and  the
    causation of the scars are that they are  "typical".   Regrettably  the
    judge has failed to give due and  full  consideration  to  the  medical
    evidence.  Further I agree with the submission made on the  Appellant's
    behalf that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred  in  law  by
    firstly commencing his assessment of the Appellant's case by looking at
    the medical evidence and then assessing credibility instead of adopting
    the proper approach and that he failed to engage in the  correct  legal
    approach to be taken on an assessment of scarring in  appeals  of  this
    nature.  For all these reasons I am satisfied that there is a  material
    error of law in the determination and I set aside the decision.

Decision and Directions

16. The correct approach in this  matter  having  found  that  there  is  a
    material error of law is to remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    none of the findings of fact to stand.  This I now do.  The  re-hearing
    is to be at Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence with
    an ELH of three hours.  The appeal can be before any Immigration  Judge
    other than Immigration Judge Edwards.  If  the  Appellant  requires  an
    interpreter it is for the Appellant's instructed solicitors  to  inform
    the Tribunal at least ten days pre-hearing.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 16th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


