
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05490/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated|
|On 2nd December 2014                      |On 30th December 2014    |
|                                          |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    R N M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs D Qureshi (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Osborne, promulgated on  12th  September  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Stoke on Trent on 2nd September 2014.  In the determination,
    the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant  whereupon,  the
    Appellant subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female and a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe.   She  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent Secretary  of  State  dated  3rd
    July 2014, refusing her application for consideration of a fresh  claim
    based upon her human rights violations under paragraph 353 of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she fears ill-treatment at the  hands  of
    ZANU-PF militias in Zimbabwe.  Her brother had already died as a result
    of ill-treatment at their hands.  She  will  be  considered  a  traitor
    because she has been agitating for the removal of President Mugabe from
    power.  She maintains that the coalition government would not  be  able
    to protect her because Mugabe controls  all  the  security  ministries.
    There would no safe place for her to go to and live in  Zimbabwe.   Her
    situation is particularly worse given the length of time she has  spent
    in the UK without returning to Zimbabwe.  In the UK, the Appellant  had
    a membership of Zim Vigil which protested outside Zimbabwe House  every
    Sunday.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed that the Appellant had been able to produce evidence
    of her brother's death, by virtue of a death certificate, which  showed
    that he died on 31st January 2011, and his occupation was described  as
    a "teacher."  However, there was no explanation whatsoever as to how he
    died and why he died (see paragraph 41).  The  death  certificate  does
    record that there was "painful growth on eye and  general  body  pains"
    (see paragraph 42).  The Appellant's case has been that her brother had
    been attacked by ZANU-PF members and had lost an eye in the attack  and
    was badly beaten.  She claimed that she had  received  a  copy  of  the
    death certificate from her mother.  However, the judge found  no  proof
    of posting.

 5. The account given by the Appellant  also  was  "vague  and  lacking  in
    particularity to the extent that I cannot accept it  as  proof  of  the
    fact that her brother died as claimed or at all (or at all)" (paragraph
    42).

 6. The Appellant also relied upon her Article 8 rights on the basis of her
    relationship with a PE, but the judge found that PE  had  not  attended
    the hearing to provide supportive  and  cooperative  evidence  for  the
    Appellant, but only a short letter in which he said that they had  been
    in a relationship for six months.

 7. The judge placed little reliance on the relationship and could  not  be
    satisfied that it engaged Article 8 of the ECHR.   Finally,  the  judge
    had regard to Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act which makes it clear that
    "little weight should be given to  a  private  life  established  by  a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status  is  precarious,"
    and this was the case here (see paragraph 46).

 8. In short, although the judge was satisfied that the Appellant "may have
    been in attendance at these meetings and demonstrations" she went on to
    say that "I am equally  satisfied  that  she  was  anxious  to  provide
    evidence of her sur place activities in order to bolster her claim."

 9. Even if this was the case, the real issue was whether such evidence was
    "likely to have come to the attention of the authorities  in  Zimbabwe"
    and the judge was not satisfied that  this  would  be  the  case.   The
    Appellant had filed photographic evidence on  the  internet  under  the
    name of RK, but the judge recorded that,

         "When asked about this the Appellant simply stated that it was  her
         maiden name, but I find that it was  rather  an  attempt  to  evade
         identification and may have been confusing for the other members of
         the organisation,  because  in  the  minutes  of  meetings  she  is
         referred to as RM" (see paragraph 50).

    Finally, the judge applied the country guidance case of  CM  (Zimbabwe)
    (see paragraphs 51 to 58) and dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  give  proper
    reasons for  findings  that  she  made  on  the  evidence.   The  judge
    considered  the  death  certificate  of  the  Appellant's  brother  but
    disregarded it because it did not  comply  with  certain  requirements.
    Second,  the  judge  disregarded  the  statement  from  ROHR  that  the
    Appellant had been a very active  member  of  the  MDC  in  the  United
    Kingdom (see paragraphs 43 to 45),  without  giving  reasons  why  this
    could properly be said.  Third,  there  was  a  letter  from  ROHR  (at
    paragraphs 43 to 45) which the judge rejected, but  the  judge  did  so
    without putting the contents of the letter to the  Appellant,  and  nor
    was she cross-examined about its contents.

11. On 23rd October 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 2nd December 2014, Mrs  Qureshi,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, relied upon the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   She
    submitted that the judge wrongly rejected evidence of  the  Appellant's
    death by virtue of the death certificate.  Secondly, the Appellant  did
    say that her brother was in Botswana, but no one had asked  her  during
    the hearing that their brother did subsequently return back to Zimbabwe
    in 2010.  He died there in 2011.  Third, the Appellant has been engaged
    in sur place activities for the MDC in the UK.  She would  be  detected
    upon return.  There was no direct evidence of this.  However, it was  a
    real possibility.

13. For his part, Mr Armstrong submitted that the determination of Judge  V
    A  Osborne  was  extremely  well-crafted.   There  were   findings   on
    credibility which were well made.

14. First, even if the brother had come back in  2010,  and  assuming  that
    this is a material fact, the onus is on the Appellant to show  that  he
    did return back and consequently suffered an attack  that  led  to  his
    death.

15. Second, the judge explains why the  writer  of  the  letter  signed  by
    Ephraim Tapa in support of a claim to be a member of the ROHR was  less
    than reliable (at paragraph 43 to  44).   Ephraim  Tapa  had  embezzled
    funds and acted without authority (see paragraph 44).  The judge  found
    that the Appellant had given no information "as to how she had come  by
    this letter"  (paragraph  45).   Whatever  errors  there  were  in  the
    determination were not material.   It  had  to  be  remembered  that  a
    previous judge hearing her immigration appeal had found  the  Appellant
    not to be credible (see paragraphs 25 to 28  of  the  determination  of
    Judge Atkinson on 22nd August 2002 at AA/05684/2008).

16. Third, there was no evidence that  the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe  were
    aware of the Appellant's sur place activities.  The judge explains why,
    given the Appellant's assumed name in the UK, she is not likely  to  be
    detected, even if the authorities wanted to identify her.  Finally,  if
    the Appellant was afraid of being detected, why would she publish a DVD
    and put herself on the internet.

17. As far as her Article 8 rights were concerned, these  were  based  upon
    her relationship with PE, who had not attended.  The Appellant had  her
    mother and children in South Africa.   She  could  easily  return  back
    there without an infringement of her Article 8 rights.

18. In reply, Mrs Qureshi submitted that the determination was fine on  the
    facts but not on the findings, and this was an error.  I  should  allow
    the appeal.

No Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007]) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons are
    as follows.

20. First, the Appellant has had an appeal before Judge  Atkinson  on  22nd
    August 2008 when the judge went so far as to  say  that,  "I  find  the
    Appellant has engaged in behaviour in  terms  envisaged  by  Section  8
    which tend to undermine the credibility of her  claim  ..."  (paragraph
    25).

21. The judge then proceeds to provide examples of her implausibility (from
    paragraphs 26 to 29).  Judge Atkinson at the  time  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be committed to the MDC (paragraph 28).  He did  not  find
    that she was in fear of life as a result of threats  made  against  her
    because "she did not leave Zimbabwe  until  July  2002."   On  her  own
    account the Appellant received only one threat  between  November  2001
    and her departure in July 2002" (see paragraph 27).  Second, it  is  in
    this context that all the other evidence needs to be  considered.   The
    evidence in relation to the death of the brother is ambivalent in  that
    it does not confirm that the Appellant died as a result of an attack by
    ZANU-PF members.

22. The fact that the brother returned back from Botswana  to  Zimbabwe  in
    2010, could just as equally be taken as evidence of the renewed  safety
    of the country, as of the danger that awaited him.  The judge concluded
    that the  evidence  was  "vague  and  lacking  in  particularity"  (see
    paragraph 42).

23. Second, the judge gives proper reasons for why the  letter  written  by
    Ephraim Tapa, in support of the Appellant's claim that she  is  a  ROHR
    member is less than reliable because "he had embezzled funds and  acted
    without authority" (paragraph 44).

24. Third, the  fact  that  the  Appellant  produced  a  DVD  and  put  out
    photographic evidence about her on the internet in the name of RK shows
    that she is courting  publicity  deliberately,  and  in  any  event  is
    unlikely to be identified under the name of "K" which is not  the  same
    name as "M" (see paragraph 50).

25. Finally, as far as the Appellant's Article 8 rights are  concerned,  PE
    did not give evidence, and in any event his written evidence  was  that
    he had only been in a relationship with the Appellant for  six  months,
    and the judge gave this proper consideration and concluded that it  did
    not engage Article 8 (see paragraph 46).

26. What is different this time around in an appeal hearing before a  judge
    is that the law with respect to Section 117B(5) as inserted by the 2002
    Act, makes it quite clear  that  "little  weight  should  be  given  to
    private life which is established precariously," and  this  is  exactly
    how the judge approached the matter.

27. All in all, this is a case where the latest country guidance case of CM
    (Zimbabwe) [2013] UKUT 00059 fell  to  be  applied,  and  was  properly
    applied by Judge Osborne,  with  a  clear  reference  to  the  relevant
    paragraph that, "as a  general  matter,  there  is  significantly  less
    politically motivated violence in Zimbabwe" and that currently

         "The evidence does not show that, as a general matter,  the  return
         of a failed asylum  seeker  from  the  United  Kingdom,  having  no
         significant MDC profile, would result in that person facing a  real
         risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF" (see paragraph 29
         of the determination).

    The judge had proper regard to this latest Upper Tribunal decision.  It
    is a country guidance case.  It fell to be applied.   It  was  properly
    applied  by  the  judge.   The  determination   made   is   clear   and
    comprehensive and cannot be faulted.  There is  no  arguable  error  of
    law.

Decision

28. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision.   The
    determination shall stand.

An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014


