
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05113/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 December 2014                          |On 23 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     M N
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Yemen who was born on 2  June  1963.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 June 2010 and claimed asylum.   His
    claim was refused on 16 August 2010 and his subsequent appeal dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Page) on 22  October  2010.   Further
    submissions were made on the appellant's behalf and on 23 May 2012  the
    Secretary of State decided that the further submissions did not  amount
    to a fresh claim.  The appellant challenged that decision  by  judicial
    review and, following the grant of permission at an oral hearing on  17
    September 2013, the Secretary of State withdrew her decision of 23  May
    2012 and reconsidered the appellant's further submissions.  On 26  June
    2014, the Secretary of State again refused the appellant's claim and on
    8 July 2014 refused him leave to enter.

 3. The appellant appealed that latter decision to the First-tier Tribunal.
     In a determination dated 30 August 2014, Judge C J  Woolley  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

 4. On 29 September 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Shimmin)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   Thus,  the
    appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Claim

 5. The appellant's claim is set out in his screening  interview  dated  14
    June 2010, in his asylum interview on 23 June 2010 and in  his  witness
    statement dated 22 August 2014 at pages 1-8 of the  appellant's  bundle
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  His claim is helpfully  summarised  in
    paras 6-11 of Judge Woolley's determination.

 6. The appellant claims to be a political activist in Yemen.  He  is  from
    the south of Yemen and, as a result  of  the  political  domination  of
    those from North Yemen, he has actively been involved in  organisations
    and peaceful demonstrations, campaigning for the  liberation  of  South
    Yemen.  He claimed to have been involved in the  independence  movement
    since 2006 when he  joined  the  Peaceful  Committee  and  subsequently
    joined the Southern Movement Committee in  2008.   He  claims  to  have
    attended marches and demonstrations and to have been very active in two
    smaller organisations which were part of the Southern Movement.

 7. The appellant claims  that  on  13  May  2009  he  was  involved  in  a
    demonstration outside the offices of the Al Ayyam newspaper.  He claims
    that he was at the front of the demonstration waving a  flag  and  that
    the demonstrators were attempting to be a "human  shield"  because  the
    authorities were seeking to enter the offices and seize the editor  and
    proprietor Mr Bashraheel.  At this demonstration, the appellant  claims
    that he was shot by  a  soldier  and  the  bullet  passed  through  his
    buttocks, emerging through his groin, damaging  one  of  his  testicles
    which was removed after he was taken to hospital by a friend, where  he
    remained for twenty days.

 8. His passage was later arranged out of Yemen via Saudi Arabia  where  he
    spent ten months and received treatment.  He then came  to  the  United
    Kingdom and claimed asylum.

 9. In addition, in his witness statement the appellant claims to have been
    active in the Southern Movement since he has been in the  UK  including
    being involved in discussions with others of like mind  concerning  the
    independence of Southern Yemen and political  posts  are  made  on  his
    Facebook page.



The Judge's Decision

10. The grounds of appeal relate exclusively to the  judge's  dismissal  of
    the appellant's claim based upon his fear of the Yemen authorities as a
    result of his political activities concerned with the  independence  of
    South Yemen.  It is not necessary, therefore, to set  out  the  judge's
    decision in relation to Art 8 which is not challenged.

11. The judge's determination is  a  detailed  one.   Having  set  out  the
    appellant's claim and the respondent's case and  the  oral  submissions
    made at the hearing, Judge  Woolley  analysed  the  evidence  and  made
    findings of fact at paras 31-62 of his determination.

12. The judge assessed the appellant's credibility  in  the  light  of  the
    earlier decision of Judge Page on the  basis  of  the  recent  evidence
    submitted on the appellant's behalf which the judge itemised at para 37
    of  his  determination.   That  evidence  included  emails  from  Peter
    Bouckaert who works for Human Rights Watch,  who  had  interviewed  the
    appellant and there was also an email from Christoph Wilcke,  a  Senior
    Researcher at Human Rights Watch (see respectively respondent's  bundle
    D1-D4 and  D4-D6).   Also,  there  was  an  email  from  Mr  Bashraheel
    Bashraheel, the editor of  the  Al  Ayyam  newspaper  (at  respondent's
    bundle D6-D7) and a further letter from  him  (at  respondent's  bundle
    D10.  Further, there was an email from Mr Al-Sakaff  at  the  SOHR  (at
    respondent's bundle D7-D8) and an email from Mr Naqeeb, the information
    secretary of the Southern Democratic Assembly (respondent's bundle  D8-
    D9).  Finally, the appellant submitted an expert report from  Mr  Emile
    Joffe (at respondent's bundle E1-E32).

13. The judge analysed the evidence in stages.  First, he  did  not  accept
    the evidence of the appellant or of Mr Al-Sakaff that the appellant had
    been politically active or, as he claimed, had acted  as  an  informant
    for SOHR prior to the demonstration on  13  May  2009.   Secondly,  the
    judge accepted that the appellant had been at the demonstration  on  13
    May 2009 outside the Al Ayyam newspaper.  At para 47, the judge did not
    accept that the appellant had been shot as he claimed but  that  if  he
    had: "it was by a stray bullet hitting him as a bystander  rather  than
    him being targeted."

14. At para 59 the judge summarised his view "on credibility" as follows:

         "I have considered the new evidence provided by the appellant since
         the first determination, and looked at all the evidence  before  me
         holistically in order to come to  a  decision  on  the  appellant's
         credibility.  On all the evidence I find that his  account  is  not
         credible.  I have not accepted his account of events in Yemen prior
         to his alleged shooting, and  I  have  not  accepted  that  he  was
         anything other  than  a  bystander  if  he  was  shot  outside  the
         newspaper offices, and that if he  was  shot  it  was  by  a  stray
         bullet.  I have not accepted his account of being involved  in  the
         Southern movement as he describes, or that he was ever of  interest
         to the Yemeni  authorities.   I  have  found  his  account  of  his
         attempted  detention  during  his  hospital  treatment  to  be  not
         credible.  I have not accepted that the documents he  has  produced
         (such as the warrant or the newspaper articles) can be  relied  on.
         The expert report is predicated on the fact  that  his  account  is
         true for him to be at risk.  I find on a global assessment that his
         account cannot be accepted as credible."

15. Consequently, the Judge did not accept that the appellant would  be  at
    risk on return.

Discussion

16. In his oral submissions, Mr Palmer refined the eight grounds set out in
    the application for permission to appeal.  To an extent,  there  is  an
    overlap between some of the grounds.  However, I will seek to deal with
    each of the grounds in turn.

Ground 1

17. Mr Palmer submitted that the judge had  failed  to  take  into  account
    evidence that supported the appellant's claim to have been  politically
    active and to have been actively involved in the demonstration  outside
    the Al Ayyam newspaper on 13 May 2009 at which the appellant claims  to
    have been shot.  Mr Palmer relied upon the evidence of Peter  Bouckaert
    and Christoph Wilcke that the appellant had  been  interviewed  by  HRW
    having been brought to them by local activists.  Mr Palmer also  relied
    upon the email  from  Mr  Al-Sakaff  which  supported  the  appellant's
    involvement with SOHR and Mr Palmer submitted that the judge was  wrong
    to find this evidence unreliable (at para 43 of the  determination)  on
    the basis that Mr Al-Sakaff had not explained  how  the  appellant  had
    been sending information to SOHR when Mr Al-Sakaff's evidence was  that
    it was through forums and chat rooms.  When I  enquired  of  Mr  Palmer
    whether  it  was  now  suggested  that  other  material  had  not  been
    considered by the judge, although not directly raised in  the  grounds,
    he relied, without any further exposition, on the evidence set  out  at
    pages 4-5 of the skeleton argument that had been relied on before Judge
    Woolley.

18. I do not accept Mr Palmer's submission that the judge  failed  to  take
    into account the evidence relied upon.

19. First, he dealt with the evidence of Mr Bouckaert at  para  45  of  his
    determination as follows:

          "Some of the new evidence produced by the appellant relates to his
         role on the 13th May 2009.  There is  an  email  from  a  Mr  Peter
         Bouckaert from Human Rights Watch who  interviewed  the  appellant.
         He had been brought to Mr Bouckaert by local  activists.   He  told
         him that he had been shot in the testicles 'when he was a bystander
         at the Al  Ayyam  office  clashes'.   This  was  according  to  his
         colleague Mr Wilcke in July 2009.  Mr Bouckaert was asked  what  he
         meant by bystander and he replied 'I cannot confirm or deny that he
         was there expressly to show his support for the newspaper.  I meant
         the word 'bystander' to mean that he did not appear  to  have  been
         actively involved in the violence between the security  forces  and
         protestors when he was shot'.  I find that this explanation is  not
         at all helpful to the appellant.   If  he  had  been  a  leader  or
         organiser there would have been no reason why  he  could  not  have
         said this to a neutral 3rd party such as Mr Bouckaert.  Yet he told
         Mr Bouckaert that he was a 'bystander', not that he was standing in
         front of the demonstration, that he had been targeted by a  solder,
         or that he was waving a flag."

20. The evidence of Mr Wilcke was in like terms.

21. Mr Palmer submitted that the judge  had  misunderstood  Mr  Bouckaert's
    evidence concerning whether the appellant was  a  "bystander".   As  is
    clear from para 45, the judge specifically  considered  Mr  Bouckaert's
    evidence about what he meant when he said  that  the  appellant  was  a
    "bystander".  I see nothing inconsistent in the judge's view  that  the
    evidence of the appellant and Mr Bouckaert was, to some extent, at odds
    in that the appellant's account was that he was standing in  the  front
    of a demonstration, waving a flag and had been targeted  by  a  soldier
    who had shot him.  Mr Bouckaert on the other  hand  reported  that  the
    appellant had said he was a  bystander  which  Mr  Bouckaert  explained
    meant that he was not involved in the violence.

22. In addition, Mr Palmer submitted that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  in
    failing to take into account that the appellant  had  been  brought  by
    local activists to HRW to be interviewed and this supported  his  claim
    to be a political activist.  In fact, however, that  is  not  precisely
    what  Mr  Wilcke  said  in  a   letter   to   the   appellant's   legal
    representatives which stated that he and Mr Bouckaert had:

         "interviewed around 80 people,  who  we  knew  beforehand  or  were
         suggested by local human  rights  activists  as  being  politically
         engaged or eye-witnesses to incidents of violence  or  other  human
         rights abuses." (my emphasis).

23. Whilst it was a possible inference that the appellant  was  brought  to
    HRW because he was an activist, it was equally  possible  that  he  was
    brought because he had been  at  the  demonstration  and  had  been  an
    eyewitness to violence.  This evidence did not necessarily point in one
    particular direction only.  It was not, in my judgment, irrational  for
    the judge not to conclude on  the  basis  of  this  evidence  that  the
    appellant was brought to HRW because he was a political activist.

24. In relation to the evidence of  Mr  Bashraheel  Bashraheel,  the  judge
    dealt with this at para 46 of his determination as follows:

         "He has also produced evidence from Mr Bashraheel Bashraheel  about
         the demonstrations.  He does not say how he knows the appellant and
         as there was no prior connection between the appellant and Al Ayyam
         newspaper it is not made clear how he  even  became  aware  of  the
         appellant.  He states that the appellant attended the offices of Al
         Ayyam in demonstrations on the 2nd, 4th and  7th  May  2009  before
         being shot on the 13th.  This  specificity  is  at  odds  with  the
         appellant's evidence who only  specifies  being  at  the  newspaper
         demonstrations on the 13th May, although he does  mention  that  he
         was at previous demonstrations.  In his asylum interview he says at
         Question 60 'it was 13th May 2009 when the building was attacked by
         the Yemeni army'.  It is not explained how Mr Bashraheel would know
         of the precise dates when the appellant attended, as he appeared to
         have no prior connection with the appellant.  This awareness on the
         part of Mr Bashraheel has not been explained by the  appellant.   I
         find that the evidence of Mr Bashraheel of the precise  dates  when
         the appellant attended (when these dates are not in fact  given  by
         the appellant himself) must undermine the credibility of the  whole
         account.  Mr Bashraheel also mentions that the  appellant  returned
         to the demonstration on May 19th 2009.   This  was  denied  by  the
         appellant at the hearing  and  is  at  odds  with  his  account  of
         remaining in hospital for 20 days."

25. Clearly, in my judgment, the evidence of Mr Bashraheel did not fit with
    the appellant's own account that he had remained in hospital for twenty
    days after the demonstration when Mr Bashraheel said that the appellant
    returned to the demonstration on 19 May.  I see nothing  irrational  or
    improper in the judge's assessment of Mr Bashraheel's evidence and  his
    conclusion that it was not reliable.

26. The judge dealt with evidence from Mr Mohammed Bashraheel (the  brother
    and executive manager of the Al Ayyam newspaper) at para 48:

        "The appellant says that he was  taken  by  friends  to  a  private
        hospital as if he had gone to a public one  the  authorities  would
        have found him.  Amongst the evidence which he has  produced  is  a
        letter from Mohammed Bashraheel (which may in fact have been before
        IJ Page since he refers to a letter from this source).  This give a
        different account 'Mr N was shot by  the  military  and  was  later
        harassed by the authorities who did not attempt  to  treat  him  at
        local hospitals'.  The appellant  has  never  mentioned  any  later
        harassment by the authorities, and this letter  suggests  that  the
        military was aware of him  but  did  not  take  him  for  treatment
        themselves.   I  find  this  different   account   undermines   the
        credibility of the appellant's account."

27. Again, the judge's  reasoning  was  entirely  open  to  him  given  the
    differences  in  the  appellant's  account  and  that  of  Mr  Mohammed
    Bashraheel.

28. In relation to the evidence of Mr Al-Sakaff, the judge dealt with  this
    at para 43 as follows:

         "Mr Nedal Al-Sakaff is one of the founders of SOHR.  He  says  that
         the appellant was 'one of the very active  sources  of  information
         for me  at  that  time'.   He  declines  however  to  give  further
         information about how the appellant was sending his information  to
         SOHR which undermines the value of his assertion.  More importantly
         however the appellant himself has never said that he was an  active
         source of information for SOHR, either before IJ Page or me.   This
         would have been information available to him at  the  time  of  the
         first hearing and I note under Devaseelan that such facts  must  be
         treated  'with  the  greatest  circumspection'.   He   could   have
         mentioned this to his former solicitor but did not.   He  does  not
         mention it in his asylum interviews.  He says that  he  thought  he
         had enough evidence and therefore now says (at paragraph 16 of  his
         statement) that he thought he had sufficient evidence.   I  do  not
         accept this explanation as it is the duty of every asylum seeker to
         give the fullest  information  about  their  circumstances  to  the
         decision taker.  I do not accept that the  appellant  was  ever  an
         informant for SOHR."

29. Whilst Mr Al-Sakaff does refer in his email of 23 January 2012  to  the
    appellant as sending information to SOHR  and  "this  was  mostly  done
    through forums and chat rooms" the judge  also  (and  correctly)  noted
    that the appellant, contrary to what Mr Al-Sakaff said, had  not  given
    evidence before Judge Page or in the current  appeal  that  he  was  an
    "active source" of information for SOHR and, in the light of that,  the
    judge was entitled to consider that the evidence of  Mr  Al-Sakaff  was
    unreliable for that reason alone.

30. In relation to the evidence of Mr Naqeeb, the judge dealt with this  at
    para 55 of his determination as follows:

          "The appellant has  not  described  any  activities  he  may  have
         undertaken in the UK on behalf of the Southern  Movement.   He  has
         produced an  email  from  a  Mr  Abdo  Naqeeb  who  is  Information
         Secretary for the Southern Democratic Assembly (TAJ) in the UK, and
         a letter dated 22nd March 2011 saying that the appellant had joined
         the Southern Democratic Assembly and had become an active member of
         TAJ as a continuation of his political beliefs.  The  appellant  at
         the hearing however gave no evidence in respect of  his  membership
         of TAJ and did not put forward any sur place grounds  on  which  he
         might be granted asylum.  I find  that  the  letter  from  Mr  Abdo
         Naqeeb in isolation is  insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the
         appellant has undertaken any political activities in the UK."

31. The judge, of course, deals with Mr Naqeeb's evidence in the context of
    the appellant's sur place activities.   But,  he  does  note  that  the
    letter refers to the appellant having joined  the  Southern  Democratic
    Assembly as a "continuation of his political beliefs".  Mr  Palmer  did
    not make any specific submissions in relation to this letter and it was
    not  specifically  relied  upon  in  the   grounds   accompanying   the
    application for permission to appeal.  The judge was clearly  aware  of
    the letter, having referred to it in  both  paras  37  and  55  of  his
    determination.  The judge may well, therefore, have  had  the  evidence
    generally in mind when considering the credibility of  the  appellant's
    account to have been actively involved  in  the  independence  movement
    whilst in Yemen.  However, even if he did not, I am wholly  unpersuaded
    that any failure to consider this letter is  material  to  his  adverse
    credibility finding and the detailed reasons he gave for rejecting  the
    appellant's account.

32. In his general reliance upon the material  at  pages  4  to  5  of  the
    original skeleton argument, Mr Palmer also implicitly relied  upon  the
    medical evidence concerning the injury to the appellant and the loss of
    a testicle which he claimed was as a result of a  gunshot.   The  judge
    referred to the medical evidence at para 50 of his determination  where
    he said:

         "I have noted in particular the statement  of  Mr  Amar  Ghattaura.
         From this I accept that the appellant has had  his  right  testicle
         removed and has scarring to the right penile shaft.   Mr  Ghattaura
         found that he had suffered some trauma there, although he found  it
         difficult to say whether this was from a gunshot wound or not.  The
         findings made by IJ Page to the effect that  there  was  no  proper
         medical evidence to  show  that  the  appellant  has  received  the
         injuries as claimed therefore cannot stand.  There is  evidence  of
         this.  However it only goes so far.  It  does  not  show  that  the
         injuries were by a bullet and there is no medical comment  made  as
         to the likely effect of being hit by a  Kalashnikov  bullet  at  30
         metres range.  The new evidence does not disturb my finding that if
         the appellant was hit by a bullet it was as a bystander rather than
         being deliberately targeted."

33. The judge dealt with injury to the appellant at para 47 as follows:

         "The appellant says that he was at the demonstration when he saw  a
         soldier take aim at him.  He described  to  me  that  he  had  said
         'Stop, Stop' and demonstrated how he had  turned.   The  weapon  (a
         Kalashnikov) was aimed at his head.  The soldier was some  distance
         away (he had said earlier about 30 metres away).  As he  turned  he
         was hit by a single bullet which passed through  his  buttocks  and
         emerged causing damage to his groin.  IJ Page treats this  evidence
         at paragraph 92 of his determination.  In his  evidence  before  IJ
         Page the appellant said he had two testicles and no injuries to his
         penis, and then remembered that he had an injury to his penis.   IJ
         Page found that if he had been shot at a range of 30  metres  by  a
         Kalashnikov that he would have severe internal injuries.  This  was
         the ground on which  the  appellant  sought  to  appeal  the  first
         determination.  It was held by Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor that the
         immigration judge was entitled to use his  common  sense  over  his
         assessment of the effects of such a bullet wound.  I do  the  same.
         I  find  that  such  a  targeted  shot  would  have  caused  injury
         internally and to the fleshy parts of  his  buttock,  but  no  such
         injury is described in the medical reports.  As  with  IJ  Page,  I
         find it is not credible  that  he  could  be  taken  to  a  private
         hospital sitting in a car.  It was put to him at the hearing that a
         Kalashnikov is an  automatic  weapon  capable  of  firing  multiple
         rounds per minute, and further that if it had  been  aimed  at  his
         head it would at 30 metres have hit him in the head.  The appellant
         had no real answer to these points.  I find that he was not shot as
         he claimed, or that if he was shot it was by a stray bullet hitting
         him as a bystander rather than him being targeted."

34. Judge Page, in the earlier appeal, had rejected the  appellant's  claim
    that he had been shot in the buttocks as a result  of  being  targeted.
    Judge Woolley clearly took into account the medical evidence  and  that
    the appellant had lost a testicle (which had been removed) as a  result
    of trauma.  The evidence was based upon the appellant's account that he
    had been shot and the  report  from  the  Al  Wali  Hospital  that  the
    appellant had suffered a gunshot wound through his  right  buttock  and
    that had resulted in the injury he  claimed.   The  evidence  did  not,
    however, explain how the appellant had come to be shot and  whether  it
    was as a result of active participation in the demonstration on 13  May
    2009 as he claimed or otherwise.  It was part of the  overall  evidence
    which the judge had to consider.  Whilst it supported  the  appellant's
    claim to have been shot on that day and, perhaps, at the demonstration,
    it did no more than that and was  not  inconsistent  with  the  judge's
    finding in paras 47 and 50 that if the appellant was hit,  he  was  hit
    "as a bystander rather than being deliberately targeted".

35. For these reasons, I reject ground 1.

Ground 2

36. As originally drafted, ground 2 argued that the  judge  had  failed  to
    resolve "material issues such as how the appellant was injured  if  not
    by way claimed".  The ground continues  that:   "Given  all  the  other
    evidence provided regarding political activities then  when  looked  at
    'in the round' along with the objective evidence,  then  we  submit  IJ
    erred  in  finding  that  'stray  bullet'  and  that  not  an  act   of
    persecution."

37. Mr Palmer in his oral submission did not place great weight upon ground
    2 although he continued to submit  that  the  judge  should  have  made
    further findings.  He submitted that the judge should have  found  that
    the appellant was politically active and that was why  he  was  at  the
    demonstration on 13 May 2009.

38. In my judgment, there is no merit in this ground.  First, the judge did
    make appropriate findings, in particular at paras 47 and  50,  that  if
    the appellant was shot it was by way of a stray bullet rather than,  as
    he claimed, being targeted by a soldier.  The point in relation to  the
    appellant's existing political activity was dealt with by the judge  at
    paras 39-43.  He did not accept on the basis of a number of significant
    discrepancies in the evidence that the new evidence  formed  any  basis
    for departing from Judge Page's earlier finding that the appellant  had
    not established any political activity.  The judge's reasoning  was  as
    follows:

         "39. In his asylum interview the appellant was clear  that  he  had
             joined the National  Committee  for  Aden  residents  and  the
             Peaceful Southern Movement Committee in 2006  when  they  were
             formed - the first in February 2006 and  the  second  in  July
             2006.  In his handwritten statement at the hearing  before  IJ
             Page he said he had made a mistake and this should  have  read
             2008.  IJ Page recorded that at the hearing before him he  had
             said that he had started his important political  activity  in
             2007.  IJ Page considered this evidence and at paragraph 90 of
             his determination found  the  appellant  not  credible  as  to
             dates.  The objective evidence  showed  (he  found)  that  the
             organisation he claims to have joined in 2006 was  not  formed
             until 2007.  He found that he had never been involved in it.

         40.  The new evidence seeks to explain this discrepancy.  Mr  Joffe
             explains that the appellant joined the Peaceful  Committee  in
             February 2006 and the  Southern  Movement  Committee  in  July
             2008.  He explains that  the  Southern  movement  was  not  an
             integrated  single  movement   with   a   specific   date   of
             incorporation.  The Southern  movement  groups  together  five
             different organisations of the same name.  Mr  Joffe's  report
             is difficult to follow since  further  information  about  the
             Southern movement is buried in a mass of detail  about  events
             in Yemen over the last four decades.   Rather  unhelpfully  he
             says at both paragraph 8 and paragraph 12 that  the  issue  of
             the dates 'is discussed in detail below' but he never  appears
             to do so in respect of the  appellant.   At  Paragraph  80  he
             however says that the  Southern  Democratic  movement  can  be
             traced back to 2001.  By 2010 it had hardened into a  coherent
             movement against the North.  The May  2009  demonstration  was
             accompanied by a call from Mr Al-Bid for the  independence  of
             South Yemen (the appellant reports that he is  the  leader  of
             the organisation although he calls him Mr Al-Beid).

         41.  In his statement the  appellant  says  he  did  not  join  the
             national  committee  in  2006.   He  became  involved  in  the
             Southern Security and Military Retired Personnel  organisation
             in 2006.  In 2007 he was attending marches  organised  by  the
             Supreme Council of the  Southern  Movement.   He  became  very
             active in two smaller organisations  that  were  part  of  the
             Southern Movement:  he was one of the founding members of  the
             national establishment for the sons of Aden in  January  2008,
             and also a founding member of the  Establishment  of  Peaceful
             Movement in Aden.  In his evidence however he appeared to  say
             to Mr Johns than he had joined the Southern movement in 2006.

         42.  On all the evidence I find that the  appellant  ha  still  not
             satisfactorily explained the dates of his involvement  or  his
             role  within  the  movements.   In  his  asylum  interview  he
             specifies two organisations  and  says  they  were  formed  in
             February 2006 and July 2006.  He says in his current statement
             however that the National organisation for Aden residents  was
             not formed until 2008.  In his  handwritten  statement  before
             the first hearing he said he  had  made  a  mistake  over  the
             dates, and in his answers at the first hearing he said that he
             had become involved in 2007.  IJ Page also drew  attention  to
             the variance in his evidence  over  his  roles  -  from  youth
             leader, to field leader  to  founding  member.   He  had  said
             before IJ Page that he was the  youth  team  leader  and  then
             changed to saying he had been made the field youth  leader  on
             10th January 2008.  He repeated this variety of  roles  before
             me.  While  I  accept  that  the  political  organisations  in
             southern Yemen may be of a  fluid  nature  this  does  not  in
             itself explain  the  variances  in  the  appellant's  evidence
             between his asylum interview, his present statement, his  past
             statement, and his evidence at the two  appeal  hearings.   He
             appears to name a welter of organisations and then to  explain
             his varying evidence by saying that one organisation was a sub-
             division of another.  Nothing in his written evidence  appears
             to point to 2007 as being a significant year for him in  terms
             of the organisations  (although  I  accept  from  the  country
             evidence that 2007 was  a  watershed  year  in  terms  of  the
             protests in Southern Yemen) and yet he was  saying  before  IJ
             Page that he had  become  involved  in  the  organisations  in
             2007."

39. That reasoning is, in my judgment, entirely  adequate  and  persuasive.
    There were clear inconsistencies in the appellant's  evidence  and  the
    judge was entitled, in the light of the  earlier  adverse  finding,  to
    conclude that the appellant  had  failed  to  establish  his  political
    involvement prior to the 13 May 2009 demonstration.

40. Given that finding, it was entirely open to the judge to find that,  if
    the appellant had been shot at that demonstration,  it  was  not  as  a
    result of being targeted but rather as a result of being hit by a stray
    bullet when he was, in effect, caught up in the events.

41. For these reasons, I reject Ground 2.

Ground 3

42. As originally drafted, ground 3 argued that the judge's  findings  were
    based  upon  "mere  speculation"  and  as  a   result   of   procedural
    impropriety.  In particular, the grounds challenge the judge's approach
    to the evidence in paras 43, 46, 55 and 56.  Mr  Palmer  accepted  that
    the substance of the ground did not, in large part, raise an  issue  of
    procedural impropriety.  He nevertheless  submitted  that  the  judge's
    reasoning in the relevant paragraphs was unsustainable.

43. First, the challenge to the judge's reasoning in para 43  concerns  the
    evidence of Mr Al-Sakaff which I dealt with  above.   Specifically,  Mr
    Palmer relied on para 16 of the appellant's witness statement in  which
    he sought to explain why his first legal representative had  failed  to
    provide relevant information.  In particular, this must relate  to  the
    judge's observation in para 43 that the appellant had never said he was
    an active source of information for SOHR either before Judge  Page  (at
    the earlier hearing) or before the judge in this  appeal.   The  latter
    is, of course, not explained by any conduct of the appellant's previous
    legal representatives in relation to the hearing before Judge Page.  In
    any event, the appellant had an opportunity before Judge  Page  (as  he
    did before Judge Woolley) to give his evidence on his prior involvement
    with SOHR.  The fact remains that he never gave evidence of  his  being
    an active source of information  for  SOHR  and  the  judge  was  fully
    entitled to take the absence of that evidence into account.

44. Secondly, Mr Palmer criticised the judge's reference to the  fact  that
    the appellant did not give evidence of his connection to Mr  Bashraheel
    Bashraheel and how he became aware of the appellant.   He  relied  upon
    the fact that the appellant in para 12 of his statement  said  that  Mr
    Bashraheel knew of the appellant and his activities.  In  my  judgment,
    this is a very minor  point  indeed  in  the  context  of  the  judge's
    reasoning in para 46 of his determination which I have set  out  above.
    The substance of that reasoning is that when Mr Bashraheel states  that
    the appellant was involved in demonstrations  prior  to  13  May  2009,
    these were not dates given  by  the  appellant  himself.   Further,  Mr
    Bashraheel's evidence that the appellant attended the demonstration  on
    19 May 2009 was simply contradicted by  the  appellant's  own  evidence
    that following his injury on 13 May 2009 he remained  in  hospital  for
    twenty days.

45. Thirdly, Mr Palmer  challenged  the  judge's  finding  in  para  55  in
    relation to the appellant's sur place activities as a member of TAJ  in
    the UK.  Mr Palmer submitted that the judge was wrong to say  that  the
    appellant had given no  evidence  at  the  hearing  of  his  sur  place
    activities.  He had done so at para 23 of his written statement.

46. That is undoubtedly the case.  Indeed, in his submissions  Mr  Richards
    accepted that there might be some valid criticism on this basis  alone.
    However, Mr Richards submitted that the error was not  material  as  it
    was not clear what evidence if any there was that the  appellant's  sur
    place activity would come to the attention of  the  Yemeni  authorities
    and what the consequences would be.

47. Neither the  grounds,  nor  Mr  Palmer  in  his  submissions,  drew  my
    attention  to  any  material  concerning  the  ability  of  the  Yemeni
    authorities to identify the appellant as  a  political  opponent  as  a
    result of anything done in the UK.   That  said,  the  letter  from  Mr
    Naqeeb does refer to the establishment of an  organisation  to  observe
    activity which may harm unity in Yemen.  It also refers to  a  file  in
    relation to TAJ being handed to the Attorney  General  for  prosecuting
    members affiliated to the organisation.  In the light  of  the  judge's
    adverse  credibility  finding  that  the  appellant  had  no  political
    involvement prior to coming to the UK, the judge was entitled  to  take
    that into account in assessing what weight, if  any,  to  give  to  the
    letter from Mr Naqeeb in  relation  to  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
    politically involved in the UK.  The finding in relation to his current
    political activities must also be  seen  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    findings in relation to his flight from Yemen and his claim to  be  the
    subject of an arrest warrant in Yemen.  The judge's findings in respect
    of these matters at paras 53 and 54  were  not  challenged  before  me.
    There, the judge said this:

         "53. The appellant was asked at the Asylum  interview  how  it  was
             that he was able to operate in Yemen without  being  arrested.
             If he was a leader (or indeed founder) of some groups  aligned
             to the Southern movement I find that he  would  have  been  of
             interest to the authorities.  His simple answer  was  that  he
             ran away all the time.  I find this not to be credible.  It is
             also contrary to his account in his screening  interview  that
             he had been warned by the authorities many times.  If  he  was
             leading demonstrations he would  have  been  identifiable  and
             would have been detained.  The authorities evidently  knew  of
             his identity when they came looking for him  at  the  Al  Wali
             hospital and I have rejected as not credible  his  account  of
             how they were forced to go away by the doctors.  If they  knew
             of his identity at the  time  they  would  have  known  of  it
             before.  The true reason he was not arrested I find is that he
             was of no interest to  the  authorities  because  he  was  not
             involved in political demonstrations.

         F.  Events in Yemen after the appellant's departure

         54.  At the hearing he produced new evidence in the form of what is
             described as an 'ordered warrant'.  I found his answers at the
             hearing on this to be confusing and evasive.  At first he said
             that he had received a text message from his cousin  that  the
             police were looking for him.  He added that he  had  a  police
             warrant in the evidence.  When he was challenged about this he
             retracted his account of a text.  He was asked why his  cousin
             had sent it to him and he responded that his brother  was  too
             busy on the farm.  His evidence was reduced to the fact that a
             warrant had been issued for him.  I have noted this warrant in
             the bundle.  The original is largely handwritten.  The purpose
             of the warrant is expressed as 'respect to claim against you'.
              Although it is expressed as being issued under  the  Code  of
             Criminal Procedure there is no reference to any offence  which
             the appellant may have committed.  It is  evident  that  there
             must have been an earlier  document  since  at  its  foot  the
             warrant states that the appellant 'has  failed  to  attend  at
             designated time after being notified'.  I note the comments of
             Mr Joffe about this but I have not  accepted  his  account  of
             events in Yemen  and  under  Tanveer  Ahmed  I  find  that  no
             reliance can be placed on this warrant  as  showing  that  the
             appellant is wanted by the authorities in Yemen.  He was  able
             to leave the  country  unmolested  some  3  months  after  the
             alleged incident and I find it is not credible that  he  would
             have  been  wanted  by  the   authorities   some   18   months
             afterwards."

48. In my judgment, the judge was entitled to find that the  appellant  had
    failed to establish any sur place activities which would expose him  to
    risk on return to Yemen.

49. Fourthly, Mr Palmer submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    discounting the evidence form the Aden Press at para 56  on  the  basis
    that it referred to the appellant as  "A  Al  D"  (anonymised  for  the
    purposes of this determination)  rather  than  the  name  that  he  had
    claimed in the asylum proceedings.  Mr Palmer submitted that  the  name
    used was his nickname which he referred to in his  screening  interview
    at question 1.3 (A3 of the respondent's bundle). Further he referred to
    the Southern Press Centre  article  (at  page  22  of  the  appellant's
    bundle) which named four individuals injured at the demonstration on 13
    May 2009, stating that: "A martyr and three injured have fallen".   The
    appellant (via his nickname) is referred to one of "three injured".

50. Even accepting Mr Palmer's point that the reference is to the appellant
    by his nickname, the point is  not  material  to  the  judge's  overall
    detailed reasoning and the documents do not, in my judgment, contradict
    the judge's finding that if the appellant were shot it was  because  he
    was hit by a stray bullet.

51. For these reasons, I reject ground 3.

Ground 4

52. Mr Palmer submitted that the judge had failed  properly  to  take  into
    account the expert report of Mr Joffe.  In particular, he  relied  upon
    paras 11-20 of the report.  A number of these paragraphs challenge  the
    reasoning of the Secretary of State which was not relied  upon  by  the
    judge.  For example, that the demonstration did not  occur  on  13  May
    2009 and that Mr Mohammed Bashraheel was in fact detained at  the  time
    that he wrote a supporting letter (see paras 12-14).  Other  paragraphs
    relate to the availability of treatment for the  appellant  at  the  Al
    Wali Clinic for his injuries  or  for  diabetes  (from  which  he  also
    suffers) in Yemen (see paras 18-20).  These are  not  relevant  to  the
    grounds of challenge currently relied upon.

53. Mr Joffe's report also deals with the  claimed  arrest  warrant  relied
    upon by the appellant but found to be unreliable by the judge  at  para
    54 of his determination (set out above) and the differing (and for  the
    judge inconsistent) dates  upon  which  the  appellant  claimed  to  be
    involved with political organisations in Yemen.

54. In fact, the  judge  referred  extensively  to  Mr  Joffe's  report  in
    relation to the appellant's claimed involvement with  organisations  in
    Yemen prior to 2009 at para 40 of his determination  (set  out  above).
    Further, he dealt with Mr Joffe's report in general at para 58  in  the
    following terms:

        "The expert report of  Mr  Joffe  has  been  discussed  above.   It
        deserves however a section of its own, not  least  because  of  the
        criticisms in the skeleton argument that neither the respondent nor
        indeed IJ Page dealt with the background evidence of the  situation
        in Yemen.  I have referred above to the somewhat unsatisfactory way
        in which Mr Joffe's report deals with  this  particular  appellant.
        The bulk of his report is concerned with the history  of  Yemen  in
        the last  four  decades,  rather  than  with  the  appellant.   The
        appellant is considered at paragraphs 7 to 20, and then again at 97
        to 99, but the intervening paragraphs contain  general  information
        about the country.  Paragraphs 7 to  10  summarise  his  claim  and
        derive  wholly  from  his   account   without   critical   comment.
        Paragraphs 11  to  20  summarise  and  criticise  the  respondent's
        decision on such matters as the warrant.  I have  considered  these
        in relation to the specific pieces of evidence produced.   Only  at
        Paragraphs 97 to 99  does  he  discuss  the  implications  for  the
        appellant. He finds it plausible that the appellant was  hit  by  a
        bullet and that he was involved with  the  Southern  movement.   He
        says that if his claim is accepted then  he  will  face  arrest  in
        Yemen.  He finds that relocation would be difficult.  I  find  that
        the report of Mr Joffe is of value in providing evidence about  the
        country conditions in March 2012 when it was written (and I discuss
        this under Humanitarian protection below) but I note that there has
        been a regime change since then and so many of his  comments  about
        Yemen are now out of date.  At the most his report says  about  the
        appellant is that if he is found to be credible then he will be  at
        risk."

55. From these passages, it is clear that the judge took  into  account  Mr
    Joffe's evidence concerning the appellant's evidence of his involvement
    with organisations prior to 2009 in Yemen.  At paras 40-42 (above) gave
    cogent reasons for finding that the appellant's evidence was unreliable
    given the differences  in  his  evidence  which  could  not  simply  be
    explained on the basis that, as Mr Joffe says in para 16 of his report,
    the appellant's claim was that he joined a "Committee of  the  Southern
    Movement in July 2006" even though Mr Joffe does not dispute  that  the
    Southern Movement itself was only created in 2007.

56. To the extent that Mr Palmer submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to
    take into account the background  evidence  in  Yemen  set  out  in  Mr
    Joffe's report, I fail to see how that ground can be made out.   It  is
    wholly unclear to me how the  judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    particular  circumstances  and  his  reasoning  in  relation   to   the
    credibility  of  the  appellant's  personal  account  could  have  been
    affected by any of the  background  material  set  out  in  Mr  Joffe's
    report.  The judge did not, after all, question the  political  context
    in Yemen which the appellant claimed to be a part of  nor,  unlike  the
    Secretary of State, did he doubt that  the  events  concerning  the  Al
    Ayyam newspaper demonstrations occurred.   The  judge  was  undoubtedly
    aware of the political situation in the Yemen.  Indeed,  he  refers  to
    the "latest country evidence" at para 64, albeit in the context of  the
    appellant's claim for humanitarian protection.   He  also  specifically
    states that he has considered Mr Joffe's report and indeed the evidence
    from SOHR in that regard.

57. In reality, Mr Joffe's report,  as  Mr  Richards  pointed  out  in  his
    submissions, boils down to his  conclusion  in  para  98  that  if  the
    appellant's claim is plausible then he is likely to  face  arrest  upon
    return to Yemen.  On the judge's findings, the  appellant's  claim  was
    not made out on the evidence so as to create the risk recognised by  Mr
    Joffe in his report.

58. For these reasons, I reject ground 4.

Ground 5

59. Mr Palmer did not seek to place any reliance upon ground 5 set  out  in
    the grounds of the application which, in substance, asserted  that  the
    Tribunal had imposed a "very high burden" on the appellant and that  in
    the light of the evidence his  claim  was  made  out.   Mr  Palmer  was
    correct, in my judgment, not to place any  reliance  upon  this  ground
    which in substance adds nothing to the multiplicity of challenges  made
    to the judge's credibility findings.

Ground 6

60. Mr Palmer submitted that the judge had failed to deal with the risk  to
    the appellant as a "low level supporter" of the independence  movement.
    The  difficulty  with  this  submission  is,  as  Mr   Palmer   himself
    acknowledged in his submissions, that if the appellant cannot establish
    that he was politically involved as he claims  and  that  he  was  only
    injured at the demonstration because he was caught  up  in  the  cross-
    fire, then he could have no claim on this basis.

61. In my judgment, that candid acknowledgment of the appellant's  case  is
    entirely correct.   Unless  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding
    cannot stand, the appellant has failed  to  establish  that  he  was  a
    supporter or was politically involved at all in  Yemen.   Consequently,
    given the judge's adverse credibility finding, the appellant could  not
    succeed (even if the background evidence supported such a claim) on the
    basis that he was a "low level supporter" of the independence movement.



62. For these reasons I reject ground 6.

Ground 7

63. Mr Palmer submitted that the judge had rejected the evidence  from  the
    "Aden Press" by imposing too great an obligation for such  evidence  to
    be reliable, namely that it provide some evidence of editorial  control
    or verification of the truth of its articles.  Mr Palmer submitted that
    a similar view would not be taken of a UK newspaper.

64. In considering this submission, it is important to set out the  judge's
    reasoning in para 56 which was as follows:

        "The appellant has produced further documentary evidence in respect
        of his appeal, some of which indeed had been before IJ Page.   When
        challenged to  point  to  a  document  that  referred  to  him  the
        appellant pointed to the document at page 19 of the  bundle.   This
        is a document from Aden  Press  which  the  appellant  explains  is
        published in the UK but not in Yemen.  There is no  indication  who
        the Aden Press is or how they source their  material.   On  reading
        the article I find it is self-serving and bears all  the  hallmarks
        of having been self-produced and submitted to the  Aden  Press  for
        the purpose of supporting an asylum claim.  It is clear on  reading
        it that some of the information  could  only  have  come  from  the
        appellant (e.g. that he  has  expressed  his  appreciation  of  the
        British authorities on his good treatment at the  airport  and  his
        residence in Cardiff).  There is no statement from the  Aden  Press
        as to how they produce their articles and in  the  absence  of  any
        evidence of editorial control or verification of the truth  of  any
        articles I find this to be  not  reliable  under  the  doctrine  of
        Tanveer Ahmed. ....."

65. In truth, the substance of the judge's reasoning was  that  the  report
    should be given little weight as its contents did not  appear  to  have
    come from an independent source, but rather from the appellant himself.
     The example given is that the appellant has expressed his appreciation
    of the British authorities on his good treatment; something which  only
    the appellant himself could have told  the  newspaper.   That  was,  in
    itself, in my judgment, sufficient for the judge to place little weight
    on what was said in a  newspaper  report.   In  terms  of  support,  it
    provided no independent verification of events beyond those  which  the
    judge was entitled to find had come from the appellant himself.

66. For these reasons, I reject ground 7.

Ground 8

67. Mr Palmer submitted that the judge had made a factual error in para  18
    where he had stated that the appellant had  "escaped"  following  being
    shot at the demonstration on 13 May 2009.  Mr Palmer submitted that the
    appellant's evidence was that he had turned away from the  soldier  who
    had shot him from behind but he had not escaped but had been  taken  to
    hospital.  In my judgment, there is no substance in this  ground.   The
    judge's reference to the appellant  having  "escaped"  in  the  general
    recitation of the evidence at para 18 had  no  effect  on  his  adverse
    credibility findings.  As the judge made  clear  in  para  47,  he  was
    clearly aware that the appellant's account was that he was shot in  the
    buttocks and that he was taken to a  "private  hospital  sitting  in  a
    car".

68. In addition,  Mr  Palmer  criticised  the  judge  at  para  57  of  his
    determination where he considered the evidence produced from  the  SOHR
    and the  evidence  of  people  killed  and  injured  in  Yemen.   As  I
    understood Mr Palmer's submission it was that this was unnecessary  and
    demonstrated the judge's general approach  and  should  be  taken  into
    account in considering the other grounds of appeal.

69. Mr Palmer did not seek to rely on the factual errors said to  exist  in
    the judge's determination and set out additionally  in  ground  8,  for
    example, that the judge had made an error in failing to record that two
    fresh claims had been made in  the  immigration  history  or  that  the
    appellant had been working in Saudi Arabia.

70. The grounds rely upon the Court of Appeal's decision in ML (Nigeria)  v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 844 that a series of factual errors can constitute
    an error of law.  Whilst that is undoubtedly  true  in  principle,  the
    suggested  factual  errors  in  ground  8  are  far  removed  from  the
    significance and number of factual errors that led the Court of  Appeal
    in ML to conclude that the appellant in that case had  not  received  a
    fair hearing.

71. I have considerable difficulty in identifying any error in para  57  of
    the judge's determination when considering the evidence  from  SOHR  in
    any event.  Leaving aside the "non-error" in referring to the appellant
    as having "escaped", the remaining  matters  identified  as  errors  in
    ground 8 have no material bearing  on  the  judge's  finding  or  could
    conceivably lead to a conclusion that the appellant's  appeal  had  not
    been fairly conducted and the judge had not given careful consideration
    to his claim.

72. The judge's determination is a detailed and substantially well-reasoned
    one considering which deals with the bulk of the evidence  relied  upon
    by the appellant.  This was, after all, a second appeal; the  appellant
    having already failed in his appeal in 2010.  The focus  of  the  judge
    was, therefore, unsurprisingly upon the new evidence relied  upon.   In
    my judgment, with one or two immaterial exceptions, the judge  properly
    and fully dealt with this evidence.  He gave full  and  cogent  reasons
    for rejecting the appellant's account and, therefore, for his  ultimate
    finding that the appellant had failed to establish that he would be  at
    risk on return to Yemen.

73. For these reasons, I reject ground 8 also.

Decision

74. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal did not involve the making of a material
    error of law.  That decision stands.

75. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                            16 December 2014
