
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05529/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 December 2015                  | On 6 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                    P K S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  3  April  1987.  He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 13 March 2015  to
    refuse him asylum and humanitarian protection. His appeal was dismissed
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Clemes  ("the  FTTJ")  who,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 1  September  2015,  dismissed  his  appeal  on
    asylum and human rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 25 September 2015 who concluded  that  it
    was arguable the findings of the FTTJ were unsafe and that he had erred
    in law; all matters raised were arguable as they went to the  issue  of
    credibility.

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

Submissions

 4. I summarise Mr Paramjorthy's grounds of appeal and oral submissions  as
    follows. There were a number of  pivotal  paragraphs  in  the  decision
    (paragraphs 18-20) which had  been  included  under  the  heading  "the
    hearing";  there  was  reference  to  the  appellant's  evidence  being
    confused but  this  had  not  been  particularised.  There  was  little
    reference to the appellant's detailed witness statement  which  engaged
    with the challenges of the respondent.  The  FTTJ's  treatment  of  the
    expert evidence of Dr Dhumad and Professor Lingam was inappropriate  in
    that the FTTJ had made findings in each case  without  considering  the
    evidence on credibility in the round. The FTTJ had focussed on some  of
    Professor Lingam's qualifications but not those  of  relevance  to  the
    issues in the appeal. He submitted that the FTTJ had been  hampered  in
    dealing with the appellant's presenting features because he had  failed
    to identify how he had addressed the  conflicts  in  the  evidence.  Mr
    Paramjorthy summarised by saying that the FTTJ had put the cart  before
    the horse  insofar  as  the  expert  evidence  was  concerned:  he  had
    dismissed that evidence before assessing the appellant's own  evidence.
    He  noted  that  the  FTTJ  had  referred  to  the  starting  dose  for
    Sertraline, apparently  drawing  conclusions  from  his  own  knowledge
    without putting this to the parties.  The FTTJ,  he  submitted,  should
    have applied the principles in Danian v SSHD [2002] IMM AR 96 if he had
    found that the appellant had engaged in TGTE activities in the  UK  for
    the purpose of furthering his asylum claim. He considered that the FTTJ
    had  confused  "Tamils"  and  the  "LTTE"  in  his  reference  to   the
    appellant's engagement with the diaspora, apparently treating  them  as
    one and the same (paragraph 9).  Finally, Mr Paramjorthy submitted that
    the FTTJ's conclusion about the lack of risk  due  to  the  appellant's
    ability to leave the country through normal channels  was  contrary  to
    the guidance in GJ & Ors  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 5. Mr Duffy, for the respondent,  submitted  that  he  would  struggle  to
    persuade me that the FTTJ's decision was "up to standard".  He accepted
    that he was in difficulties challenging the appellant's  position  that
    there were material errors of law.

Discussion

 6. The decision makes confusing reading because findings of fact are mixed
    with other matters. By way of example, under the heading "The hearing",
    there are various findings in relation to the appellant's oral evidence
    and the reports of the two experts within paragraphs 18  -  20.   There
    are conclusive findings in relation to the expert evidence at  the  end
    of paragraphs 19 and 20 but no conclusive findings with regard  to  the
    appellant's evidence; the FTTJ's conclusive findings on the appellant's
    credibility are provided under the subsequent heading  "Conclusion  and
    Determination".

 7. The FTTJ concludes at paragraph 26 that he does not find "the appellant
    is a credible witness who might face  persecution  or  even  harassment
    from  the  government  arising  from  his  claimed  LTTE  and/or   TFTE
    following."  Having made this finding, he then goes on to consider  the
    "background evidence" finding that it does not  provide  "real  support
    for the appellant's claim especially after [his] finding that he is not
    someone who  is  likely  to  pique  the  interest  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities".

 8. The FTTJ's treatment of the two medical experts' evidence  is  at  odds
    with the guidance in HE [2004] UKIAT 00321 in which the  Tribunal  said
    "where the report is specifically relied on as  a  factor  relevant  to
    credibility, the adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part of
    the findings on credibility, rather than just as an add on, which  does
    not undermine the conclusions to which he would  otherwise  come".  The
    same can also be said of his treatment of the background  material.  In
    Mazrae [2004]  EWCA  Civ  1235  the  Court  of  Appeal  said  that  the
    Adjudicator's approach to credibility was flawed in that  she  appeared
    to have reached an adverse finding on credibility based solely  on  the
    appellant's own account, a finding which she went on  to  say  was  not
    shaken  by  the  background  material  and  an  expert  report,  having
    considered them separately. Although the application  was  refused  for
    various reasons, Lord Justice Sedley admitted to  having  grave  doubts
    about the Adjudicator's reasoning in this respect  and  said  that  the
    Adjudicator should have  considered  and  evaluated  all  the  evidence
    together - the appellant's  account,  the  medical  report  and  expert
    report, rather than dismissing each in isolation from each other.

 9. The FTTJ considered and rejected the two expert reports  before  making
    an assessment of the credibility of the  appellant's  evidence.  Having
    made that assessment of the appellant's credibility, he then went on to
    consider the background material.  His approach to the analysis of  the
    witness, including expert, evidence  and  the  background  material  is
    fundamentally  flawed  and  undermines  his  adverse  findings  on  the
    appellant's credibility.  That credibility  is  at  the  heart  of  the
    appellant's claim.

10. In any event, the FTTJ should have made findings  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's  claimed   attendance   at   demonstrations   in   the   UK
    (irrespective of the appellant's motive) and the impact of this on  the
    risk on return (Danian v SSHD [2002] IMM AR 96).

11. The FTTJ failed to take into account the guidance in GJ when making his
    adverse credibility  findings  at  paragraph  25  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's ability to leave Sri Lanka undetected with  the  assistance
    of an agent.

12. Given these failings, the adverse findings of the FTTJ with  regard  to
    the credibility of the  appellant  are  inadequate  and  unsustainable.
    These findings are at the crux of the appeal and the decision  must  be
    set aside in its entirety.  The parties' representatives  agreed  that,
    in circumstances, it was appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be  decided
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

13. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of material errors on points of law.  The decision is set aside.
     The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ Clemes.

14. The anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated: 1 January 2016



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge     Dated: 1 January 2016

