


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: AA/05683/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                  Decision and Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                             |
|On 4 January 2016                     |                  On 18 January 2016    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between


                                   H E R D
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms D. Revill, Counsel, instructed by Hanson Young
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the Mr H.E.R.D, a citizen of Sri Lanka, against
       the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal
       against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  his  application  for
       asylum and to remove him from the UK.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.




    Background


    3. The appellant was born on 27  July  1990.   He  entered  the  United
       Kingdom on 24 March 2011 on a Tier 4 (General)  Student  visa.   The
       appellant claimed asylum in July 2014. The  respondent  refused  the
       appellant's asylum claim on 31 December 2014.


    4. The appeal against that decision  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Rose  on  10  September  2015.   The  judge,  in  a  decision
       promulgated on 23 September 2015, dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
       on all grounds.


    5. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  the
       following grounds:  1. The judge accepted that the appellant and his
       partner had in the past been arrested because of a public display of
       affection and had been subject to serious  sexual  abuse  by  police
       officers.  It was argued that there should  logically  have  been  a
       finding that there was a real  risk  that  there  would  be  further
       public displays  which  would  in  turn  lead  to  a  real  risk  of
       persecutory ill treatment; and 2. The judge erred in his  assessment
       of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  whether  there  would   be   very
       significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Sri Lanka.


    6. The hearing came before me.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my
       decision which I now give.


    Ground 1


    7. Ms Revill sought  to  distinguish  the  appellant's  case  from  the
       country guidance case of LH &  IP  (gay  men:  risk)  Sri  Lanka  CG
       [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC).


    8. For completeness I set out the headnote in LH & IP:


       '(1) Having regard to the provisions of articles 365 and 365A of the
       Sri Lankan Penal Code, gay men in Sri Lanka constitute a  particular
       social group.
       (2)  'Gay men in civil partnerships' in Sri Lanka do not  constitute
       a  particular  social  group  for  the  purposes  of   the   Refugee
       Convention.  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  failure  to   recognise
       alternative  marital  and  quasi-marital  statuses  such  as   civil
       partnership or homosexual marriage  which  are  available  in  other
       countries of the world does not, without more, amount to a  flagrant
       breach of core human rights.
       (3) Applying the test set out by Lord Rodger in  the  Supreme  Court
       judgment in HJ (Iran) & HT (Cameroon) v Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, in general the treatment of gay  men
       in Sri Lanka does not reach the standard of persecution  or  serious
       harm.
       (4) There is a significant population of homosexuals and other  LGBT
       individuals in Sri Lanka, in particular in Colombo.  While there  is
       more risk for lesbian and bisexual women in rural areas, because  of
       the control exercised  by  families  on  unmarried  women,  and  for
       transgender individuals and sex workers in the cities, it will be  a
       question of fact  whether  for  a  particular  individual  the  risk
       reaches the international protection standard,  and  in  particular,
       whether it extends beyond their home area.
       (5) Where a risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  exists  in  an
       appellant's home area, there may be an internal  relocation  option,
       particularly for individuals returning via Colombo from  the  United
       Kingdom.'


    9. It was Ms  Revill's  contention  that,  unlike  in  that  case,  the
       appellant and his partner in this case had been  subjected  to  ill-
       treatment in Sri Lanka in the past.  Although she conceded that  the
       judge did consider this, it was her contention  that  he  failed  to
       correctly distinguish the country  guidance.   Ms  Revill  indicated
       that although the country guidance found that in general  there  was
       no risk in Sri Lanka due to being a gay man, she submitted that this
       was in the context where  gay  people  would  generally  keep  their
       relationships secret  Ms Revill referred me to paragraph 108 of  the
       country guidance:


                 'It seems tolerably clear from the evidence before us  that
                 for male sex workers and transgender individuals there is a
                 risk of harassment, blackmail, and,  on  occasion,  serious
                 harm capable of amounting to persecution, by reason of  the
                 public nature of their sexuality. Also, given the  cultural
                 constraints on  the  position  of  women  in  rural  areas,
                 lesbian and bisexual women may be at risk of persecution or
                 serious harm  there.   It  is  unclear  whether  that  risk
                 continues for those who live away from  their  families  in
                 larger cities, and specifically in Colombo.'


   10.  Ms Revill argued that the risk appears  to  be  by  virtue  of  the
       public nature of these individuals' sexuality and that the judge had
       failed to  adequately  consider  that  the  appellant  had  publicly
       displayed his sexuality and  as  a  result  had  been  targeted  and
       detained.  It was her view that the fact that this happened  in  the
       past would create a risk in the future.


   11. Ms Revill's central point in relation to the  country  guidance  was
       that its tenor was that homosexuality is tolerated if you keep it to
       yourself and that the country guidance does not say  anything  about
       publicly flaunting sexuality as most people in  Sri  Lanka  do  not.
       However I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  clearly  addressed  this
       argument, which was also made by Ms  Revill  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  At paragraph [22] the judge recorded the country guidance
       finding that 'in general the treatment of gay men does not reach the
       standard of persecution or serious harm.'   The  judge  went  on  to
       consider the country guidance findings in some detail and  to  apply
       those findings to the appellant's case, at paragraphs  [24]  through
       to [39] of his determination.


   12. At [35] the judge considered that the Upper Tribunal found that  the
       appellants in LH and IP were a particularly  discreet  couple.   The
       judge went on at [36] to find that the appellant and his partner are
       not as discreet.  However, the judge was of the view [37]  that  the
       fact that the appellants in LH and IP were particularly discreet was
       not:
            'in itself the decisive factor in their  appeal.   The  country
           guidance given by the Upper Tribunal does not indicate  that  if
           their inclination had been to be  less  discreet  their  appeals
           would necessarily have succeeded.  It was found that in  general
           the treatment of gay  men  in  Sri  Lanka  does  not  reach  the
           standard  of  persecution  or  serious   harm,   although   some
           categories, such as transgender individuals and sex  workers  in
           the cities are at greater risk.  Accordingly, it does not follow
           that because the Appellant and his partner might wish to be less
           discreet than the appellants in LH  and  IP  (Sri  Lanka),  they
           should be regarded as being at real risk of persecution.'

   13. Judge Rose went on to find at [38] that:
           'It is apparent from the consideration of the  evidence  by  the
           Upper Tribunal that it is common in Sri Lanka for  a  homosexual
           couple to conceal their sexual  orientation  and  live  together
           under the guise of friendship.  However it is not  part  of  the
           country guidance that a couple who do not choose to do so  would
           suffer a real  risk  of  persecution,  unless  there  are  other
           factors which increase their risk.'


   14. Those were findings open to the judge and Ms Revill  was  unable  to
       point to any finding in the country guidance which might  contradict
       this.


   15. Ms Revill relied on paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules:
           'The fact that a person has already been subject to persecution
           or serious harm, or to direct threats of such harm, will be
           regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-founded
           fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
           unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution
           or serious harm will not be repeated.'


   16. Judge Rose found, at [40] that he was satisfied that the appellant's
       account of the attack and subsequent  ill-treatment  by  the  police
       'may be true, and I consider the possibility of persecution on  that
       basis'.


   17. The Judge also directed himself appropriately at [27]:
           'In principle, past persecution means that future persecution is
           more likely, and the fear of it more likely to be well founded,
           unless there has been a significant change of circumstances.'


   18. The judge went on to find (again at [27]):
       'However, the appellant's account does not indicate  that  the  ill-
       treatment that  he  and  his  partner  suffered,  on  one  occasion,
       occurred because they were targeted as  individuals  by  people  who
       knew  them.   Whilst  their  past  experience  may  make  them  more
       apprehensive, in my judgement it does not  lead  to  the  conclusion
       that they are victims of systematic hostility, or that in the future
       they would be at greater risk than  LH  and  IP  (Sri  Lanka)  would
       indicate.'

   19. Although Ms Revill disagreed with this finding, I am satisfied  that
       it is no more than that; the judge in referring to the appellant and
       his partner not being at risk of systematic  hostility  was  clearly
       guided by [111] of LH and IP which indicated that:  'the  appellants
       have not been able to point to more than a few specific instances at
       or near the level  of  persecution.   These  appear  to  arise  from
       opportunism and exploitation not from systematic hostility'.


   20. The judge, in accepting that the appellant's account of  the  attack
       and subsequent ill-treatment by the police may be true, had accepted
       that the appellant and his partner were apprehended after a trip  to
       the cinema where they displayed affection, by men who had seen  them
       kissing.  They were subsequently arrested by the police  and  beaten
       and forced to perform sex acts while being filmed.  It was  open  to
       the judge on these facts to make the findings that he did that  they
       were not victims of systematic hostility.  It was  implicit  in  his
       findings that the judge considered this incident as one  that  arose
       from 'opportunism and  exploitation'  as  set  out  in  the  country
       guidance.


   21. The judge clearly considered future risk and he considered  this  in
       light of the principles in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2010]UKSC 31 which the judge  considered  at  [10],
       [21] and  [39]  of  his  decision.   At  [21]  the  judge  correctly
       summarised those principles as follows:
           'In HJ (Iran), the Supreme Court analysed the circumstances in
           which a gay person will be found to have a well-founded fear of
           persecution in the country of his or her nationality based on
           membership of a particular social group.  Essentially, if gay
           people who live openly are liable to persecution in the
           applicant's country of nationality, the applicant will be
           entitled to asylum either if he would in fact live openly or if
           he would live discretely but only in order to avoid the risk of
           persecution.  If he would choose to live discreetly simply
           because that was how he himself would wish to live, or because
           of social pressures, for example, not wanting to distress his
           parents or embarrass his friends, then his application should be
           rejected.'

   22. As noted above, the judge at [38] made a  reasoned  and  sustainable
       finding (in relation to gay couples living discretely) that  'it  is
       not part of the country guidance that a couple who do not choose  to
       do so would suffer a real risk of persecution', and LH and  IP  also
       finds that there is public debate in Sri Lanka around the subject of
       gay rights, that gay pride events occur regularly, albeit in secure,
       but not secret, conditions.  It is  also  discussed  that  an  LGBTI
       support organisation is able to  carry  on  its  activities  without
       major problems from the authorities.


   23. I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  findings,  read  holistically,
       indicate that he considered the past ill-treatment and the fact that
       the appellant and his partner 'might wish to be less  discrete  that
       the appellants in LH and IP'.  He took into account all the  factors
       including in light of the country guidance  and  that  this  was  an
       isolated,  opportunistic  incident,  which  might  make  them  'more
       apprehensive' on return but would not lead to them being at  greater
       risk than set out in the country guidance.  It was implicit in these
       findings therefore that the judge was satisfied that there were good
       reasons (namely the isolated and opportunistic nature of  the  harm)
       for considering that the past persecution  would  not  be  repeated.
       That is in line with the findings in LH and IP  which  at  paragraph
       112, whilst finding that perpetrators of such abuse  enjoy  complete
       immunity with no evidence that the state does anything to  stop  it,
       also found that there was 'no evidence that such  abuse  is  ordered
       from a high level'.


   24. Although Ms Revill expanded  on  her  argument  including  that  the
       appellant had been filmed and she submitted that this increased  his
       likelihood of being detained  and  ill-treated  again,  she  rightly
       accepted that this was  speculative.   The  judge  in  reaching  his
       finding that the appellant's past  experience  did  not  lead  to  a
       finding that they were victims of systematic hostility, was aware as
       set out in the appellant's witness statement that  the  incident  in
       question occurred in April 2010.  The appellant did  not  leave  Sri
       Lanka until March 2011 (albeit that he stated that his family  tried
       to keep him apart from his partner and the appellant stated  he  did
       not know where his partner was) and there was  no  evidence  of  any
       further difficulties or any targeting of the appellant.


   25. It was open to the judge in light of the evidence and  his  findings
       to be satisfied as he was at [27] that the appellant's previous ill-
       treatment taken together with his finding at [36] that they are 'not
       as discreet' (in effect that they may repeat the behaviour that  led
       to the incident in April 2010) did not mean  that  'if  he  and  his
       partner are returned to Sri Lanka there is a  reasonable  likelihood
       that  they  will  face  persecution  as  a  consequence   of   their
       homosexuality or their marriage in the UK' [40].


   26. The judge also made alternate findings, which I am  satisfied  would
       make  any  claimed  error  immaterial,  that  the  appellants  could
       relocate to a city such as Colombo [28] and these findings were made
       in light of his finding that the one incident of ill  treatment  was
       isolated with no evidence that 'in  the  future  they  would  be  at
       greater risk that LH and IP (Sri Lanka) would indicate'  [27].   The
       possible option of internal relocation is also set out in LH and  IP
       and again there is nothing in the country guidance to  suggest  that
       such an  option  is  not  available  in  a  situation  such  as  the
       appellant's where ill-treatment has occurred.


   27. In conclusion there is no merit in Ground 1.


      Ground 2

   28. The judge's findings  in  relation  to  276ADE(1)(vi)  were  clearly
       reasoned and the grounds amount to no more than a disagreement  with
       the weight placed by the judge that the appellant has cultural  ties
       with Sri Lanka, notwithstanding that he states he has been  disowned
       by his family, that he might experience discrimination and prejudice
       but the judge was not satisfied  that  this  would  constitute  very
       significant obstacles to his integration.  Although the judge made a
       reference to 'similar difficulties' potentially being faced by a gay
       couple who had not left Sri Lanka this does not mean, as Ms  Revill,
       suggested that the  judge  did  not  have  in  mind  the  particular
       situation  faced  by  the  appellant,  which  he  had  set  out  and
       considered in some detail in the context of the  asylum  claim.   It
       was open to the judge to take into account the wider situation faced
       by  gay  couples  in  Sri  Lanka  in  finding  that  there  were  no
       significant obstacles.


   29. There is also no merit in the argument, not put with any force, that
       the judge applied the wrong test,  given  that  at  [43]  the  judge
       discussed the amendments to paragraph 276ADE91)(vi) and stated  that
       the explanatory memorandum indicated that the Statement  of  Changes
       'do not represent any substantive change to the  policies  reflected
       in the Statement of Changes HC 194 which came into force on  9  July
       2012'.


   30. The judge went on however, at [44] to consider Ms Revill's arguments
       including  in  relation  to  the  respondent's  guidance  on   'very
       significant obstacles' and to discuss and make findings  as  to  the
       claimed very significant obstacles at [44] to [46].  I am  satisfied
       that these findings make clear that the judge had the  correct  test
       in mind and there was no misdirection.


   31.  Ms  Revill's  arguments  on  this  ground  were  no  more  than   a
       disagreement with the judge's findings.

          Decision:

   32.  The appeal is dismissed.  The making of the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on a  point  of
       law and shall stand.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Dated: 11 January 2016




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson







