
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
AA/05652/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 May 2017                           |  On 31 May 2017                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                     hA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Capel of Counsel instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan with an  age  assessed  as  6
    November  1995.   He  appeals  the  decision  of  a  First-tier   Judge
    promulgated on 7 March 2017.
2.   The appellant had applied for asylum following his arrival by lorry  in
    May 2012.  He was interviewed in January 2015 and his  application  was
    refused on 19 March 2015.  The appellant's claim in brief was that  his
    brother had wanted to marry the daughter of a  police  deputy  who  had
    found out about the relationship.  The  appellant's  brother  had  been
    arrested and then killed.  The police  had  accused  the  appellant  of
    being a terrorist on finding arms in his property and the appellant was
    arrested.  The police deputy said the appellant would be released if he
    agreed to marry his daughter.   The  appellant  was  released  but  his
    mother told him she did not want him to marry  the  officer's  daughter
    and arrangements were made for the appellant  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

3.   In refusing the claim the Secretary of State noted that  the  appellant
    had travelled through various countries and he had failed to apply  for
    asylum in Greece and Germany.  This  damaged  his  credibility  in  the
    light of  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004.   The  Secretary  of  State   found   the
    appellant's account to be inconsistent.  Taking the claimant's case  at
    its  highest  the  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that  there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection for him  in  Afghanistan,  and  moreover  the
    internal relocation option was reasonably available  to  him.   In  the
    light of the findings in AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012]  UKUT
    163 (IAC) the Secretary of State considered that the  general  security
    situation did not in  itself  give  rise  to  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Refugee Convention reason.  Returning  the  appellant
    to Afghanistan would not be unduly harsh.  In relation to Article 8  it
    was not considered that the appellant came within paragraph 276ADE  and
    there were not very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into
    Pakistan.   There  were   no   exceptional   circumstances   warranting
    consideration by the Secretary of State outside the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   Consideration was given to the appellant's medical grounds but  it  was
    concluded that  the  country  information  showed  that  treatment  was
    available for his condition.

5.   The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Judge on 6 June  2016
    when the appellant was represented by Miss Capel as he was  before  me.
    There was a psychiatric report from  Dr  Mehrotra  who  had  found  the
    appellant not to be fit to give evidence, and in the circumstances  the
    judge considered it was perfectly proper not to call the appellant  and
    to draw no  adverse  inference  from  his  failure  to  give  evidence.
    Although the appellant had claimed to have been born some months  later
    than the age assessment had found, the judge drew no adverse inferences
    from this either.

6.   Although the judge did not hear oral evidence  from  the  appellant  he
    heard from two of the appellant's key workers as well as having witness
    statements from two other key workers.

7.   In relation to Dr Mehrotra  the  judge  noted  that  he  had  not  been
    provided with a record of the appellant's hospitalisations.  The  judge
    considered  it  would  be  extremely   difficult   for   a   consultant
    psychiatrist to provide a medical report based  on  two  hours  with  a
    patient and without access to any of his  mental  health  records.   Dr
    Mehrotra  diagnosed  the   appellant   as   suffering   from   paranoid
    schizophrenia and PTSD.  Dr Mehrotra had seen a medical report from  Dr
    Jauhar who had stated that the appellant had a psychotic mental illness
    characterised by  persecutory  delusions,  among  other  matters.   The
    symptoms had  been  present  for  two  years  and  had  worsened.   The
    appellant had been on continued anti-psychotic medication for two years
    and he now has "a depot anti-psychotic injection to  improve  adherence
    to his treatment".

8.   Dr Mehrotra had stated that the appellant had used  cannabis  regularly
    since arriving in the UK and he  also  used  psycho-active  substances.
    PTSD was consistent with the account given by the appellant  of  trauma
    in Afghanistan where the appellant claimed to have  been  assaulted  in
    prison.

9.   The judge considered the appellant's GP records and the  report  by  Dr
    Jauhar and concluded in paragraph  125  of  his  decision  that  having
    considered all the evidence he did not find that the PTSD diagnosis was
    reliable.  Nor did he find it supportive of the  appellant's  claim  in
    general.  However, the judge stated in paragraph 126 as follows:

     "From all the psychiatric evidence, I have no doubt that the  appellant
         is suffering from psychotic mental illness.  Dr  Mehrotra  suggests
         the  diagnosis  of  paranoid  schizophrenia.   The  appellant   has
         presented over several months with auditory hallucinations of third
         persons,  incongruous  affect,   persecutory   delusional   beliefs
         including bizarre content, passivity and  poor  insight  which  the
         doctor states are typical clinical features of this illness."

10.  The judge also heard from one of the appellant's key  workers  who  had
    recalled instances when the appellant was clearly hallucinating and had
    said that the appellant had self-harmed several times and had  suicidal
    thoughts.  He was not able to take his daily medication and  needed  to
    be constantly reminded.  When  he  did  not  take  his  medication  his
    symptoms worsened and he was now taking his medication monthly  through
    injections.  The judge also heard from Mr Dike, a personal advisor  for
    Surrey County Council's Care Leavers Service.  The appellant  had  been
    hospitalised having been sectioned under the Mental Health Act  for  28
    days after an altercation with his  flatmate  in  which  the  appellant
    wanted to stab him.  The appellant was in a bed and  breakfast  because
    he had to be removed from his housing (supported accommodation) because
    of conflict with an Albanian resident.  While the appellant had no  key
    worker Mr Dike saw him three times a week.  He was looking  for  a  new
    placement for the appellant.

11.  The judge noted in paragraph 138 that the appellant had told  a  number
    of doctors and key workers that he had stopped using cannabis and legal
    highs "but that he has said this on many occasions and does not  appear
    to have broken the habit".  In paragraph 140 of the decision the  judge
    stated as follows:

     "The appellant's key workers are unanimous in  their  opinion  that  if
         the appellant were to be returned  to  live  with  his  mother  and
         sister in Kabul they would not be able to manage him."

12.  The  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  not
    believable and he would not, if returned to Afghanistan, be of  adverse
    interest to anyone.

13.  The judge followed AK (Afghanistan) and noted the  appellant  would  be
    returned to Kabul where he had originally lived  with  his  mother  and
    sister and they still lived there.

14.  The judge's decision concludes by dealing with  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim under Articles 3 and 8.  Some treatment for  the  mentally
    ill would be available in Kabul, although it was clear from the country
    evidence that the responsibility for persons who are mentally  ill  lay
    primarily with their families.  In paragraph 152 of  the  decision  the
    judge stated:

     "I have carefully considered the interaction of the appellant's  mental
         illness and the country conditions in Kabul as set out in  AK.   If
         the Appellant would have been living alone on return to Kabul  with
         his mental illness, I might well have  found  that  to  return  him
         would be in breach of the Article  15(c)  Qualification  Directive.
         However, the appellant has remained in contact with his mother  and
         sister throughout his journey to the  UK  and  after  his  arrival.
         They speak regularly by  telephone.   I  find  that  such  a  close
         relationship would mean that he would  derive  significant  support
         from his mother and sister on return."

     The judge referred to N [2005] UKHL  31  and  found  that  the  country
    evidence showed that there was treatment in  Kabul  for  psychosis  and
    that anti-psychotic drugs were available and  that  cannabis  played  a
    part in the appellant's condition and he observed:

      "Obviously,  the  appellant  will  have  yet  another  opportunity  to
         completely give up cannabis on return to Kabul which hopefully will
         reduce his psychosis."

15.  In relation to Article 8 the judge considered the submissions  and  the
    delay in determining the appellant's case by the respondent, but it  is
    common ground that  the  judge  did  not  refer  to  paragraph  276ADE,
    although  he  does  refer  to  Section  117A-D  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He concluded  that  the  interference
    with the appellant's private life was not disproportionate.

16.  In granting permission to appeal a First-tier Judge stated as  follows:



         "3.  The grounds argue that the judge did not give adequate reasons
             for rejecting the diagnosis of PTSD, failed to take account of
             relevant evidence including his non-compliance with his  anti-
             psychotic medication regime and the support he received in the
             UK.  The judge had not had regard  to  the  inability  of  his
             mother  and  sister  to  accommodate  him   as   they   cannot
             accommodate themselves  and  paragraph  276ADE  had  not  been
             properly considered.


         4.   The appellant's mental health issues and his circumstances  on
             return are clearly  the  focus  of  this  case.   The  judge's
             consideration of the appellant's health issues is set  out  at
             paragraphs 98 to  140.   The  judge  gave  clear  reasons  for
             rejecting PTSD but did accept psychosis and, it  would  appear
             the appellant's treatment and needs for  that.   Consideration
             of the position on return is at paragraphs 151 to  155.   This
             is, compared to other parts of the decision,  superficial  and
             does not appear to take account of the circumstances he  would
             actually face on return.


         5.   In the circumstances the grounds are arguable  and  permission
             is given on all  grounds  although  there  is  more  merit  in
             grounds 2 and 3.  Permission granted."

17.  A response was filed on behalf of the Secretary of State  on  27  April
    2017.  It was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  conducted  a  thorough
    assessment of the appellant's claim and  the  findings  in  respect  to
    return to Kabul were detailed and should be read in the  light  of  the
    rejection of the appellant's asylum claim which had  included  evidence
    from the appellant's mother.   There  was  no  reason  to  believe  the
    appellant's claim of poor circumstances  in  Kabul  given  the  adverse
    credibility findings and it should be noted that on the appellant's own
    evidence his mother was able to raise $15,000 for him to  come  to  the
    UK.

18.  Miss Capel submitted that the case was an unusual one.  The  judge  had
    accepted that the appellant  was  suffering  from  a  psychotic  mental
    illness.  The judge had not properly assessed whether  the  appellant's
    claim came within Article 3.  The appellant was non-compliant  and  had
    to have his medication delivered by injection in a hospital.  There was
    very intensive input into the appellant's care.   He  was  a  difficult
    patient.  The appellant had been sectioned under the Mental Health Act.
     There had been  five  attendances  at  A&E  and  Counsel  took  me  to
    references to the  appellant's  periods  of  detention.   He  had  even
    absconded from hospital and had joined a  youth  group.   It  had  been
    unanimously agreed by the health  professionals  that  the  appellant's
    mother and sister would not be able to manage the appellant.

19.  Counsel adopted and agreed with what had been  said  in  the  grant  of
    permission  that  the  concluding  part  of   the   determination   was
    superficial.  There was a question of the accessibility  of  medication
    and care given the appellant's record of non-compliance.  The judge had
    not engaged with the evidence.  The appellant  had  to  be  treated  by
    injection in a hospital.

20.  The appellant's mother and sister could not afford to  rent  their  own
    accommodation and  lived  with  a  different  family  in  exchange  for
    providing childcare and doing domestic chores.  They did not receive  a
    wage.  They would not be able to support the appellant.  The judge  had
    erred in failing to deal with whether the  appellant  would  face  very
    significant obstacles on his return under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).  The
    credibility findings were not safe in the  light  of  the  medical  and
    other evidence.  The appellant lacked capacity and he had been a  minor
    in Germany.

21.  Miss Isherwood submitted there had been no material error  of  law  and
    she went carefully through the decision, noting that the appellant  was
    living in a bed and breakfast with a degree of  independence.   It  was
    clear he had a certain  capacity.   The  decision  was  detailed.   The
    appellant had  been  in  contact  with  his  family.   There  had  been
    discrepancies in the appellant's account.  The judge had been  entitled
    to reject the appellant's evidence.  The judge had taken  into  account
    all the material before him.

22.  The claim that the appellant's mother and sister would not be  able  to
    manage the appellant had to be read in  the  context  of  the  negative
    credibility assessment made by the judge in respect of  the  appellant.
    The judge had erred in not referring  to  paragraph  276ADE,  but  Miss
    Isherwood submitted the error was not material.

23.   Counsel  submitted  in  reply  that  the  submissions  on  credibility
    overlooked the fact that there was no dispute that  the  appellant  was
    suffering from a psychotic illness.  While the judge had rehearsed  the
    evidence, he had not made findings on the appellant's medical needs and
    the type of care required on return.  The appellant was  non-compliant.



24.  Counsel noted that  the  hearing  had  been  unusual  in  that  at  the
    conclusion of the first hearing in June 2016 it  had  been  assumed  by
    both sides that the matter had been reserved.  Then a request had  been
    made for further evidence from Dr Mehrotra and the second  hearing  had
    taken place many months later.  There appeared to  be  nothing  in  the
    decision about there being a split hearing.

25.  If there was a material error of law the case would need to be  reheard
    de novo and the appellant's representatives had written on 3  May  2017
    requesting that a rehearing be adjourned  to  a  later  date.   Further
    evidence would be required about the country conditions and  a  further
    certificate of capacity in respect of the appellant might be  required.



26.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the judge's decision  if  it  was
    materially flawed in law.  It is to be noted that there is  nothing  in
    the judge's decision to indicate that the appeal  was  adjourned  part-
    heard.  As far as the parties  were  concerned,  they  were  under  the
    impression that the matter had been reserved following the hearing on 6
    June 2016.  The earliest that they would have been aware that the  case
    was not concluded was 3 August 2016 when directions were issued stating
    that the appeal hearing was part-heard and giving a date of 24  October
    2016.  The directions stated that the judge had matters of concern with
    regard to the evidence of Dr Mehrotra and set out  some  questions  for
    the witness.  The hearing listed on 24 October 2016 was adjourned  "due
    to lack of judiciary".  There is  correspondence  between  the  parties
    about whether it was necessary to call Dr Mehrotra.   The  matter  then
    came before the First-tier Judge again on 2 February 2017, nearly eight
    months after the decision where the judge had heard oral evidence.

27.  As I have said, there is no mention  in  the  determination  itself  of
    adjourning the matter or the reasons for it.  The parties were  unaware
    that the matter had not been reserved and  were  awaiting  a  decision.
    The only mention of the issue of requesting further  material  from  Dr
    Mehrotra was in paragraph 106 of the decision where  the  judge  simply
    says that the consultant's report is dated 30 May 2016 "and there is an
    addendum report, in response to some questions raised by me,  dated  20
    October 2016."

28.  Where a decision follows a hearing where there has been oral  evidence,
    lengthy delays like this produce problems.  In fact,  the  problem  was
    picked up  when  the  First-tier  Judge  granted  permission.   It  was
    observed that the concluding parts of the decision  were  "superficial"
    and did not appear to take account of the circumstances  the  appellant
    would actually face on return.  Another error creeps in to this part of
    the decision - the judge did not take into account paragraph  276ADE  -
    an error acknowledged by both sides.

29.  In circumstances where it is necessary to adjourn a matter  part-heard,
    the reasons for it should have been clearly set out  in  the  decision.
    The circumstances where  it  will  be  appropriate  having  reserved  a
    decision to reopen the matter will be rare.  Questions should be  asked
    of witnesses at the hearing.

30.  Although the hearing was on 6 June, it does not appear to  be  until  6
    July that the judge gave manuscript reasons for requiring directions to
    be issued.  These were not, as I have observed, issued  until  a  month
    later.

31.  Of course some of the delays were  not  the  fault  of  the  First-tier
    Judge.

32.  The way in which the appeal was conducted led in my  view  directly  to
    the problems identified when permission to appeal was granted.   It  is
    extremely difficult to pick up the threads after such  a  long  period.
    The judge failed to relate the problems associated with the appellant's
    condition  -  in  particular  non-compliance  and  the  need  for   his
    medication to be dispensed at a hospital - with the reality facing  him
    in Kabul.  While medication may  be  available  the  problem  for  this
    appellant is that he does not take it and his care has to be  carefully
    monitored.

33.   Miss  Isherwood  argued  that  the  appellant  was  living  in   semi-
    independent accommodation in a bed and breakfast.  This point overlooks
    the fact that the appellant is currently on medication administered  at
    a hospital and he has professional help available.

34.  I am not satisfied that in all the circumstances this decision  can  be
    salvaged.  I consider that a lot of the problems with it were caused or
    contributed by the failure to deal with the matter promptly  after  the
    hearing.  This was particularly important given the  delays  that  have
    occurred.  The decision does bear the hallmarks of a two-stage  process
    and I endorse what was said about  the  latter  part  of  the  decision
    appearing superficial.  It is accepted by both  sides  that  the  judge
    erred  in  failing  to  take  into  account  paragraph   276ADE(1)(vi).
    Regrettable though it is, I  find  no  alternative  in  this  case  but
    directing that the decision is materially flawed in law, and given  the
    extent of the fact-finding required, a remittal de novo  is  necessary.
    The hearing must be before a different First-tier Judge.

35.  The appeal is allowed as indicated.

36.  The anonymity order by the First-tier Judge continues.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.






Signed                                  Date 26 May 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

