
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05052/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th December 2015                         |On 31st December 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between


                                     p t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page, promulgated on 3rd September 2015, following a  hearing  at
    Columbus House, Newport on 13th August 2015.  In the determination, the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was  born  on  9th
    July 1987.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated
    27th February 2015, to refuse him asylum, and to deny him  humanitarian
    protection.  The applicable Immigration Rules are at paragraph 336  and
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.

 3. The Appellant claims to have joined the LTTE in March 2007.  He  claims
    to have received military and a physical training after  three  months.
    His claim is that he had  responsibility  for  taking  food  and  other
    supplies like tents  and  clothing  to  members  of  the  LTTE  on  the
    battlefield.  He wore a uniform and he carried a rifle. He says that he
    was injured while working for the LTTE when there was  an  attack  from
    the air that resulted in his sustaining an injury to his leg.

 4. In January 2009, his uncle made arrangements for him to leave  for  the
    UK through an agent but the passport was seized by the British  Embassy
    in Chennai.  He was involved in helping students at  Jaffna  University
    in celebrating the Heroes Day by making posters and banners.   On  26th
    June 2013, he was inside a house with his mother and girlfriend when he
    heard someone calling his name.  He went outside and  there  were  four
    men there.  They asked for him.  They hit him in the  face.   His  eyes
    were covered by the men and his hands were tied.  He was taken away  in
    a van.  He was detained and beaten daily.  He was asked questions.   He
    was hung from a pole by his  feet.   He  was  water  boarded.   He  was
    questioned about supporting some demonstrations in  Jaffna  University.
    He was then left in a truck and when he opened his eyes he was taken to
    a place where he was handed to someone else.  He left Sri Lanka on 16th
    July 2013. He then managed to board a plane to  the  UK  on  20th  July
    2013.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge did not find the Appellant's evidence of being  a  member  of
    the LTTE to be credible (see paragraph 28).  Credibility issues were at
    the core of this appeal and this was repeatedly emphasised by the judge
    (see paragraphs 12, 25 and 9).  The judge referred to  the  Appellant's
    injuries and added that these injuries were consistent with the account
    that he gave but this in itself  did  not  prove,  even  on  the  lower
    standard, that the injuries were  sustained  in  the  manner  that  the
    Appellant himself maintained (see paragraph 15).

 6. The judge went on to say that the Appellant's claim to  be  of  adverse
    interest in Sri Lanka to the authorities  there,  and  of  having  been
    detained and tortured  for  twenty  days  before  being  released,  was
    incapable of belief (see paragraph 26).  The  judge  did  not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant would have been released  by  the  army  in
    2008 in the circumstances in which he  had  described  (paragraph  27).
    The appeal was dismissed.





Grounds of Application

 7. The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  had  materially
    misconstrued the  evidence.   He  had  treated  the  evidence  as  only
    establishing the possibility that the Appellant's scars were consistent
    with the Appellant's accounts, and that if this was so then  they  were
    meant to be equally consistent with alternative  explanations,  whereas
    this was not the  case  because  the  medical  report  had  placed  the
    possibility of the injuries having been sustained in the manner alleged
    by the Appellant to be at a very high degree.

 8. Also the fact that the Appellant was released after payment of a  bribe
    could not amount to  a  lawful  basis  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    account while being detained in the first place.  The  judge  also  had
    not set out the reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's  credibility  in
    the reasons for refusal letter, because in the refusal  letter  he  was
    disbelieved on the basis of his identity, and the  suggestion  that  he
    might have been in the UK at that time, which he was not.

 9. On 22nd September 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 1st October 2015, a detailed Rule 24 response  was  entered  by  the
    Respondent.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 10th December 2015, Mr Muquit, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, made the  following  three  core  submissions.
    First, what the medical report, relied upon by the Appellant suggested,
    was  that  the  majority  of  the  Appellant's   scars   were   "highly
    consistent/typical" with the story that the  Appellant  gave.   Only  a
    minority of the scars was simply consistent.  Given the high degree  of
    consistency, the Appellant's claim was  proved  beyond  all  reasonable
    doubt, and the judge was wrong to have interpreted the  report  in  the
    manner that he did, leading to an inevitable refusal and  rejection  of
    the evidence.

12. Second, the judge had not rejected the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he
    suffered from mental health difficulties (see paragraph 26),  and  this
    being so, the judge should have treated the Appellant as a  "vulnerable
    witness" whose evidence was such as to  make  applicable  the  guidance
    given by the  Practice  Direction  for  child,  vulnerable  adult,  and
    sensitive witnesses.  The failure to  consider  the  evidence  in  this
    light was an error of law.  Third, at paragraph 27,  the  judge  states
    that the Appellant was released following the payment of a  bribe,  and
    the judge states that this would not have been feasible.

13. However, there is established jurisprudence in the form of the case  of
    GJ to the effect that the seriousness of charges against an  individual
    is not determinative of whether a bribe can be paid  and  the  detainee
    released.  In fact it is possible to leave  through  the  airport  even
    when a person is being actively sought not least given the problems  of
    bribery and corruption in that country.

14. In addition, Mr Muquit also referred to the fact that the statement  of
    the Appellant's brother-in-law, which appears at D80 of the Home Office
    bundle, and is signed off by S M and dated 10th September 2014, had not
    been referred to at all by the judge.  Additionally, the medical report
    by Dr Dumas, which appears at pages 95 to 115, and is a report  by  the
    Medical Foundation, had also not been  referred  to.   The  judge  does
    refer to reports after page 95, but this plainly  does  not  include  a
    reference to Dr Dumas's report.  If the judge were  to  apply  "anxious
    scrutiny" to the facts before him, then the evidence had to  be  looked
    at comprehensively.

15. For her part, Ms Holmes relied upon the  Rule  24  response.   This  is
    detailed and extensive.   It  states  that  the  judge  had  repeatedly
    described the case before him as one turning on  credibility,  but  the
    Appellant failed to give a  credible  account.   Second,  there  was  a
    medical report on the Appellant's condition, but this was  premised  on
    the fact that the Appellant was telling the truth, which the judge  did
    not find the Appellant to have done,  so  there  was  nothing  in  this
    point.  Third, the  Appellant  appears  to  have  had  only  two  minor
    connections  with  Tamil  activities  after  2008,   which   were   not
    significant.  Fourth, the reality was that his activities were  subject
    to the de minimis principle and do  not  establish  risk  upon  return.
    Fifth, the fact that the Appellant was released from custody  indicates
    that the authorities were no  longer  showing  a  continuing  level  of
    interest in him.  Finally, the Appellant had  conducted  no  activities
    since being in the UK and would be of no interest to the authorities if
    he returned.  It has to be remembered that the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    operate a "watch list", and the Appellant's name would not be  on  that
    watch list if he were to be returned.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, notwithstanding the fact that the judge has provided a
    detailed and otherwise comprehensive determination, there was a failure
    to factor in the statement of S M.  This appears at  D80  of  the  Home
    Office bundle.  It gives a detailed account of how, when  this  witness
    failed to get a flight from Colombo in May 2014, he remained behind and
    was visited by men who were not in uniform, and who asked this  witness
    about the Appellant.  He states, "then one of them spoke to my brother-
    in-law in Tamil.  The men took him outside.  That was the last  we  saw
    of him" (see paragraph 5).

17. On his way to the airport, his bag was snatched by men, one of whom had
    come to see him at the lodge.  This is a recent event in May 2014,  and
    if correct demonstrates that the Appellant is still of interest to  the
    authorities, such that the judge should have dealt with it, if only  to
    reject the testimony as lacking in credibility.

18. Second, if one looks at the medical report by Mary  Beyer,  dated  12th
    February 2015, this states (at D90) that the Appellant  had  "23  scars
    which are attributed  to  this  ill-treatment.   Eleven  of  these  are
    typical of the attribution given, ten are highly consistent and two are
    consistent with the attribution  stated"  (paragraph  41).   The  judge
    appears to have taken the view that the injuries were simply typical of
    the ill-treatment complained off.   However,  only  two  of  these  are
    simply consistent.  The others consist of eleven that are  "typical  of
    the attribution given".  The remaining ten are "highly consistent" with
    the attribution.  Given that "anxious scrutiny" has to be exercised  in
    cases involving asylum claims, the failure to apprehend the evidence in
    the proper manner lead the judge into error.

19. Third, and for the same reason, the failure to consider the  report  of
    Dr Dumas (at pages 95 to 115) also demonstrates a failure  to  exercise
    "anxious scrutiny", and thereby to render the decision flawed in  terms
    of an error of law.

Remaking the Decision

20. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  This is a case where paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement
    applies in that the nature or extent of any judicial fact-finding which
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to  be  remade  is
    such that, having regard to the overriding objective in Rule 2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  again.   The
    matter will be heard by a judge other than Judge Page at  the  earliest
    opportunity.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal is  remitted
back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than
Judge Page at the earliest opportunity.

An anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2015



