
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 11th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               silvy alexander
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A Hashmi, Counsel instructed by Blavo & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Jones made following a hearing at Bradford on 11th September 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Ethiopia born on  9th  August  1987.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 7th December 2011 and  claimed  asylum
    on what she now accepts was a false prospectus.  During the  course  of
    her interview she disclosed that her fear of  return  to  Ethiopia  was
    not, as she had originally said, for political reasons but  because  of
    her sexuality.

 3. It has always been acknowledged by the Secretary of State that  if  the
    claimant was found to be credible then she would be entitled to succeed
    in her appeal.  Mr Diwnycz did not seek to resile from that position.

 4. The judge took into account the clear Section 8 points in favour of the
    Secretary of State but said that they were not  determinative  and,  on
    the basis of the evidence which he had heard both from the claimant and
    from her supportive witnesses, concluded that she was  credible  as  to
    the events which led to her claim for asylum  and  as  to  her  current
    sexuality.

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had not fully engaged with the evidence.  She says  that  the
    judge did not deal with the question of an arrest warrant said to  have
    been issued in respect of the claimant.  Furthermore,  the  judge  said
    that he wondered whether the claimant could express the  basis  of  her
    claim to a male agent when she was in a vulnerable position although in
    her witness statement the claimant said that, had she known  she  could
    claim asylum on account of her sexuality, she would have done so, which
    was inconsistent.  There was  also  a  discrepancy  in  the  claimant's
    evidence but whether  her  husband  had  kept  control  of  her  travel
    documents. The judge had given undue weight  to  the  evidence  of  the
    support group and counsellor witnesses.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Tiffin on 21st  October  2014
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

 7. Mr Diwnycz relied on his grounds, which he admitted he  could  not  put
    forward with any great  force,  and  submitted  that  collectively  the
    points raised in the grounds identified an error of law.

 8. Miss Hashmi relied on her skeleton  argument  and  submitted  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal were a simple disagreement with  the  decision.   The
    Secretary of State knew why she had lost the case which was because the
    evidence of the claimant was accepted.

Findings and Conclusions

 9. The grounds identify no material  error  in  this  determination.   The
    Secretary of State's case is set out in full and  properly  considered.
    The judge had at the forefront of his mind the obvious  difficulty  for
    the claimant in this case which was that, initially,  she  deliberately
    sought to mislead the Respondent as to the true basis of her claim.

10. The judge properly reminded himself that Section  8  of  the  2004  Act
    applied but it was not in itself determinative of credibility.  He  was
    entitled to accept that the claimant had  not  made  proper  disclosure
    because she was frightened, but that did not inevitably mean  that  she
    should not be found to be credible.

11. The judge heard oral evidence from the claimant and from  a  number  of
    witnesses who were supportive of her,  corroborating  her  account  and
    attesting to her vulnerability. An appellate  Tribunal  which  has  not
    heard the evidence will not lightly interfere with the  judgment  of  a
    Tribunal which has heard  and  considered  that  evidence  and  made  a
    reasoned judgment upon it.

12. The core of this matter is the claimant's sexuality, not whether  there
    was an arrest warrant and not whether she  had  access  to  her  travel
    documents.  On that issue,  the  judge  gave  proper  reasons  for  his
    decision and the grounds disclose no error of law.

Notice of Decision

13. The original judge's decision stands.  The Secretary of State's  appeal
    is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 5th February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

