
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/05907/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date sent                    |
|On 2 February 2012 and 12 February 2013       |On 24 July 2013              |
|Prepared on 11 July 2013                      |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

                            vijaykumar thambiaya

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by Raja & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms M Tanner, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, whose stated date of birth is  1  December  1977,  is  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka.  He appeals against  a  decision  of  Immigration
    Judge Wyman, prepared on 13  September  2010  and  promulgated  shortly
    thereafter, in which Judge  Wyman  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision refusing his  application  for  asylum  and  also
    deciding to remove him from this country.

 2. The appellant's  immigration  history  as  recorded  in  Judge  Wyman's
    determination was as follows.  He had travelled to the  United  Kingdom
    in 2000 and made an  application  for  asylum.   This  application  was
    refused and he was returned to Sri Lanka in 2003.  Having  returned  to
    Sri Lanka, in the same year he made a false  application  for  a  visit
    visa using a different name, Sivanesan  Sivan.   This  application  was
    refused.

 3. The appellant then left Sri Lanka on 18 September 2009 and travelled to
    Malaysia where he stayed for two months.  He arrived in this country on
    26 November 2009 using a false British passport.  He claimed asylum  on
    10 March 2010.

 4. As already noted, his application was refused by the  respondent.   The
    refusal letter is dated 9 April 2010.  This was served on the appellant
    on 13 April 2010.  On the same date,  the  appellant  was  served  with
    notice of the respondent's immigration decision  to  remove  him  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999,  as  an  illegal
    entrant/person subject to administrative removal.

 5. The refusal letter is detailed and essentially  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum (and also humanitarian protection) was rejected because  the
    respondent did not accept his account.

 6. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    before Immigration Judge Wyman, sitting at Hatton  Cross.   The  appeal
    was first listed on  2  June  2010  when  the  appellant  began  giving
    evidence.  In the course of giving evidence, the appellant claimed that
    during his period in detention in 2008 he had been tortured and  raped.
    Judge Wyman has recorded at paragraph 51 of his determination that  the
    appellant claimed that this was the first time he  had  ever  disclosed
    that he was raped in custody and that "due to the  shame,  he  did  not
    tell anyone previously".  He apparently explained that he had told  his
    solicitors two days before.

 7. Because  this  had  not  been  contained  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement, Mr Fripp, Counsel then representing the appellant, requested
    an adjournment in order to obtain better  instructions,  and  following
    these instructions asked for the hearing to be adjourned in order  that
    the  appellant's  solicitors  could   seek   advice   regarding   their
    professional situation.

 8. The appeal was then re-listed for 14 July 2010, but on that occasion Mr
    Fripp  informed  the  Tribunal  that  the  appellant  had  suffered  an
    epileptic attack in the waiting room and was waiting for an  ambulance.
    The hearing had to be adjourned again until 8 September  2010  when  it
    concluded.

 9. Judge Wyman has recorded at paragraph 66 of his determination  that  at
    that hearing,  the  appellant  "confirmed  that  he  was  tortured  and
    sexually mistreated whilst in detention at Kaluthura detention camp  in
    2008".  Importantly,  for  the  purposes  of  this  determination,  the
    appellant stated during that hearing that "this was the only time  that
    he had been tortured".   He  went  on  to  say  (this  is  recorded  at
    paragraph 69) that he feared he would be  tortured  on  return  because
    "several things are different  now  from  his  return  back  in  2003".
    Amongst the things that  were  different  were  that  "he  himself  was
    tortured in 2008".

10. As already noted above, Judge Wyman dismissed the appeal, having made a
    number of adverse credibility findings.

11. Some of these adverse  credibility  findings  were  challenged  in  the
    grounds in support of the appellant's  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The essence of the appellant's argument,
    as set out in the grounds, is that he should have been  accepted  as  a
    witness of truth.  At paragraph 12, it is asserted that "the effect  of
    [the various] errors [in  Judge  Wyman's  determination]  is  that  the
    appellant's account has not been considered in the round,  taking  note
    of all the evidence, and as such the conclusions drawn are flawed".

12. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Taylor, sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  on  12  October
    2010.

13. This appeal was then listed before me as long ago as 31  January  2011,
    when I found that Judge Wyman's determination had contained an error of
    law such that his decision fell to  be  set  aside.   My  reasons  were
    founded on a close analysis of the facts, and were as follows:

    "The IJ failed to make sufficient findings of fact to justify his
    conclusion that  the Appellant would not be at risk on return.  For
    example, he failed to give adequate reasons for his finding of fact
    that the Appellant had not been raped.  He also failed to deal
    adequately (or at all) with the Appellant's evidence that he and his
    surviving brothers had been threatened by the army (see para. 17), on
    which there is no finding of fact.


    Further, he does not appear to have taken proper account of his
    findings that the Appellant had been detained for 10 months during
    which time he had been beaten and threatened with rape, when
    considering whether he would be at risk on return.


    With regard to the finding at para. 142 of his Determination that "I
    accept the Appellant's father may indeed have been able to pay a bribe
    to secure the release of the Appellant.  However I note that bribes
    were accepted where individuals were clearly of no value to the
    authorities.  Had the Appellant been a high profile member of the LTTE,
    then I do not believe that a bribe, or any price, would have secured
    his release", this is not only not supported by reference to any
    background evidence, but is also beside the point, as the Appellant did
    not claim to have been a high profile member of the LTTE.


    The finding at para. 135 with regard to the Appellant's "story" of
    having spent a year in Megombo before coming to the UK, that "I do not
    find that this element of the story rings true" is apparently based
    upon the IJ's assertion that "whilst I accept that many people do stay
    with families while waiting for visas and documents, it is very rare
    that this takes as long as 12 months as in the Appellant's case" and
    that "in my experience it is rare for the process [of obtaining
    documents] to take as long as a year".  Although there is some leeway
    for an IJ to rely on the benefit of his/her experience where a point is
    obvious, in a case such as this, which must turn on its own particular
    facts, such a finding is unsustainable, especially where the
    "experience" relied upon is not supported by reference to any
    background material..


    The last part of this paragraph, that "it is known that the Sri Lankan
    authorities regularly conduct searches of houses.  It is not accepted
    that the Appellant would have been unable to remain undetected for such
    a lengthy period" is also unsustainable.  Given the IJ's finding that
    this Appellant was not a high profile member of the LTTE, it is not
    clear what sort of searches he had in mind that would be carried out by
    the authorities, such that the Appellant would have been detected.

    On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Tarlow indicated that he agreed for all
    of the reasons set out above that the Determination contains errors  of
    law and should be set aside. "

14. I directed that in the circumstances, none of the findings of fact made
    by Judge Wyman could stand, but all the evidence should  be  considered
    anew.

15. The appeal was then listed before me again on 27 May 2011 but had to be
    adjourned because the respondent had not located a file relating to the
    appellant's wife's successful appeal which  needed  to  be  before  the
    Tribunal.

16. The appeal then came before me again for directions on  21  July  2011,
    when I gave a fresh time estimate of at least three hours, and directed
    (again) that a Tamil interpreter should be provided for the hearing.

17. The appeal was then listed for substantive hearing on 8 November  2011,
    but had to be adjourned yet again because on this occasion, despite the
    directions which I had given, an interpreter had not  been  booked.   A
    fresh date (15 December 2011) was obtained and further directions given
    for the appeal to be heard on that  date,  again  when  an  interpreter
    should be booked.

18. Regrettably, although the parties attended on 15 December  2011,  again
    no interpreter had been booked, and because none could be  obtained  at
    such short notice, the appeal had to be adjourned yet again, this  time
    until 2 February 2012  when,  eventually,  the  substantive  re-hearing
    commenced.

19. The appellant  was  cross-examined  at  length  at  this  hearing,  and
    substantial challenges were made on behalf of  the  respondent  to  his
    credibility.  For the reasons which are set out below, I do not need to
    set out in full what the appellant's answers were to all the  questions
    he was asked, or indeed as to the precise  details  of  his  claim.   I
    will, however, refer below to some parts of his evidence which are very
    relevant for the purposes of this determination.

20. It would be fair to say that  there  were  inconsistencies  within  the
    appellant's evidence, which on one occasion the appellant explained  by
    stating that he had "a forgetful memory".  He was "taking medicine even
    now".  However, in light of what is set out below, it is not  necessary
    to examine these  inconsistencies  in  any  detail.   There  were  also
    substantial difficulties regarding the appellant's current claim, which
    were carefully analysed by Ms Tanner in her submissions.

21. Of particular relevance to this determination are the answers given  by
    the appellant when asked about the basis of his asylum claim  in  2000.
    Essentially, he told the Tribunal  that  he  had  claimed  asylum  then
    because of the general problems which had existed in his  country.   As
    young boys, they had found life difficult because on the  one  hand  if
    people were caught by the army they would be tortured and on the  other
    hand the rebel movement would ask them to  join  them.   He  came  here
    because of this fear.  The appellant made it clear during  the  hearing
    that his claim in 2000 had been founded on generic fears rather than as
    a result of any specific ill-treatment which he had suffered.  This was
    consistent with what he had stated in evidence in  the  hearing  before
    Judge Wyman, as set out above, and also as recorded by Judge  Wyman  at
    paragraph 50 of his determination.  The appellant is recorded there  as
    having stated during the hearing "that if he was returned to Sri  Lanka
    now, he feared that he would have more serious problems  than  when  he
    returned to Sri Lanka in 2003.  This is because he now has a record  of
    being in detention, and was only released on payment of a bribe".

22. It was quite clear that the appellant was saying that whereas his  case
    now was founded essentially on what had been done to  him,  personally,
    after his return in 2003, his claim in 2000 had not been based  on  any
    allegation of ill-treatment specific to him.

23. Because I was concerned that  the  file  did  not  contain  any  papers
    relating to the appellant's earlier application,  I  indicated  to  the
    parties that I intended  to  make  enquiries  regarding  this  previous
    application.  As a result of these enquiries, the files relating to the
    appellant's previous application for asylum in 2000 were  located,  and
    it was apparent that he had appealed against the refusal of his  asylum
    application at that time and that his  appeal  had  been  dismissed  by
    Adjudicator Mr S S Chohan, in a determination promulgated on 28  August
    2001, following a  hearing  at  Hatton  Cross  on  12  June  2001.   At
    paragraph 4 of his determination, Mr Chohan notes as follows:

         "It is the appellant's claim that since 1994 he assisted the  LTTE.
         His  duties  included  collecting  sensitive  information,  digging
         bunkers and assisting in meetings.  In February 1999, the appellant
         claimed he was arrested by the army in Kathaidy.  The  arrest  took
         place at his home following the  bombing  of  an  army  camp.   The
         appellant was taken to Navatkhuli army camp  and  then  to  another
         camp.  The appellant was detained for six months during which  time
         it is claimed he was beaten and tortured.  He was tied  and  beaten
         with boots and pipes filled with sand; he was tied upside down  and
         beaten and a bag filled with petrol was  tied  to  his  head.   The
         appellant also claims to have been given  electric  shocks.   As  a
         result the appellant claims to  have  scars.   He  also  claims  to
         suffer from epilepsy."

24. At paragraph 5 Mr Chohan sets out how the appellant claims  he  managed
    to escape and at paragraph 9 Mr Chohan describes the appellant's  scars
    which he inspected at that time.

25. At paragraph 12, Mr Chohan records that "the appellant told me that  if
    he were to be returned he feared problems from both the  army  and  the
    LTTE.  He said he had escaped from custody and so they would be looking
    for him".

26. It is not necessary for the purposes of this  determination  to  record
    everything which was said in evidence during the hearing in  2001.   It
    is worth noting that Mr Chohan found, at paragraph 22, that "there  are
    too many significant discrepancies in the appellant's  account  and  as
    such I do not find him to be a credible witness".

27. I had indicated at the conclusion of the hearing  on  2  February  2012
    that if it was possible to locate the file, I would give  both  parties
    the opportunity to make further submissions as to the relevance of  any
    material so obtained, before reaching a decision in this appeal.

28. Accordingly, because I considered that the determination of  Mr  Chohan
    clearly had a bearing on this appeal and that it would  not  be  proper
    for me to reach a decision without giving both parties  an  opportunity
    of addressing me further in the light of the  material  which  had  now
    come to light, I arranged for the appeal to be re-listed, in order that
    the parties  could  make  such  representations  with  regard  to  this
    material as was considered appropriate.

29. I gave these directions on 29 February 2012, but although  a  direction
    had been included that the appeal was to be re-listed before me on  the
    first  available  date,  for  further  submissions,  due   to   listing
    difficulties it was not possible to list this appeal  again  before  me
    until 12 September 2012.

30. On the day before this hearing was  due  to  take  place,  that  is  11
    September 2012, the appellant's solicitors  sent  by  fax  two  further
    documents for the Tribunal's consideration, being a  witness  statement
    from the appellant and what is referred to as a "medico  legal  report"
    from Dr Raj Persaud.

31. The appellant's very short witness statement is as follows:

         "1.  I adopt the contents in my previous witness statement as  part
             of this statement.  Give this statement is necessary  at  this
             stage to clarify the allegation made by the respondent against
             me in relation to the credibility issues.

         2.   It is true that I was arrested, detained and tortured  by  the
             Sri Lankan army during 1999 and I managed to escape  from  the
             army camp whilst I was being transported in a truck to another
             camp.

         3.   I am sorry that I told the Tribunal that I claimed  asylum  on
             general grounds.  This is due to  mental  vulnerability  as  a
             result of my psychiatric condition.

         4.   I sincerely apologise for any inconvenience caused  the  court
             and humbly request the honourable immigration judge to forgive
             me for the same and allow my appeal."

32. This statement is dated 11 September 2012.

33. The psychiatric report from Dr Persaud, which  is  dated  10  September
    2012 following an examination on 28 August 2012, begins by  describing,
    in glowing terms, the "Expertise of  Author  of  Report".   Dr  Persaud
    wishes the Tribunal to note, among other matters,  that  he  has  "been
    elected a Fellow of the Royal College of Psychiatrists plus  University
    College London - the highest honour these institutions  can  bestow  on
    members" and that he has worked in the NHS as a consultant since  1994.
    Apart from all the prizes he won which are listed, he also records that
    "amongst other qualifications I hold a first class  honours  degree  in
    psychology from UCL" which, in case anyone was in any doubt, is said to
    be "the highest grade its [sic] possible to achieve".  He also  records
    that "in the recent  past  a  national  newspaper  in  the  UK  -  "the
    Independent on Sunday" voted myself one of the top ten psychiatrists in
    the UK and "The Times" newspaper voted myself one  of  the  top  twenty
    mental health experts in the world".

34. Regrettably, Dr Persaud did not see fit to mention anywhere within  his
    report that in June 2008 the General  Medical  Council  had  found  him
    guilty of dishonesty and bringing the  profession  into  disrepute  and
    that he was suspended from practising for  three  months  (which  is  a
    matter of public record).

35. It is also apparent from the report which he prepared that, as  stated,
    Dr Persaud's "understanding of  the  basic  facts  of  the  case  [was]
    gleaned from the client".

36. At the hearing on 12 September 2012, Mr  Muquit,  who  appreciated  the
    difficulties arising in connection with Dr Persaud's report,  told  the
    Tribunal that this report would "not be the high watermark of my case".
     He did not seek to suggest that this report added  very  much  to  the
    appellant's  claim.   He  also  recognised  that  there  was  a   basic
    discrepancy between what the appellant had said in evidence  (that  the
    basis of  his  first  claim  had  not  been  dependent  upon  what  had
    specifically happened to him  but  had  been  founded  on  the  general
    circumstances  in  Sri  Lanka)  and  what  is  said  in   Mr   Chohan's
    determination.  He recognised that the appellant's evidence  inherently
    would not be seen as sufficiently  reliable  to  justify  the  Tribunal
    making positive credibility findings.  He also  acknowledged  that  the
    Tribunal had a record of the submissions made by Ms Tanner with  regard
    to inconsistencies in his evidence generally.  However, the appellant's
    evidence was not the only evidence in this case and the Tribunal had to
    consider whether or not there was other evidence sufficient to persuade
    it that he would nonetheless be at risk on return  to  Sri  Lanka.   In
    particular, Mr Muquit would wish  to  rely  on  the  findings  made  in
    relation to the appellant's wife by a different Tribunal.

37. Unfortunately, because of holiday leave, Ms Tanner, who had represented
    the respondent at the substantive hearing, was not  available  at  this
    hearing and Mr Saunders, who was representing  the  respondent  in  her
    place, was not in  a  position  to  deal  with  any  submissions  which
    referred to evidence which had been given during a hearing at which  he
    had not been present.

38. Accordingly,  the  appeal  had  to  be  adjourned  yet  again,  and  it
    eventually came back before me  on  12  February  2013,  when  I  heard
    submissions on behalf of both parties, who addressed me in light of all
    the material which was now  before  the  Tribunal.   I  recorded  these
    submissions contemporaneously,  and  because  my  notes  are  contained
    within the Record of Proceedings, I shall  refer  below  only  to  such
    parts of the submissions as are necessary  for  the  purposes  of  this
    determination.  I have, however, had regard  to  everything  which  was
    said to me in the course  of  the  hearing,  as  well  as  to  all  the
    documents contained within the file.

39. In the course of her submissions on behalf of the respondent, Ms Tanner
    asked the Tribunal to note that the appellant  had  been  found  to  be
    completely lacking in all credibility by Judge  Chohan  in  July  2001.
    The appellant had then claimed to have been detained  and  ill-treated.
    He claimed to have received electric shock treatment.  He had  suffered
    scars and was eventually  released.   The  account  he  had  given  was
    dismissed by Judge Chohan, and he  had  been  found  to  be  completely
    lacking in credibility due to many significant discrepancies.

40. It would appear that this appellant had  presented  a  similar  account
    then as he was presenting now.  That is beatings, torture  and  escape,
    supported by a Medical Foundation Report in July 2000 which referred to
    a barely visible scar on his back, a two inch scar on his left shoulder
    and minor marks on his face.  These were found not  to  be  significant
    and unlikely to attract attention on return.  These findings of  course
    still stood under Devaseelan principles, and this was unchallenged.

41. Moving on  to  the  most  recent  claim,  although  the  appellant  had
    acknowledged that he had sought asylum in the UK before, he clearly had
    not told the truth about the substance of that claim,  because  he  had
    referred to "generic risks" which he claimed to have been the basis  of
    that claim.  Clearly he had been attempting to  distance  himself  from
    the true nature of that application.

42. The latest asylum application was based on a similar account  of  being
    detained and ill-treated.  For the reasons set out within  the  refusal
    letter, the Tribunal  was  asked  again  to  reject  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim.  Part of the claim related to a shop  said  to  have
    been owned by his family which was located between the  LTTE  camp  and
    the army camp.  It was said that this camp was  only  100  metres  from
    this shop as was the LTTE camp.  That is the army  camp  and  the  LTTE
    camp were at most 200 metres apart.  This was simply not  accepted  nor
    was it accepted that either of the forces used that shop.

43. The respondent also rejected the appellant's claim that his family  had
    helped people to travel from Colombo to Jaffna, and that  part  of  the
    family business was not mentioned during  the  asylum  interview.   The
    Tribunal was asked to note that the appellant had said that he "forgot"
    but that was not accepted as an explanation nor was the account of  the
    appellant's brother having being shot accepted, because  the  appellant
    had said it took place at a park but the Tamil.net reference,  at  page
    96 of the appellant's bundle, referred in the fifth paragraph to "armed
    men who arrived at the home of Thambiaga Chandranohan  [presumably  the
    appellant's brother] and gunned him down Sunday around 6.30pm".

44. So the appellant claimed it was at a park  but  from  that  article  it
    would appear he was  shot  in  his  home.   The  explanation  that  the
    appellant had given for that discrepancy is that the mistake  may  have
    been because of an error in the police report.  This was  not  accepted
    as a reasonable explanation  as  the  article  in  Tamil.net  makes  no
    mention of the police report.

45. Another reason for rejecting credibility was that  the  appellant  said
    his brother was killed during a sports event, and it was  not  accepted
    that that venue could be mistaken for the family home,  which  was  500
    metres away, using a short cut.

46. In addition to that, and what has emerged after the refusal letter, was
    of course the medical report which had  been  handed  in  at  the  last
    hearing, from Dr Persaud.  (At this stage, on behalf of the  appellant,
    Mr Muquit accepted that he could not rely on that report in light of Dr
    Persaud's history).

47. Ms Tanner continued by asking the Tribunal to note that  in  any  event
    this report did not refer to the appellant's previous detention or  the
    scarring said to have been present at that time, so it was  not  really
    worth the paper it was written on.

48. Another point regarding what had  been  claimed  by  the  appellant  in
    connection with his medical condition was that even if he had  been  so
    unfortunate as to choose a  fairly  disreputable  doctor  to  supply  a
    medical report, which should not on its own count against him as  such,
    so far as the respondent was aware, no further medical report had  been
    obtained  and  no  further  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's   mental
    condition, or physical condition in connection with his epilepsy.   Nor
    had any up-to-date information been provided as to  any  medication  he
    might be taking.

49. Accordingly, it  could  not  be  believed  that  any  inconsistency  or
    discrepancy in his latest claim could  be  attributed  to  his  health,
    mental or physical.

50. It should also be noted that the appellant had used  a  false  passport
    (see paragraph 45 of the refusal letter) and had pretended he was  deaf
    and dumb when he passed through immigration.

51. Another aspect regarding his general credibility and how  little  could
    be believed was his application for a visa.  He made  that  application
    after he had been removed from the UK  following  the  failure  of  his
    earlier asylum claim, and that application was made in  a  false  name.
    When asked why, he had said that it was in order "to  come  back  here"
    (see paragraph 47 of the refusal letter).

52. These matters  were  all  relevant  when  considering  the  appellant's
    credibility.  All  the  evidence  in  the  round  did  not  assist  the
    appellant, but it was accepted that the Tribunal still  had  to  assess
    whether even so, he would be of any interest to the authorities.

53. In this regard, the respondent relied  on  the  very  detailed  refusal
    letter, starting at paragraph 50, which taken  into  account  with  the
    relevant case law, which was still [at the  time  of  the  hearing]  LP
    viewed in light of TK, would suggest he was not.

54. This appellant had already been returned to  Sri  Lanka  in  2001,  and
    therefore on the basis that his account was not going to  be  believed,
    he would have to show that he would be of interest to  the  authorities
    on return.  The respondent would submit that there was no risk  to  him
    as a returning failed asylum seeker.  He had no profile as  a  previous
    LTTE supporter, and what is more he had been able to travel to Colombo,
    passing through various checkpoints, showing his  own  identity  cards,
    which was a further indication that he was not of interest to anyone.

55. Insofar as he was returning from London as a failed asylum seeker,  and
    was a Tamil, these facts did not place him at risk, even having used  a
    false passport, because he would only be at risk if he showed  that  he
    had  become  involved  in  sur  place  activities  which  he  had  not.
    Accordingly, there was simply not  sufficient  evidence  on  which  the
    Tribunal could find that he would be at risk on return.

56. With regard to other family members who might have left  Sri  Lanka  or
    current family members in Sri Lanka, the respondent did not accept that
    his brother was killed as claimed, and  neither  should  the  Tribunal.
    The appellant had also said  that  his  family  continues  to  run  the
    business, so there did not seem to be any risk there.   Apparently  the
    appellant's wife is living in the  UK  and  that  claim  was  accepted.
    However, this appellant had to establish his own claim and the Tribunal
    should take into account that the appellant's evidence was that he  had
    had no contact with his wife, so it is hard to see how what a different
    Tribunal might have found in her case could make any difference to  his
    claim.

57. At the time of the refusal letter, three years ago, no Article 8  claim
    had been raised, and for these  reasons,  the  Tribunal  was  asked  to
    dismiss the appeal.

58. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Muquit began by accepting on  behalf  of
    the appellant that an Article 8 claim was not, in the circumstances  of
    this case, sustainable.  As Mr Muquit put it,  he  "takes  a  realistic
    approach".

59. He had earlier confirmed that he did not resile  from  the  concessions
    which he had made at the earlier hearing  in  September  2012,  and  he
    accepted during the course of  his  submissions  that  the  appellant's
    personal credibility could not be accepted by the Tribunal.

60. Nonetheless, the Tribunal should note that the appellant is a Tamil  by
    ethnicity, which was  relevant,  because  whatever  the  truth  of  the
    individual detail which he had given as to his support for the LTTE, it
    was inevitable that it would be realised that  he  originated  from  an
    LTTE controlled area and for this reason it  was  likely  that  he  had
    supported the LTTE, even if this was not as a fully-fledged  supporter,
    because this would have been expected of anyone living in those areas.

61. Mr Muquit invited the Tribunal to note that the  detail  the  appellant
    had given of his involvement with the LTTE was very modest,  which  was
    consistent with his position as someone who had been digging bunkers or
    acting as a look-out and providing funds, as the majority of people  in
    these areas did.  He did not  claim  ever  to  have  been  more  deeply
    involved.

62. With regard to Judge Chohan's determination, it had to be accepted that
    under Devaseelan principles, the Tribunal was required to look first to
    these previous findings.  It was also accepted that the  appellant  had
    told lies about that previous hearing, although to be precise, his  lie
    was a succinct one, which was that his claim had been  a  general  one,
    whereas it had in fact been based on  specific  allegations  of  abuse,
    which as the Tribunal had noted, had not been believed.

63. Although the appellant did not now  rely  on  Dr  Persaud's  report  to
    identify any condition he might have, beyond that report  the  Tribunal
    did have the benefit of two other reports which  had  not  been  before
    Judge Chohan and which manifested the inconsistencies in his  testimony
    and provided explanations  for  these  inconsistencies.   Reliance  was
    placed upon the report of 20 August  2010  from  Dr  Naganathar  and  a
    second report of 18 May 2011 from Dr Balasubramanian.  These were  both
    consultant psychiatrists who had confirmed the appellant suffered  from
    epilepsy and they had both described him as having PTSD and before that
    a depressive disorder.

64. In response to an observation from the Tribunal that this appellant was
    known to lie about his symptoms, for example saying  he  was  deaf  and
    dumb which he was not, Mr Muquit submitted that now he  mentioned  that
    he had epilepsy which he had not before.  The  fact  that  he  had  not
    mentioned it before did not mean that he did not have it.  However,  Mr
    Muquit did accept that it was difficult to maintain that this appellant
    had any personal  credibility,  but  nonetheless  the  Tribunal  should
    accept the medical evidence.

65. Mr Muquit then referred to what he asserted were some errors  in  Judge
    Chohan's adverse credibility findings, but again he accepted that  this
    Tribunal could not be expected to accept  the  appellant  as  a  person
    whose evidence was credible.  However the findings should  be  made  in
    light of the distinct evidence which pointed to an avenue for believing
    him, in particular the evidence from the doctors referred to.

66. Mr Muquit then referred to  evidence  suggesting  that  he  had  had  a
    business in Sri Lanka  on  his  return,  and  there  was  some  further
    discussion about particular aspects of his evidence  which  might  have
    been accepted.  With regard to his assertion that he transported people
    from Colombo to Jaffna, it was accepted there was a lack of detail with
    regard to his evidence and that if the  Tribunal  was  looking  at  his
    evidence in isolation, he lacked credibility.  However,  this  was  not
    necessarily determinative, and, it was asserted, should not be a  basis
    for the Tribunal rejecting other evidence.

67.  Mr  Muquit  then  tried  to  explain  how   some   of   the   apparent
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence might have  occurred,  such
    as that the newspaper article, which was a summation of the incident, a
    short account of a general incident,  may  have  got  specific  details
    wrong when it was said that the incident had occurred  "at  the  hone".
    It was not clear that  the  newspaper  was  saying  that  the  shooting
    happened "at the home".  He also relied on the evidence with regard  to
    the appellant's sister, which although not strictly  evidence  in  this
    case, had been positively adduced by the appellant.  Although Mr Muquit
    acknowledged, in answer to a  question  from  the  Tribunal,  that  the
    appellant's sister had not been present to be  cross-examined,  it  was
    nonetheless evidence which was "capable of being considered".   It  was
    asserted further that given the "lack of contamination" regarding  this
    evidence it had not been undermined.

68. Although the appellant had entered this country under a false passport,
    claiming to be deaf and dumb, it was his case that he did what  he  was
    told to do.  He was acting under the influence of someone pretending to
    be his aunt or mother.  With regard to  his  failure  to  claim  asylum
    earlier, although this was a factor which under Section 8 the  Tribunal
    was bound to consider, this should not be determinative, if it  was  in
    the context of a direction that had been given to him.

69. With regard to his having applied for a visa in a false name, that  was
    consistent with someone who did not want to stay in Sri Lanka.  It  was
    not  inconsistent  with  his  later  claim.   Mr  Muquit  acknowledged,
    however, that "like a good tailor, I have to cut  the  cloth  with  the
    material I have".

70. Mr Muquit then dealt with the appellant's risk on return on  the  basis
    that the Tribunal accepted,  as  had  been  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, that the appellant could not be believed at  all  and  that
    therefore the only factors to be  considered  were  that  he  would  be
    returning as a Tamil failed asylum seeker.  He  accepted  that  on  the
    basis of the country guidance current at the time of his submissions, a
    return from London in  these  circumstances  might  not  of  itself  be
    sufficient.  However, everything was fact specific, and  in  this  case
    the Tribunal would be considering a person who would be returning as  a
    failed asylum seeker, who had been in London for a  significant  period
    of time, having arrived in 2009.

71.  It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  had   not   participated   in
    demonstrations in this country, which  would  lead  to  risk,  but  the
    authorities were concerned with  the  risk  to  someone  who  might  be
    perceived, because  of  his  or  her  profile,  as  being  in  need  of
    investigation.  Even if the appellant's  account  was  rejected,  there
    might still be sufficient features to suggest that  there  was  a  real
    risk that he might be questioned beyond a cursory  level,  because  the
    issues he would have to deal with regarding his  presence  here,  which
    were the details of his family,  his  general  background  and  various
    other matters might still create a real risk for him on return.

72. The question was whether or not this appellant  would  be  regarded  as
    somebody who needed to be investigated.  Mr Muquit was not prepared  to
    concede that the appellant would not be at risk, primarily  because  he
    was awaiting the decision  in  the  country  guidance  case  which  was
    currently being argued elsewhere before this Tribunal, in order to  see
    what guidance would be given.

Discussion

73. The primary issue which must be determined  first  is  whether  or  not
    anything this appellant now says can be believed.  An attempt has  been
    made to explain the numerous inconsistencies in  his  evidence  on  the
    basis of his claimed psychiatric condition, supported in the main by  a
    psychiatric report prepared  by  Dr  Persaud.   However,  Dr  Persaud's
    evidence, even if he was a reliable witness, which he  is  not,  having
    been suspended by the GMC because of his dishonesty which  he  did  not
    see fit to disclose in his report, is in any event  unreliable  because
    it is largely based on what the appellant has told him,  which  has  in
    major respects been shown to be untrue.  This  appellant  is  a  proven
    liar with an appalling immigration history.  He made a false claim  for
    asylum in or about 2000, and his  evidence  was  disbelieved  by  Judge
    Chohan because of numerous inconsistencies, and  this  is  my  starting
    point.  He then applied for a visa in a false name.  He then arrived in
    this country, again using false papers, claiming at  that  time  to  be
    deaf and dumb and then, at a substantially later time, made  a  further
    claim for asylum in the course of which he told what we now know to  be
    deliberate lies with regard to his previous claim.

74. The appellant's current claim is not only riddled with inconsistencies,
    but bears striking similarities to his earlier false  claim  which  had
    been disbelieved.

75. As Mr Muquit told the Tribunal, he had  "to  cut  his  cloth  with  the
    material I have" but although he has done his best,  he  has  not  come
    close to persuading me that I can accept the truth  of  anything  which
    this appellant has said. He has no credibility as a witness whatsoever.

76. Nor can I accept that the appellant has  any  medical  condition  which
    could possibly  explain  the  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence.   His
    explanation  for  giving  what  was  obviously  a   dishonest   account
    concerning his previous asylum application, namely that this  was  "due
    to mental vulnerability as a  result  of  my  psychological  condition"
    (coupled with an apology and a request that the Tribunal "forgive" him)
    is  risible.   The  only  believable  explanation   for   the   various
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, coupled  with  his  having
    given an account regarding his previous hearing which has  subsequently
    been shown to be untrue is that over many years and in  the  course  of
    very many hearings, he has persistently and  dishonestly  attempted  to
    advance a false claim.

77. Given my credibility findings, which are that  I  accept  none  of  the
    appellant's account, on the basis of the country guidance  existing  as
    at the time of the hearing, as has been  accepted  by  Mr  Muquit,  the
    facts that someone was both a Tamil and a failed  asylum  seeker  would
    not of themselves have then been considered sufficient to  put  him  at
    risk on return to Sri Lanka.  However, I  have  had  in  mind  that  Mr
    Muquit had stated in his closing submissions that he  did  not  concede
    this point, because he was awaiting the decision in a country  guidance
    case which was then being argued before this Tribunal.

78. While writing this determination I also was aware  that  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal was considering its determination in  the  country
    guidance case referred to by Mr Muquit, which was in fact argued before
    it on 5 - 8 and 11 - 12 February 2013, and then  further  on  15  March
    2013 and 19  April  2013  (that  is  contemporaneously  with  and  then
    subsequently to the date on which the closing submissions were made  in
    this appeal).  Having made enquiries, I ascertained  that  one  of  the
    arguments which had been advanced in that case  was  precisely  whether
    any returning Tamil who was a failed asylum seeker would be at risk for
    these reasons alone, and for this reason I considered it appropriate to
    delay giving this determination until that  country  guidance  decision
    had been promulgated.

79. The country guidance decision having been promulgated on 5 July 2013, I
    am now able to consider the  only  argument  which  could  possibly  be
    advanced on behalf of this appellant, which is that as a failed  asylum
    seeker, who was also a Tamil, for these reasons alone he  would  be  at
    risk on return, even though none of his evidence had been accepted.

80. Having given careful consideration to this  very  recently  promulgated
    country guidance decision (GJ & Others (post-civil war; returnees)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319), I am able to conclude that on the basis of
    my finding that none of the appellant's account of what has happened to
    him can be believed, he is not at risk on return.  This  appellant  has
    not established, to any standard of proof, that he has or ever had  any
    profile as a LTTE supporter or as a  supporter  of  any  similar  Tamil
    separatist organisation, and nor (as was accepted by Mr Muquit  on  his
    behalf) is there any evidence of any sur place activities such as would
    of themselves put him at risk.

81. I note in particular the  country  guidance  now  given  (which  is  to
    replace all existing country guidance on  Sri  Lanka)  as  set  out  at
    paragraph (8) of the head-note of GJ and is as follows:

         "8.  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the Diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  northern  province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government."

82. This appellant has, on my findings, no history as a Tamil activist  and
    would not be perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities, whose approach is
    based on sophisticated intelligence, as having any such profile.

83. Mr Muquit was realistic enough to concede  that  any  Article  8  claim
    must, in the circumstances of this case, be bound to fail, and  he  was
    right to do so.  Whatever private life this appellant might have  built
    up in this country (of which there has  been  scant  evidence)  in  the
    light of his appalling immigration history, and the persistent lies  he
    has told, his removal is obviously  proportionate  for  the  legitimate
    purpose  of  the  economic  wellbeing  of  this  country,  through  the
    maintenance of a fair and effective system of immigration control.

84. It follows that this appellant's appeal must be dismissed.

Decision

I set aside the determination of Immigration Judge  Wyman  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed on all grounds.



Signed:                                 Date: 17 July 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig
