
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05312/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 July 2015                      |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                        MOHAMMED REZA ALIPOUR-FETRATI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mohammed Reza Alipour-Fetrati, was born  on  29  January
    1969 and is a male citizen of Iran.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge N Manuel) against a decision of the respondent dated 16
    July 2014 to remove him to Iran having refused his  claim  for  asylum.
    The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.  The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Mr Schwenk, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that  there  were
    four issues before the Tribunal.  First, as indicated in the First-tier
    Tribunal decision at [11], at the adjourned hearing of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal (the first hearing was on 27 August 2014 and the second
    on 11 October 2014) the appellant had attended with a witness, a  Mr  A
    Evelyn.  The Presenting Officer objected to the witness giving evidence
    on the basis that there had been an opportunity for  collusion  between
    the appellant (who had given his evidence at the earlier  hearing)  and
    the witness.  The judge indicated that she

         "... agreed to hear the evidence of Mr Evelyn and [I] indicated  to
         the parties that I would be cautious about the weight to  be  given
         to his oral evidence ... bearing in mind  that  this  evidence  was
         after the appellant's evidence was  heard  in  full  and  the  case
         adjourned part-heard for submissions only."

    The appellant now complains that the question of  collusion  was  never
    put to the witness or, indeed, to the appellant.  In  consequence,  the
    judge acted unfairly.  I disagree with that submission.  The judge gave
    an indication of the potential concerns which  she  had  regarding  the
    witness's evidence ("... I indicated to the parties")  and,  whilst  it
    would not be right for the judge simply to assume that  there  must  be
    collusion where such circumstances arise, it was reasonable for her  to
    indicate that she intended to approach the evidence of Mr  Evelyn  with
    some caution.  If the possibility of collusion  had  been  put  to  the
    witness and the appellant and (as would have been  likely)  denied,  it
    would still have been reasonable for the judge  to  indicate  that  she
    intended to approach the evidence of the  witness  with  some  caution;
    even if she had heard evidence from the appellant and witness  and  the
    representative's submissions on the subject it seems very unlikely that
    the judge would have been in a position to make positive finding either
    way as to whether a collusion had occurred.  I find that the judge  did
    not act unfairly as alleged.

 3. Secondly, a number of the credibility matters referred to the judge  at
    [31] are, according to the appellant's grounds, reliant  upon  findings
    of inherent plausibility.   Having  considered  the  findings  in  some
    detail, I do not agree with that submission.  I do agree, however, that
    at [31k] the judge may have erred in finding as follows:

         "At Q95 the appellant claimed the authorities had raided his  house
         and taken documents.  However there  was  no  evidence  to  explain
         exactly what these documents were and how  they  would  incriminate
         him as a person who is against the government."

 4. The appellant had been asked about the raid on his house at the  asylum
    interview [Q95/96] and, whilst he refers to  the  "authorities"  having
    taken documents away from his house, the interview had, as  Mr  Schwenk
    put it, "moved on" and the appellant was not asked to give  details  of
    the documents removed.  It is also not clear that the question arose in
    cross-examination of the appellant at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing.
    It is harsh, in my opinion, for the judge to find that the  appellant's
    credibility had been damaged because there had  been  "no  evidence  to
    explain exactly what these documents were" when, at interview and again
    at the  appeal  hearing,  the  appellant  had  never  been  asked  what
    documents had been removed.

 5. Fourthly, the appellant challenges the judge's findings as regards  his
    risk to him upon return.  At [54], the judge found that:

         "... being arrested at the airport on return and  held  for  a  few
         days whilst the police established  whether  or  not  he  has  been
         involved in political activity, does  not  in  my  view  reach  the
         minimum level of  severity  required  to  constitute  a  breach  of
         Article 3."

 6. The appellant refers to the Operational  Guidance  Note  (OGN)  of  the
    respondent dated October 2012 which records [3.17.13] that  "conditions
    in prisons and detention facilities  are  harsh  and  potentially  life
    threatening in Iran  ...  they  are  likely  to  reach  the  Article  3
    threshold".  The  judge's  finding  is,  in  my  opinion,  inadequately
    reasoned; she has not explained exactly why "in my view"  detention  in
    prison conditions which evidence before the  Tribunal  indicated  might
    reach Article 3 ECHR might not "reach the  minimum  level  of  severity
    ..."

 7. The judge has provided a generally thorough and careful analysis of the
    evidence.  Many of her findings are sound but I have  serious  concerns
    regarding her analysis of the evidence for the reasons I have  detailed
    above. Moreover, in the matter of risk on return, I am  concerned  that
    the judge has not given sufficient reasons for  finding  that  a  brief
    detention upon to Iran would not expose this appellant to the real risk
    of Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment.  On balance, I find  that  the  safest
    course of action is to set aside the decision and to remit  the  matter
    to a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision.
     Given what I  have  said  regarding  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    evidence, I consider that the only  prudent  course  of  action  is  to
    direct that none of the findings of fact shall stand.  In  making  that
    direction, I stress that it still remains for the  appellant  to  prove
    his case before the next First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  25
    November 2014 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge N  Manuel)
    to remake the decision.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 1 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

