
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05159/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 March 2016                               |On 4 May 2016                 |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                     O H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on [ ] 1969.  She  has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision made by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Parker  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 4 July 2014 refusing to grant her asylum and leave  to
    remain on Article 8 grounds.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that she  had  been  ill-treated
    by her husband and his family both in Nigeria and in the UK.   She  met
    her husband 21 years ago and her husband would beat her every  day  and
    his family started to ill-treat her and abuse her.  Following the  ill-
    treatment by her husband and his family her mental health deteriorated.
     She was taken to a psychiatric hospital on three occasions in Nigeria.
     The police were informed  two  to  four  times  and  her  husband  was
    released without charge.  The beatings would continue after he returned
    from police detention.  She came to the United Kingdom in 2009 with her
    husband and two of her eldest children.  During the trip to the  United
    Kingdom her husband beat her and she was taken to a  psychiatric  unit.
    She believes that if she is returned to Nigeria with her four children,
    he would subject her to further ill-treatment and she would not receive
    sufficient protection from the police or the authorities in Nigeria.

3.   The appellant has six children with her husband.  They are  EH(1)  born
    [ ] 1993, SH born [ ] 1994, RH born [ ] 1996, EH(2) born [ ]  1998,  VH
    born [ ] 2001 and JH born [ ] 2004.  All her children are in London.

4.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant, RH and EH(2).  He had  up-
    to-date medical evidence consisting of  two  letters  from  South  West
    London and St George's Mental Health Trust from Dr P  Lomax  and  Dr  O
    Mistry dated 16 January 2015 and 26 June  2014.   The  letter  from  Dr
    Lomax gave a general description that the appellant  has  both  bipolar
    and affective disorder and this can result in  extreme  moods  and  can
    affect her memory.  The second letter said she had been under the  care
    of a support team since August 2012 confirming that she has bipolar and
    affective disorder and is currently on medication.  It  also  says  her
    memory has been poor.

5.   The respondent accepted that the abuse has occurred.  The  judge  found
    that the appellant was abused in Nigeria.  The consistent  evidence  of
    her children was that they were also abused.  Since  2009  her  husband
    has travelled to the United Kingdom on 30  separate  occasions.   Since
    she claimed asylum he has travelled on eight separate occasions to  the
    United Kingdom.

6.   The judge agreed with the respondent's assessment  that  the  appellant
    will have sufficiency of protection in Nigeria.  This  is  because  the
    background evidence stated that the countrywide police force is present
    and available in Nigeria to provide protection.   The  appellant  would
    not be returned to live with her husband.  She  would  be  returned  to
    live elsewhere.  It is not the state who will be persecuting her and it
    has not been shown to a satisfactory standard that the appellant cannot
    live in the same area as her husband because he will harm her and  that
    he has sufficient influence over the  police  so  that  she  would  not
    obtain protection.

7.   The judge said that the evidence from RH and EH(2) suggests  that  they
    were threatened but he found that the threats were  vague.   There  was
    reference to the police being called to one  incident  in  the  UK  but
    there  was  no  evidence  relating  to  this.   Therefore  it  was  the
    respondent's view from 2011 that the appellant has had  little  contact
    with her husband and no  threats  have  been  made  was  correct.   The
    appellant was sectioned in 2010 and was away  from  her  children  when
    they were at a very young age for  three  months.   Her  husband  is  a
    frequent visitor to this country and  could  have  visited  if  he  was
    bothered and had an inclination to do so and take the children back  to
    Nigeria.  The other difficulty  was  the  appellant's  husband's  abuse
    towards his children.  The respondent questioned why they were visiting
    their father on a regular basis.  While the conclusion  was  that  some
    abuse occurred there was an  ongoing  relationship  with  their  father
    which suggested that their claim may have been exaggerated.  RH was now
    an adult and EH(2) was nearly an adult  yet  they  still  maintained  a
    relationship with their father.  The judge  found  that  the  appellant
    would return with her four  children  to  live  in  Lagos  and  in  his
    opinion, it has not been shown that the appellant's husband would  have
    any interest in harming her on return.  He found that the  evidence  of
    the appellant  and  the  children  was  speculative.   The  appellant's
    husband's intentions should be viewed by his actions and  he  has  done
    nothing to demonstrate that she would be harmed on  return.   He  found
    that the appellant's husband has forgotten her  and  got  on  with  his
    life.  The evidence was that he had remarried.

8.   The judge said it was difficult to  reconcile  her  husband's  previous
    role arranging her previous visa and tickets on her trips to the UK and
    the notion that he was unaware of her trip in 2011.

9.   The judge said the appellant had not provided  any  evidence  that  her
    husband has the widespread influence she claims he has.   She  did  not
    mention that her husband has maintained contact with  her  since  2011.
    Since 2009 he has been to this country on  30  separate  occasions  and
    since claiming asylum in April 2012 he has been here eight  times.   He
    has not met her once which indicates a lack of interest  in  her.   She
    alleges that the police warned him  to  stay  away  yet  there  was  no
    evidence of this.  The appellant, RH and EH(2)'s evidence suggests that
    he did contact her prior to claiming asylum and the police  had  to  be
    called in.  In her screening interview she only refers  to  threatening
    to call the police.  Even taking into account  her  vulnerable  witness
    status, the judge said he would expect clear answers on  these  points.
    He said the  submission  from  Mr  Jeserum  portrayed  the  appellant's
    husband as a controlling and organised person which  suggests  that  if
    this was true, he would have made more of an attempt to contact or harm
    the appellant in this country if he was interested in her.  At best  he
    has made an attempt to contact her in December 2011.  He has  not  made
    any attempt to contact her since she made  the  asylum  application  in
    2012 despite coming to the UK on eight occasions. The judge  held  that
    these are not the actions of a man who is interested in the  appellant.



10.  The judge found that the appellant would not  need  to  rely  upon  the
    state for protection because her husband has no interest in harming her
    in the UK or in Nigeria.  The abuse  that  has  occurred  has  happened
    inside the marital home and outside this environment she is not at risk
    and neither are her children.  The evidence of the latter statement  is
    the fact that on eight or nine occasions RH and EH(2) have been allowed
    to visit their father.  This shows that the appellant  does  not  think
    that they are at risk in this situation.

11.  The judge noted that the appellant's eldest daughter SH is  married  to
    a British  citizen  and  her  eldest  son  had  previously  helped  her
    financially and there was no reason  why  they  will  not  continue  to
    support her.  This would include paying for her medication  on  return.
    The  appellant  said  they  have  no  obligation  to  do  so  and  have
    responsibilities of their own.  The judge found that this may  be  true
    but there was no evidence that they have turned their back on her.

12.  The judge considered internal relocation and he said it  was  difficult
    to escape the conclusion reached by the respondent that  the  appellant
    may face practical difficulties if  starting  life  in  another  place.
    Whilst there may be general concerns and  uncertainties,  she  has  not
    produced any evidence that they would not be able to live a normal life
    judged by the country's standards.

13.  The judge found that the appellant would return as a person  who  lives
    with her four dependent children.  She looks after  them  without  help
    from Social Services.  She is stable on  her  monthly  medication.   Dr
    Mario Aguillar believes that there is no internal relocation option for
    the appellant yet the respondent quoted from  a  British  Danish  fact-
    finding report from 2008 which states the opposite is  true.   This  is
    quoted in the Nigerian CIO June 2013 report which suggests it is  still
    a valid proposition.  There are hostels available.  Dr  Mario  Aguillar
    concluded at paragraph 47 of his report and went as far as to say  that
    the appellant would be regarded as a witch possessed by  evil  spirits.
    The judge said as he had found  that  there  are  mental  health  drugs
    available in Nigeria  the  appellant,  supported  by  her  three  adult
    children, will be able to afford this.  He relied on  the  decision  in
    POO Nigeria v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 132 which held that if the  Claimant
    was returned to Nigeria she would receive adequate care facilities in a
    shelter.

14.  The judge then went on to consider Section 55 of the  UK  Borders  Act.
    He said the children will return as a family unit  with  their  mother.
    There is no threat of persecution and the risk of harm is so  low  that
    the appellant allows her children to visit their father.

15.  He noted that the seven year residence period has not been met.

16.  The judge found that the children's  best  interests  are  to  be  with
    their mother the appellant.  The children do not face abuse from  their
    father.  The appellant's economic plight will be aided by her three and
    soon to be four adult children.  She is currently stable and as such is
    a functioning mother of four.  According to her oral evidence she  does
    work and can do so on  her  return  to  Nigeria.   He  found  that  the
    appellant is not at risk of being persecuted if returned to Nigeria.

17.  Mr Jesurum raised two grounds of challenge  to  the  judge's  decision.
    The first ground he submitted was the  judge's  failure  to  take  into
    account relevant evidence.  The first relevant evidence which the judge
    did not take into account was the evidence of RH and EH(2)  that  their
    father did not have their contact details and that was why he  was  not
    able to contact them.  Consequently the judge  erred  in  finding  that
    their father had lost interest in them because  he  had  not  contacted
    them.  Mr Jesurum submitted that this was because he had  no  means  of
    doing so.

18.  The second relevant evidence according  to  Mr  Jesurum  was  that  the
    judge did not deal with the reason that the appellant's husband did not
    target them in the UK was because  when  he  did  so  the  police  were
    called.  The third relevant evidence was the  judge's  conclusion  that
    the children's evidence of the claimed threats from  their  father  was
    vague.  EH(2) did say that his father had said  that  if  their  mother
    returned to Nigeria he would show her what sort  of  man  he  was.   Mr
    Jesurum submitted that the judge was wrong to dismiss this evidence  as
    vague.  He submitted  that  the  appellant's  husband  is  violent  and
    controlling.  He has twenty domestic staff at home and owns a  security
    business.  The specific threat must be analysed in the context  of  the
    undisputed evidence.

19.  As to the materiality of the  error,  Mr  Jesurum  submitted  that  the
    appellant and the children have no funds, no home or support.  RH  said
    that they would have no choice but to call their father for assistance.
     If they were threatened by  him  then  relocation  would  need  to  be
    considered.  The unduly harshness of relocation  must  be  assessed  in
    respect of the appellant's  mental  health.   These  cumulative  errors
    materially undermine the judge's decision.

20.  The second ground he argued was the judge's reference to  the  ages  of
    the children.  The judge found that the children would be able  to  pay
    for the appellant's treatment.  The  judge  erred  in  his  finding  at
    paragraph 40 that the appellant would be supported by her  three  adult
    children.  Mr. Jesurum submitted that out of the four children  one  is
    an adult and three are minors.  The error of fact is an  error  of  law
    and it is material to the judge's decision.

21.  I was not persuaded that the judge erred in law for the  reasons  given
    by Mr Jesurum.

22.  The appellant's evidence of her  husband's  violent  behaviour  towards
    her and the  children  was  accepted.   Her  evidence  which  was  also
    accepted was that he had not tried to contact them since 2011.  He  had
    remarried.  He had been in  the  UK  on  several  occasions  after  she
    claimed asylum and he had made no attempt to contact them.  Mr  Jesurum
    submitted that this was because when he had done  so  the  police  were
    called.  The judge considered this evidence  at  paragraph  31  finding
    that the evidence on this issue was inconsistent.  The judge noted  the
    appellant's evidence that the UK police warned him  to  stay  away  but
    found that there was no evidence of this.  The  appellant  and  RH  and
    EH(2)'s evidence suggested that he did contact her  prior  to  claiming
    asylum and the  police  had  to  be  called  in.   However  during  the
    screening interview she  only  referred  to  threatening  to  call  the
    police.  Even taking into account her vulnerable witness status, it was
    open to the judge to find that he would expect clear answers  on  these
    points.  It was open to the judge on the submission from Mr Jesurum who
    portrayed the  appellant's  husband  as  a  controlling  and  organised
    person, that he would have made more of an attempt to contact  or  harm
    the appellant in this country if he was interested in her.  It was open
    to the judge to find that at best he has made no attempt to contact her
    in December 2011 and has made no attempt to contact her since she  made
    the asylum application in  2012  despite  being  to  the  UK  on  eight
    occasions.  The judge's finding that these are not the actions of a man
    who is interested in the appellant was open to him on the evidence  and
    discloses no error of law.

23.  I find no error of law in the judge's finding at paragraph 29 that  the
    evidence from the two children suggesting that the  father  had  issued
    threats were vague.  The judge gave sound reasons at paragraph  29  for
    his finding.

24.  I find that Mr Jesurum's second argument discloses no error of  law  in
    the judge's decision.  The appellant has six children, two of whom  are
    adults.  Out of the four children who it is claimed  are  dependent  on
    her, the first of those children is RH and she is now 19 and an  adult.
    The judge found that the two adult children, meaning the oldest son and
    daughter who are her first two children, had supported their mother  in
    the past and were not likely  to  abandon  her  now.   There  was  also
    evidence that their father paid the school fees.  Mr Jesurum said  that
    at the hearing the appellant had said that the children  did  not  have
    contact with their father but had met him at family gatherings.  I find
    that this is inconsistent with what she said at  paragraph  29  of  her
    witness statement dated 4 November 2014 in response to the respondent's
    Reasons for Refusal Letter.  She said therein

         "I can confirm that when my husband has come to the United  Kingdom
         since my asylum application,  he  has  on  occasions  contacted  my
         children and has met them.  He has not come to my house nor had  he
         met me however.  ... in fact, every time my children  have  visited
         him since, I have ensured that he is reminded that  he  should  not
         contact me or attempt to assault me as I would contact  the  police
         and he could end up in prison ..."


    That was the evidence before the judge and he was entitled to  rely  on
    that evidence to find that even though it is said that the  appellant's
    husband was abusive towards his  children,  they  were  visiting  their
    father on a regular basis and that there was  an  ongoing  relationship
    with their father which suggested that their  evidence  may  have  been
    exaggerated.



25.  I find that the judge made  no  error  of  law  and  that  the  judge's
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun





























                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge       |Miss K Eshun                          |
|issuing approval:                  |                                      |
|Appellant's Name:                  |Mrs OH                                |
|Case Number:                       |AA/05159/2014                         |

Oral decision (please indicate)


I approve the attached Decision and Reasons for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |


