
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05419/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 May 2015                       |On 11 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 27 May 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. H.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri  Lanka,  born  on  10  April  1985,
         entered the  United  Kingdom  using  his  own  passport  and  entry
         clearance as a student on 16 January 2010. He claimed asylum on  17
         March 2013, having abandoned his studies in May 2010.

      2. The Respondent refused the asylum claim on  17  July  2014  and  in
         consequence she made a decision of the same date to remove  him  to
         Sri Lanka.

      3. An appeal against that removal decision was heard and dismissed  by
         First Tier Tribunal Judge Fisher in a Decision  promulgated  on  31
         October 2014. Whilst the Judge was not satisfied that the  evidence
         before him allowed him to make a finding upon whether the Appellant
         had never returned to Sri Lanka after 16 January 2010 as he claimed
         to have done, he  otherwise  rejected  as  untrue  the  Appellant's
         account.

      4. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for permission  to
         appeal. Permission was refused by Judge Ford on 1 December 2014 for
         lack of any grounds of challenge. The Appellant  then  renewed  his
         application to the Upper Tribunal,  which  was  granted  by  Deputy
         Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 20 March 2015

      5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 14 April 2014. She  argued
         that the grounds were misconceived, and there was no material error
         in the approach taken to the evidence by the Judge.

      6. Thus the matter comes before me.

         The grounds

      7. There is only one ground advanced on behalf of the  Appellant,  and
         that is the complaint  that  the  Judge  fell  into  error  in  his
         approach to the medical evidence  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant.
         There were two reports prepared in relation to the scarring to  the
         Appellant's body by Dr Lesley Lord. The first was a detailed report
         dated 5 June 2013, and the second was a  brief  addendum  dated  24
         September 2014. Her reports were made by reference to the  Istanbul
         Protocol, and they sought to offer  an  opinion  upon  whether  the
         scarring that she had  observed  was  consistent  with  the  injury
         mechanism that had been described by the Appellant.

      8. No issue arose in this appeal over whether or  not  the  Respondent
         had properly raised the issue of  whether  the  scarring  was  self
         inflicted by proxy, or "manufactured  to  order";  RR  (challenging
         evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 274.

      9. In her first report Dr Lord observed;

             "All the scars on the back of his arms and  legs  and  on  his
             back are diagnostic of burns. They have a definite outline and
             therefore have been caused by a hot solid object held  against
             the skin. The scar over the left shoulder blade  and  that  on
             the right upper  arm  could  have  been  caused  by  the  same
             implement at the same time. This also applied to the two scars
             across the upper thighs. Most of these scars are in  positions
             where he could not have  caused  them  himself.  They  are  in
             different planes so they could not have been caused by a  fall
             against something with several hot bars. These would have been
             very painful and to inflict these on him he would have had  to
             be restrained in some way."

     10. In the addendum report Dr Lord observed;

                . "The scars on his back arms and legs were  all  diagnostic
                  of healed burns.

                . The clearly  defined  shape  of  each  was  diagnostic  of
                  contact with a hot solid object and  all  the  burns  have
                  been inflicted with a similar shaped object

                . They are not in a position where he could  have  inflicted
                  them himself

                . These burns are completely healed so cannot be dated

                . I have been asked to consider the possibility of  SIBP.  I
                  have now examined over  1000  asylum  claimants  including
                  many from Sri  Lanka  and  this  is  a  familiar  picture.
                  Medically however it is not possible to determine by whose
                  hand the burns were inflicted and whether they  were  with
                  consent.

                . These injuries would have been extremely  painful  at  the
                  time and he shows no signs of flinching which  would  have
                  made the outlines less regular. This  means  that  he  was
                  immobilised in some way. He told me that he was tied to  a
                  table lying on his front. He also said that he was in  and
                  out of consciousness."

     11. The argument advanced in the grounds, and before me,  is  that  the
         medical  evidence  was  not   therefore   inconsistent   with   the
         Appellant's account of being restrained  when  tortured.  Since  Dr
         Lord had not said in terms that the Appellant's  account  of  being
         restrained but conscious was inconsistent with  the  appearance  of
         the scarring, then it was not open to the Judge to conclude that it
         was. Ms Soltani went so far as to describe this  as  "an  untenable
         tension between the medical evidence and the Determination".

    Conclusions

     12. It is plain that the Judge had  well  founded  concerns  about  the
         credibility of the Appellant's account of abandoning his studies in
         the UK, and instead deciding to return and start up in business  as
         a rickshaw taxi operator in Sri Lanka [25]. He also considered that
         the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum was  not  consistent  with
         his claim to be in genuine fear of his life at the hands of the Sri
         Lankan authorities, and as a result he applied s8 of the  2004  Act
         [29]. He also considered incredible  the  account  of  having  been
         released from detention and torture by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
         in order to pose as one who was involved in a business of which  he
         knew nothing, in order to seek to act as an informer upon people he
         did not know [30].

     13. In my judgement it is also plain, when the decision is  read  as  a
         whole, that the Judge considered the medical evidence as a part  of
         the  whole  of  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  and  not  in
         isolation.

     14. It was of course the Appellant's  case  that  on  occasion  he  was
         deliberately burned by his torturers whilst  unconscious,  although
         some of the burns were  inflicted  during  questioning  and  whilst
         conscious. It  is  difficult  to  comprehend  the  purpose  that  a
         questioner would have in acting in this way, if he was  aware  that
         his victim could neither  anticipate,  nor  feel,  the  pain  being
         inflicted. Nevertheless it was his case that some of the burns were
         inflicted whilst he were conscious.

     15. In my judgement, contrary to the argument advanced by  Ms  Soltani,
         the Judge did not seek to go behind the medical  evidence.  On  the
         contrary the medical evidence posed a serious credibility question.
         Would  a  torturer  have  been  able  to  take  the  care  to  have
         immobilised his victim so  completely,  that  despite  the  natural
         flinch reaction to a burn,  he  had  been  unable  to  flinch  when
         deliberately burned whilst conscious? It  was  Dr  Lord's  evidence
         that none of the scars upon the Appellant's body showed any sign of
         a flinch  reaction.  Thus  either  the  Appellant  was  unconscious
         throughout  which  he  denied,  or,  he  had  been  immobilised  so
         completely  that  when  conscious,  despite  the  level   of   pain
         inflicted, he was unable to flinch at all. In my judgement that was
         the issue that the Judge grasped, and that  the  challenge  to  his
         decision seeks to avoid [28].

     16. In my judgement it was well open to the Judge to find  as  he  did,
         that no matter how well restrained, given the level of pain that Dr
         Lord advises would have been occasioned by the burns  necessary  to
         cause the scars he bears, that he would have moved to  some  degree
         if conscious. Since the scars showed that he had not, it  was  open
         to the Judge to find in consequence that contrary to his  claim  he
         was unconscious throughout the occasion(s) on which such burns were
         inflicted. That pointed to  the  burns  being  inflicted  with  the
         Appellant's consent and whilst he was  unconscious.  That  was  the
         Judge's finding. He gave adequate reasons for it, and it  was  open
         to him to make on the evidence before  him.  Although  he  did  not
         refer to the authority, the decision shows in my judgement that the
         Judge sought [31] to apply the principles set out by Ouseley  J  in
         CJ (on the application of R) v Cardiff County Council  [2011]  EWHC
         23, when he restated the importance  of  the  approach  in  Tanveer
         Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318. Documentary evidence along with its
         provenance needs to be weighed in the light of all the evidence  in
         the case. Documentary evidence does not carry with it a presumption
         of authenticity, which specific  evidence  must  disprove,  failing
         which its content  must  be  accepted.  What  is  required  is  its
         appraisal  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  about   its   nature,
         provenance, timing and background evidence and in the light of  all
         the other evidence in  the  case,  especially  that  given  by  the
         claimant. The same can properly  be  said  for  a  claimant's  oral
         evidence.

     17. Accordingly there is in my judgement  no  error  disclosed  in  the
         Judge's approach to the evidence, and the challenge is revealed  to
         be in  reality  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
         conclusions.

         Conclusions

     18. In my judgement, and notwithstanding the terms in which  permission
         to appeal was granted, there is no merit in  the  grounds  advanced
         before me. It was open to the Judge to make the adverse findings of
         fact that he did, for the reasons that he  gave,  and  to  conclude
         that the Appellant was not entitled  to  international  protection.
         The complaints made about the Judge's approach reveal  no  material
         error of law that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.

DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    31 October 2014 contained no error of  law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
    Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside  and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 27 May 2015




Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated 27 May 2015

