

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05047/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 18th November 2014                        |On: 21st January 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     GN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel instructed by Kesar & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan date of  birth  1st  January
    1995. He appeals with permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  Burns)[2]  to  dismiss   his   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to vary his  leave  to  remain  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of  the  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. That decision  followed  rejection  of
    his claim to international protection.

Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Appellant made his claim on the 16th June 2009, the  day  after  he
    arrived in the UK in the back of a lorry. It is now  agreed  that  this
    was two weeks after his fourteenth birthday.

 3. His claim, in short, was that he feared  forcible  recruitment  by  the
    Taliban. His case was that his paternal uncle, M, was a Talib  and  his
    own sons had joined the Taliban many years ago. The Appellant's  father
    was studying English in Kabul and whilst he was away the Appellant fell
    under the sway of his uncle who had spent the past  two  years  showing
    him DVDs of Taliban propaganda and encouraging him to support jihad. He
    had now fled Afghanistan because his father had confronted  M  and  had
    subsequently been kidnapped.  He feared that he would now be forced  to
    work for the Taliban and/or fight on their behalf.

 4. He was interviewed and on the 9th December 2009 his claim was rejected.
    The Respondent did however grant Discretionary Leave until the 1st July
    2010; this followed an Age  Assessment  which  concluded  that  he  was
    sixteen.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on asylum grounds. In
    a  determination  dated  30th  December  2010  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies
    accepted that the Appellant had indeed been 14. She took  into  account
    new evidence about his age from an independent social worker, a  doctor
    and a teacher who had been working with the Appellant  for  some  time.
    Her own observations of the Appellant chimed with  this  evidence.  She
    noted his physical appearance and manner were of a much  younger  child
    than the 18 he would have  been  had  the  Respondent's  position  been
    accepted. She wrote:

         "13. The Appellant was anxious at the  hearing  to  provide  almost
         pat, memorised responses to Mr  Richie  without  attention  to  the
         questions  being  asked  and  displayed  an   open   almost   na�ve
         manner....I found him lacking  in  listening  skills  and  to  some
         extent, comprehension skills.  He  did  not  display  the  mien  or
         capacity to manipulate information indicative of  an  older  child,
         regardless of formal education though he was selective in recall."


    Having made those  observations  she  accepted  his  claimed  age,  and
    assessed his credibility in light of that finding. She did not  however
    believe his account of events in Afghanistan  which  she  found  to  be
    vague and contradictory. She dismissed the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds
    noting that "age and a lack of education are not bars to truthfulness".


 6. On the 18th June 2012 the Appellant applied to extend his Discretionary
    Leave and to 'upgrade' it to refugee status. These representations were
    rejected and the Respondent issued a fresh refusal letter along with  a
    refusal to vary his leave  and  a  decision  to  remove  the  Appellant
    pursuant to s47 of the Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 7. It was against that decision  that  the  Appellant  brought  a  further
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. He relied on new evidence:

      a) His solicitors had managed to obtain disclosure from Croydon Social
         Services of notes taken by the social workers who had conducted the
         first Age Assessment; these notes  were  said  to  reveal  evidence
         which might have gone  some  way  to  assuaging  Judge  Roopnarine-
         Davies' concerns about the account concerning his father.


      b) The Respondent's attempts  to  trace  the  Appellant's  family  had
         yielded no results;


      c) The Appellant now had an Article 8  'private  life'  claim,  having
         lived in the UK for a number of years;


      d) A new medical report had assessed him as having PTSD,  anxiety  and
         depression but more significantly an IQ "well below"  the  expected
         level and to have learning difficulties


    The latter was a detailed  report  by  a  Dr  Neil  Egnal,  a  Clinical
    Psychologist with over forty years experience.  Dr  Egnal  conducted  a
    battery of tests  on  the  Appellant  and  concluded  that  he  had  an
    intellectual disability which gave him a "low to borderline"  level  of
    functioning. In Dr Egnal's opinion  "this  would  explain  his  limited
    account of events, as well as his poor performance in the  Home  Office
    interviews. I would also attribute his poor performance as being due to
    his mental state. In my opinion it is most unlikely  that  he  has  the
    intellectual ability or emotional maturity to be able  to  relocate  to
    Afghanistan or to find work there or to support himself there".


 8. The matter came before Judge Burns who  noted  the  contents  of  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies'  "careful  and  sympathetic   determination".     He
    properly directed himself to the authority of Devaseelan  [2002]  UKAIT
    00702 and took the earlier determination as his starting point.  Of  Dr
    Egnal's evidence the determination says the following:

         "20.    .... In my view, Dr Egnal's report, had it been before  the
         First-tier Judge, would  simply  have  confirmed  the  judge's  own
         careful  and  sympathetic  assessment   of   the   Appellant,   his
         difficulties, his potential and his limitations. There  was  in  my
         view nothing in the report that in substance went beyond  what  the
         judge  had  already  determined.  The  technical  language  of  the
         assessment and its clinical description of course  would  not  have
         been her words, but the gist or substance of  the  matter  remained
         unaffected."


 9. On that basis, Judge Burns dismissed the appeal by placing reliance  on
    the findings of Judge Roopnarine-Davies.

10. The  grounds  of  appeal  are  that  this  approach  was  unlawful  for
    irrationality. It is submitted that there  was  a  material  difference
    between the Tribunal giving the Appellant some leeway  because  of  his
    youth and lack of  education  and  the  attention  merited  by  medical
    evidence that he has an intellectual impairment affecting  his  ability
    to give a coherent and detailed account.

11. The Respondent submits that there was nothing wrong in the reasoning at
    paragraph 20 of the determination. The Respondent adopts  Judge  Burns'
    characterisation  of  the   first   determination   as   "careful   and
    sympathetic" and submits that the  Tribunal  could  not  properly  have
    given the Appellant any greater  benefit  of  the  doubt  than  he  had
    already been given.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set
    aside.

13. The unchallenged  findings  of  Dr  Egnal  were  not  simply  that  the
    Appellant was young and lacked education. His clear findings  are  that
    the Appellant has an intellectual disability, the  diagnostic  criteria
    for  which  include  "deficits  in  intellectual  functions   such   as
    reasoning, problem solving,  planning,  abstract  thinking,  judgement,
    academic learning, and learning from experience".   In Dr Egnal's  view
    this had two consequences pertinent to the resolution  of  his  status.
    Firstly the disability, combined with his PTSD, anxiety and  depression
    meant that his ability to give a clear account was  impaired.  Secondly
    Dr Egnal considered that it would operate against him should he try and
    establish himself in Afghanistan.   These were both matters relied upon
    as Devaseelan new evidence.

14. Neither of those points are adequately addressed in the  determination.
    As to the first I agree that there is  a  material  difference  between
    approaching a young Appellant with sympathy and  care  and  approaching
    him knowing that he has learning difficulties which are obstructing his
    ability to give evidence. It is irrational to cast the  expert  opinion
    of a Consultant Clinical Psychologist  as  having  the  same  "gist  or
    substance" as a Judge's observation that this  witness  was  young  and
    uneducated.   As to the second, this does not enter into  the  analysis
    at all. The fact that the Appellant has PTSD, depression,  anxiety  and
    diagnosable learning disabilities was highly pertinent not only to  the
    assessment of future risk, but to his ability  to  internally  relocate
    within Afghanistan and enjoy his Article 8(1)  rights.  The  Tribunal's
    finding  at  paragraph  66  that  the  Appellant  is  a   "resourceful,
    determined and persistent person" does not sit easily with the  results
    of any of the tests undertaken by Dr Egnal.

15. I find that the error identified in the grounds  infects  the  findings
    overall and the decision is set aside in its entirety.



The Re-Made Decision

16. Before me Ms Smith agreed that there would be little point  in  calling
    the Appellant to give oral evidence again. He  has  already  given  his
    account on numerous occasions - to his solicitor, to the Respondent, to
    social services, to Judge Roopnarine-Davies and to Judge Burns.  I  was
    therefore invited to re-make the decision on the evidence before me.  I
    heard helpful submissions from Ms Smith and Ms Kenny  and  reserved  my
    decision.

17. I deal first with asylum. I remind myself that the burden of proof lies
    on the Appellant  at  all  times  and  that  he  must  show  it  to  be
    "reasonably likely" that he faces a risk of persecution/serious harm in
    Afghanistan. This formulation reflects  the  lower  standard  of  proof
    applicable in asylum cases  and  is  the  test  I  must  apply  to  his
    historical account as well as in my assessment of future risk.   It  is
    submitted on the Appellant's behalf that he faces a real risk of forced
    recruitment by the Taliban and/or punishment for refusal to comply with
    their demands.   My starting  point  must  be  the  decision  of  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies and in particular her negative  credibility  findings
    about the Appellant's reasons for leaving Afghanistan.  I am  asked  to
    depart from those findings on the basis of the  new  evidence,  and  in
    particular the report of Dr Egnal. That report could  potentially  shed
    new light on this case in two ways. It is relevant to the assessment of
    the historical facts, but even if those facts remain unproven,  it  may
    be relevant to the level of risk faced by the Appellant in  Afghanistan
    today.

18. I accept that Dr Egnal is qualified to  make  the  assessment  that  he
    does. I accept that he is an impartial and objective witness  and  that
    his diagnosis of  the  Appellant's  difficulties  has  been  made  with
    reference to the appropriate diagnostic criteria.

19. Judge Roopnarine-Davies found that neither the  Appellant's  young  age
    nor his lack of education were bars to telling the truth.   Dr  Egnal's
    evidence goes some way beyond that.  It  is  his  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant's learning disabilities result in "deficits  in  intellectual
    functions  such  as  reasoning,  problem  solving,  planning,  abstract
    thinking, judgement, academic learning, and learning from  experience":
    he has an extremely low IQ.  Dr  Egnal  believes  that  these  factors,
    taken with his mental health  issues  -  PTSD,  anxiety,  depression  -
    would have a significant impact on his ability to give a clear account:

         "His difficulty  in  remembering  important  dates  and  facts  and
         recounting of events would, in my opinion, most likely  be  due  to
         his low intellect as well as his emotional state...


         According to my assessment of him and his responses  to  the  tests
         and interview, his symptoms would appear to be consistent with  his
         account of his experiences which in my  opinion  have  led  to  his
         current psychological state".


20. It is now accepted that when the Appellant left Afghanistan he  was  13
    years old. I find, in light of Dr  Egnal's  evidence,  that  he  was  a
    thirteen year old with learning difficulties.  I am satisfied that this
    is evidence  which  warrants  departure  from  the  findings  of  Judge
    Roopnarine-Davies.  Had the Tribunal been aware of the Appellant's  low
    intellectual functioning it is in my view unlikely that it  would  have
    approached his evidence in the way that it did.

21. It is trite asylum law  that  any  asylum  claim  should  be  evaluated
    against the  'objective'  country  background  material,  but  that  is
    particularly so where the  claimant  is  impeded,  by  virtue  of  age,
    disability or other vulnerability, from articulating his case. In  fact
    in such cases the decision-maker must look to a variety of  sources  of
    information. See for instance the UNHCR Handbook:
         206. It has been seen that in determining refugee status the
         subjective element of fear and the objective element of its well-
         foundedness need to be established.
         207. It frequently happens that an examiner is confronted with an
         applicant having mental or emotional disturbances that impede a
         normal examination of his case. A mentally disturbed person may,
         however, be a refugee, and while his claim cannot therefore be
         disregarded, it will call for different techniques of examination.
         208. The examiner should, in such cases, whenever possible, obtain
         expert medical advice. The medical report should provide
         information on the nature and degree of mental illness and should
         assess the applicant's ability to fulfil the requirements normally
         expected of an applicant in presenting his case (see paragraph 205
         (a) above). The conclusions of the medical report will determine
         the examiner's further approach.
         209. This approach has to vary according to the degree of the
         applicant's affliction and no rigid rules can be laid down. The
         nature and degree of the applicant's "fear" must also be taken into
         consideration, since some degree of mental disturbance is
         frequently found in persons who have been exposed to severe
         persecution. Where there are indications that the fear expressed by
         the applicant may not be based on actual experience or may be an
         exaggerated fear, it may be necessary, in arriving at a decision,
         to lay greater emphasis on the objective circumstances, rather than
         on the statements made by the applicant.
         210. It will, in any event, be necessary to lighten the burden of
         proof normally incumbent upon the applicant, and information that
         cannot easily be obtained from the applicant may have to be sought
         elsewhere, e.g. from friends, relatives and other persons closely
         acquainted with the applicant, or from his guardian, if one has
         been appointed. It may also be necessary to draw certain
         conclusions from the surrounding circumstances. If, for instance,
         the applicant belongs to and is in the company of a group of
         refugees, there is a presumption that he shares their fate and
         qualifies in the same manner as they do.
         211. In examining his application, therefore, it may not be
         possible to attach the same importance as is normally attached to
         the subjective element of "fear", which may be less reliable, and
         it may be necessary to place greater emphasis on the objective
         situation.
         212. in view of the above considerations, investigation into the
         refugee status of a mentally disturbed person will, as a rule, have
         to be more searching than in a "normal" case and will call for a
         close examination of the applicant's past history and background,
         using whatever outside sources of information may be available.
22. I have no reliable[3] information from other  sources  such  as  family
    members, but I do have a clear, that is to  say  fairly  uncontentious,
    picture of the objective situation in Afghanistan.  In  July  2012  the
    European Asylum Support Office reproduced research[4]  which  indicated
    that  instances  of  forced  recruitment  by  the   Taliban   are   now
    "exceptional".  This is set out at paragraph 3.10.15  of  the  'Country
    Information and Guidance' (CIG) note of August 2014[5].  That research,
    or rather its conclusion, has been subject to some  criticism,  notably
    from UNHCR and Amnesty International[6], who note that  the  definition
    of the term 'forced recruitment' is there too narrowly drawn.   Amnesty
    argue that the apparent "willingness" of Afghans to  join  the  Taliban
    has to be assessed in context. It is not only those at gunpoint who are
    "pressured".   The EASO conclusion cited in  the  CIG  illustrates  the
    point:  "To gain support and recruit fighters, they relied on  economic
    needs, fear and  coercion,  pride  and  honour,  tribe  and  tradition,
    religious persuasion,  etc".  Both  UNHCR  and  Amnesty  advocate  that
    'forced recruitment' must have a wide definition to include the  varied
    situations that unwilling recruits have found themselves in:
         The report defines "forced recruitment" narrowly, limiting its
         scope of application to situations where individuals are forced to
         join the Taliban under the use or threat of immediate violence. The
         report does not include in this definition Taliban recruitment
         mechanisms based on broader coercive strategies, including fear,
         intimidation and the use of tribal mechanisms to pressurize
         individuals into joining the Taliban[7].
    In respect of these broader coercive strategies the background material
    consistently indicates that these are being widely  used  in  areas  of
    strong Taliban presence.  This includes familial, social and  religious
    pressure on children to become "martyrs". See  for  instance  Amnesty's
    view:
         ...it has been acknowledged by human rights and other non-
         governmental organisations, as well as United Nations bodies, that
         children - mainly male children, although there have been recently
         reports of girls - are targeted for recruitment as combatants,
         suicide bombers, porters of munitions and informants by armed
         groups such as the Taleban.
23. The claim consistently advanced by the Appellant  in  his  SEF,  asylum
    interview, witness statements and live evidence  is  that  he  is  from
    Baghlan province in central Afghanistan.  This does not appear to be in
    dispute.  Baghlan lies in north of Kabul, in  the  north  east  of  the
    country. The country background material indicates that this is an area
    where the local population have been under  Taliban  control  for  some
    time[8].  Amnesty  International  reference  2012  UNAMA  research   in
    reporting that local houses have been taken over at night by insurgents
    who have ordered them to leave their doors open so that they  can  gain
    entry.  Civilians  from  Baghlan,  interviewed  in  IDP  camps   within
    Afghanistan,  reported  fleeing  their  homes  after  receiving  "night
    letters" to that effect.  Children and the vulnerable  continue  to  be
    targeted in the area, not just by insurgents but  by  traffickers.  See
    for instance the United States Department of State 2014 report:
         According to the government and the UN, insurgent groups use
         children as young as nine years old as suicide bombers. Boys from
         Badakhsan, Takhar, Baghlan, Kunduz, and Balkh provinces in the
         north region of Afghanistan, as well as those travelling
         unaccompanied, were reportedly at the highest risk of trafficking.
         Exploiters often used drugs to control their victims. Sometimes
         entire Afghan families, including children, are trapped in debt
         bondage in the brick- making industry in eastern Afghanistan.
         Traffickers recruit Afghan villagers to Afghan cities and then
         sometimes subject them to forced labor or forced prostitution after
         their arrival.
24. This is the background against which this claim must be  assessed.  The
    information indicates that a) the Taliban  are  known  to  use  various
    means to pressurise local people into joining  or  otherwise  assisting
    them b) the Appellant's home area  is  specifically  mentioned  in  the
    reports as being a place where the Taliban - and traffickers -  recruit
    young boys, and the vulnerable, for  debt  bondage,  drug  trafficking,
    sexual exploitation or suicide bombing. I draw three  conclusions  from
    this evidence. First of all that the Appellant's historical claims  are
    entirely plausible, second that the situation has not improved at  all,
    and thirdly that the Appellant, as a young man with significant  mental
    health  issues  and  learning  disabilities,  would   be   particularly
    vulnerable to being 'used' in the manner outlined in these reports.

25. I have started  with  the  findings  of  Judge  Roopnarine-Davies.  Her
    findings, in summary, were that the Appellant had learned a  story  and
    was sticking to it.  Given his young age and  intellectual  impairment,
    this may well be true.   That  is  not  however  determinative  of  his
    appeal.  The fact that his mother/parents were prepared  to  put  their
    particularly vulnerable child in a lorry at the age of  thirteen  years
    old would suggest that they were fearful about  his  future  should  he
    remain in the village. The objective material  indicates  that  such  a
    subjective fear would have been  well-founded.  Whether  the  actor  of
    persecution was his uncle, or any other Talib, is  in  my  view  rather
    immaterial. The focus of my enquiry is whether this 19 year  old  would
    face a risk in Afghanistan today.

26. The Appellant is from  Baghlan.  The  objective  material  supports  Ms
    Smith's submission that this is an area under heavy Taliban  influence,
    if not control.  It further supports her submission  that  the  Taliban
    will use various means to coerce young men into joining their cause.  I
    find as fact that a young man with learning difficulties is  likely  to
    be more at risk than the average 19 year old. He is a 19 year  old  who
    has been out of Afghanistan for some 6  years.  He  has  in  that  time
    missed a crucial developmental stage in growing up in Afghanistan  -  a
    period in which other young men would learn how best to keep themselves
    safe and avoid trouble.  There is no evidence that either the Appellant
    or the Respondent have managed to  locate  his  family  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that they could, even  if  he  could  find  them,  offer  him
    protection from the Taliban or other actors  of  persecution  in  these
    circumstances. He is extremely vulnerable and I find that  there  is  a
    real risk that he  will  be  subject  to  forcible  recruitment  and/or
    trafficking.

27. The Respondent submits that should there be a risk  in  Baghlan,  there
    will be no such risk in Kabul.   The  objective  information  indicates
    that whilst there is no  overt  Taliban  presence  in  the  city  there
    certainly are other dangers. I remind myself of Dr Egnal's  view:   "In
    my opinion it is most unlikely that he has the intellectual ability  or
    emotional maturity to be able to relocate to  Afghanistan  or  to  find
    work there or to support himself there".   He is  still  a  very  young
    man,  and  in  this  respect  the  dicta  of  Maurice  Kay  LJ  in   KA
    (Afghanistan) and Ors v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 is pertinent:

         "18...At this point, it is appropriate to refer to what I call "the
         eighteenth birthday point". Although the duty to endeavour to trace
         does not endure beyond the date when an applicant reaches that age,
         it cannot be the case that the assessment  of  risk  on  return  is
         subject to such a bright line rule. Given that the kinds of risk in
         issue include forced recruitment  or  the  sexual  exploitation  of
         vulnerable young males, persecution is not respectful of  birthdays
         - apparent or assumed age  is  more  important  than  chronological
         age."


28. There is no suggestion that the Appellant  has  a  support  network  in
    Kabul who could protect him  and  offer  him  guidance.  He  lacks  the
    capacity to find work or support himself and in those circumstances  he
    is at real risk of being preyed upon by criminal gangs, traffickers  or
    terrorists. Even if he could manage to avoid such dangers  I  find  the
    overwhelming likelihood would be that the Appellant would end up on the
    streets. I find that this would be unduly  harsh.  He  is  not  in  the
    position to avail himself of a reasonable internal flight alternative.

29. I find that the Appellant is a refugee.  Given my findings  I  am  also
    satisfied that the Appellant's removal would put the UK  in  breach  of
    our obligations under the ECHR.



Decisions

30. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

31. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds."




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           19th January 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 1st October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Landes
[2] Determination prepared on the 25th August 2014
[3] Evidence from the Appellant's friend Tofan about the current
whereabouts of the Appellant's family was found to be unreliable by Judge
Burns; the grounds contain no challenge to those findings.
[4] EASO "Taliban Strategies- Recruitment" - citing for instance the Danish
Immigration Service Fact Finding Report of May 2012.
[5] Afghanistan: Security
[6] EASO COI Report "Afghanistan: Taliban Strategies - Recruitment", July
2012
[7] UNHCR cited at paragraph 3.10.17 of the Operational Guidance Note v11
reissued September 2014
[8] The material in the bundles indicates that Baghlan continues to be a
centre of the insurgency and government attack: see for instance Radio Free
Europe dated 31st May 2014 at page 498 Appellant's bundle

