
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/05809/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On January 18, 2016                  |On February 11, 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                MR OKKES GUL
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mrs Mighal (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr Stanton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey. The appellant came to the  United
    Kingdom on January 22, 2014 and he claimed asylum on January 29,  2014.
    The respondent refused his application on Mat 20, 2015 under  paragraph
    336 HC 395 and took a decision to  remove  him  by  way  of  directions
    pursuant to Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act
    1986.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on April 1,  2014,  under  section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Carroll  on
    September 10, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on October 1, 2015 the
    Judge refused his application for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    and found he was not in need of protection under ECHR legislation.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on October 23, 2015 submitting:

          a. The Judge placed far too much weight on the absence of medical
             evidence bearing in mind this was an asylum application.

          b. The Judge failed to deal with the risks associated with  being
             a draft evader.

          c. The Judge failed to demonstrate  any  regard  to  the  country
             guidance decision  of  IK  (Returnees-Records-IFA)  Turkey  CG
             [2004] UKAIT 00312.

 5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal White gave  permission  to  appeal  on
    basis the Judge's approach to his Kurdish ethnicity and the fact he was
    a draft evader. When considered against the risk  factors  affirmed  in
    IK. He found it arguable the Judge may have erred.

 6. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mrs Mighal relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the Judge  had
    placed far too  much  weight  on  the  absence  of  medical  and  court
    documents in circumstances where this was an asylum appeal.  The  Judge
    also failed to demonstrate any engagement  with  the  country  guidance
    decision of  IK  and  should  have  considered  the  risks  facing  the
    appellant based on his own acceptance the appellant was a Kurdish draft
    evader who followed the Alevi religion and had a low political profile.
    The Judge erred in law.

 8. Mr Stanton adopted the Rule 24 response dated  November  19,  2015.  He
    submitted the absence of documents was a factor the  Judge  could  have
    regard to if those documents could have been readily available  to  the
    appellant. In any event the Judge found the  appellant  had  been  both
    inconsistent and evasive. Whilst the Judge had not mentioned  the  case
    of IK he submitted the Judge demonstrated engagement with the  relevant
    factors and there was no material error.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

 9. The respondent had previously accepted the  appellant  was  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity and had previously been involved in  low-level  activity  but
    she rejected his claim that he had been detained on three occasions  or
    ill-treated.

10. In considering whether the appellant was at  risk  of  persecution  the
    Judge had to have regard  to  whether  his  account  of  detention  was
    credible because any assessment would have to take this  into  account.
    At paragraph [9] of the decision the Judge set out his  findings  about
    the appellant's claims and at paragraph [10] he concluded  his  account
    lacked credibility and he was not at risk.

11. Two issues arise out of this approach. Firstly, Mrs Mighal submits that
    the Judge placed too much weight on the failure  by  the  appellant  to
    produce documents and secondly, the Judge  failed  to  demonstrate  any
    engagement with the country guidance of IK.

12. The judge concluded the appellant's claim lacked credibility because:

          a. Despite having twenty or so relatives in  the  United  Kingdom
             none attended the hearing to provide support for his claim.

          b. He failed to mention in his screening interview  that  he  had
             been fingerprinted for taking part in a demonstration  and  in
             fact  claimed  he  had  been  fingerprinted  for  distributing
             leaflets.

          c. Failure to produce any medical records from Turkey or  produce
             a medical report prepared in the United Kingdom confirming his
             injuries.

          d. Failure to produce the search warrant.

          e. Failure to produce draft papers that he stated his father  had
             at home.

          f.  His  account  of   his   second   detention   was   full   of
             inconsistencies.

          g. Even if he had been arrested, which was not accepted,  he  was
             released on each occasion without charge.

          h. Failed to apply for asylum at the earliest opportunity.

13. Mrs Mighal's submission was that the Judge's findings were based mainly
    on his failure to produce documents but this clearly is not  the  case.
    In addition to making  adverse  findings  on  his  failure  to  produce
    documents the Judge concluded that he had given  inconsistent  evidence
    and failed to apply for asylum at the earliest opportunity.

14. In ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119 the Tribunal
    said that it  was  a  misdirection  to  imply  that  corroboration  was
    necessary for a positive credibility finding.  However, the  fact  that
    corroboration was not required did not mean  that  an  Adjudicator  was
    required to leave out of account the absence of  documentary  evidence,
    which could reasonably be expected: the  Adjudicator  was  entitled  to
    comment that it would not have been difficult to provide  the  relevant
    documents in this case.   In particular, the Adjudicator  was  entitled
    to comment that it would not have been difficult for the  Appellant  to
    provide a death certificate concerning his brother or some evidence  to
    support his contention that he had received hospital  treatment.  These
    were  issues  of  fact  for  the  Adjudicator   to   assess.   In   the
    circumstances, the Tribunal declined to  intervene  and  said  that  an
    appeal must be determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the
    weight to be attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure  to
    produce other evidence in support.

15. In Gedow, Abdulkadir and Mohammed v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  1342  the  Judge
    noted that the Somali appellant claimed that an uncle  had  funded  his
    journey and the Judge referred to "the  absence  of  any  corroborative
    evidence by letter or any other means from his  paternal  uncle".   The
    Court of Appeal said the Judge was merely drawing a conclusion from the
    absence of corroboration; and he was entitled to do so so  long  as  he
    bore in mind the difficulties faced  by  asylum  seekers  in  producing
    corroborative evidence.

16. The Judge made adverse findings about the  lack  of  medical  documents
    because the appellant indicated in his interview that he had  documents
    in Turkey and although he later qualified this evidence the Judge found
    his evidence was inconsistent-something he  was  entitled  to  do.  The
    Judge also noted that a search warrant was in existence along with  his
    draft papers and the Judge found his failure to produce  any  of  these
    was a factor he could take into account. Applying the above case law  I
    am satisfied he did not err by this approach.

17. The first challenge to this decision has no merit and I find amounts to
    nothing more than a mere disagreement with the Judge's findings.

18. The second and third grounds are linked because being a draft evader is
    a factor the country guidance decision makes clear should be taken into
    account. Having made his adverse findings the  Judge  was  then  tasked
    with considering whether he would be at risk based on the  approach  of
    IK.

19. The decision of IK does not appear to have  been  referred  to  in  the
    First-tier but nevertheless the Judge  is  expected  to  apply  country
    guidance cases. A failure to mention a case does not mean there  is  an
    error in law as long as the  Judge  demonstrates  engagement  with  the
    underlying principles and guidance of the case.

20. In paragraph [10] the Judge wrote-

         "For all of the reasons given above and for the  reasons  given  by
         the respondent I do not find the appellant to be credible s to  his
         claim of having fled Turkey in order to avoid  the  authorities  on
         the basis of his support for the Kurdish  cause  or  the  basis  he
         evaded military service. "

21. The Judge  clearly  had  regard  to  two  of  the  main  limbs  of  the
    appellant's claim.

22. He had already rejected as lacking credibility his  claim  about  being
    detained or alternatively found that even if he had  been  detained  he
    had been released without charge. The Tribunal in IK  made  clear  that
    "arrests" as comprised in the GBTS require some court intervention, and
    must be distinguished from "detentions" by the security forces followed
    by release without charge.

23. The Tribunal made clear that the list  of  factors  to  be  taken  into
    account was not a checklist and should not be  treated  as  such.  Each
    case has to be considered on its own merits and although the Judge does
    not refer to the aforementioned case Mrs Mighal's submission  that  the
    Judge did not consider the  risk  to  him  is  not  borne  out  by  the
    decision. Having those identifying tags does not  mean  this  appellant
    must succeed. Each case must be assessed on its own merits and this  is
    what the Judge did.

24. Whist the decision could have been more detailed and  ideally  referred
    to relevant case law I am not satisfied that the absence of a reference
    to the country guidance decision amounts, in this appeal, to  an  error
    in law.

25. I therefore find there is no error in law.

    DECISION

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  uphold  the  First-tier
    decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
