
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05416/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Hill, Birmingham   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th February 2016                         |On 3rd May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              MR OSCAR OKUTTWA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge V A Osborne, promulgated  on  11th  September  2014  following  a
    hearing at Bennett House in Stoke-on-Trent on 2nd September  2014.   In
    the determination, the judge dismissed the appeal of Mr Oscar  Okuttwa,
    who subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Grant of Permission

 2. On 19th January 2015 permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in this matter, with the  observation  made  by  the  Tribunal
    that,

         "Having read the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
         light of the original application, I find that I  am  in  agreement
         with First-tier Tribunal Judge Bartlett; this application fails  to
         identify any properly arguable error or mistake of law on the  part
         of the judge.  Judges are required to give considerable  weight  to
         the interests of the wider general public  in  the  maintenance  of
         immigration control".

 3. On 10th March 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Secretary  of
    State to the effect that the notice of decision granting the  Appellant
    permission for leave to appeal had been sent out in error.  This  being
    so, the Respondent will submit that the oral hearing is not required to
    correct this administrative error.

Submissions

 4. At the  hearing  before  me  on  12th  February  2016,  the  Appellant,
    appearing in person, submitted that the Grounds of Appeal were  to  the
    effect that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  given  insufficient
    consideration in paragraph 49 of the determination to the effect of the
    new Section 117B of the NIAA 2002, specifically Section 117B(6),  where
    the public interest is defined in relation to the removal of  a  person
    with a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying
    child.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge had found it reasonable in  terms
    of paragraph  117B(6)  for  the  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    accompanied by his parents.  The Appellant maintained that this was  an
    arguable error of law.

 5. Second, the Appellant submitted that his situation had now changed from
    the time that the Grounds of Appeal had been submitted.  He  said  that
    his wife had been pregnant the last time.  However, she has  now  given
    birth to their child.  The wife has leave to remain and  she  has  been
    given five years of stay.  The Appellant  said  that  he  himself  also
    applied for leave to remain but his application was rejected  summarily
    with no reasons given, and no right of appeal given.

 6. For his part, Mr Mills submitted that the Rule 24 reply makes it  clear
    that the grant of permission is in error.  What  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chalkley intended to do was to refuse permission.  This is quite  clear
    if one looks at the body of his reasons which are plainly  intended  to
    show that the decision was simply  unchallengeable.   However,  at  the
    bottom it is said that permission is granted.  This is in error.

 7. Second, if the Appellant's application for leave to remain has now been
    rejected, it is only because he already has an extant right of  appeal,
    which appeal has today been heard, and it is only when  all  rights  of
    appeal have been exhausted, that the Home Office will entertain  a  new
    application for permission to  remain.   It  is  therefore  up  to  the
    Appellant to make his application again, on the basis that his wife has
    leave to remain, and their child has now been born, and that they exist
    as a family unit within this country and that he has an  Article  8  to
    remain here.

Decision

 8. This is a case where on 2nd October  2014,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bartlett refused permission to appeal on the basis that, the  challenge
    in the Grounds of Appeal being on the basis that Section 117B had  been
    wrongly applied, was doomed to failure  because  the  judge  "expresses
    adequate reasons for reaching  the  conclusion  made  in  reference  to
    Section 117B(6) and the other public interest considerations  specified
    in Section 117B" (see paragraph 3).

 9. When the Appellant exercised his right to seek permission in the  Upper
    Tribunal, UTJ Chalkley, expressly referred to the  decision  below  and
    stated  that,  "I  am  in  agreement  with  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bartlett; this application fails  to  identify  any  properly  arguable
    error or mistake of law on the part of the judge".

10. For some bizarre reason the entry at the bottom of  the  page  then  is
    that "permission to appeal is granted".  It is plain that  this  was  a
    mistake.   The  Upper   Tribunal   intended   to   refuse   permission.
    Furthermore, nothing that the Appellant  has  said  today  in  any  way
    persuades me otherwise.

11. There has been  a  change  of  circumstance  in  his  life  and  it  is
    appropriate for him to make  an  application  on  the  basis  of  these
    changed circumstances.

12. However, as far as this particular application is concerned  today,  it
    cannot proceed any further.  No permission to appeal has been granted.

13. The appeal is dismissed.

14. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 29th April 2016

