
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05335/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 15 February 2016                   |On 8 April 2016                       |
|Prepared 15 February 2016             |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     AP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Mannan, Counsel, instructed by Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of India, of Tamil ethnicity, date  of  birth
    [ ] 1983, appealed against the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant with reference to Section 10 of the  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999, an asylum/human rights based claim having been refused on  10
    March 2015.

2.   The  basis of the Appellant's claim was summarised in the  Respondent's
    Reasons for Refusal Letter of 20 January 2015.

3.   The matter by way of an appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ford [the judge] who, on 13 October 2015, promulgated a decision [D] in
    which the asylum claim was refused, a claim with reference to  Articles
    3 and 8 of the ECHR were refused and  a  claim  based  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds was refused.

4.   Permission was sought to appeal that  decision  which  was  refused  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N J Bennett on  15  November  2015  and  more
    extensive grounds were submitted in the renewed application  which  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 9 December 2015.

5.   Mr Mannan effectively summarised favourable  findings  that  the  judge
    had made in relation to ill-treatment of the Appellant in detentions in
    2008, 2009 and 2013 involving the state  by  the  police  force  and/or
    military personnel.  The judge accepted that the ill-treatment amounted
    to inhuman and degrading treatment and was a  violation  of  Article  3
    ECHR rights. The judge  also  accepted  the  evidence  of  two  medical
    reports, one identifying the cause of the scarring  being  attributable
    to the ill-treatment the Appellant  had  sustained  and  the  other  in
    relation to the Appellant's mental health affected by the ill-treatment
    that he had received in India.

6.   Those matters were reflected upon by the judge, who nevertheless  seems
    to have misunderstood what might have constituted a Refugee  Convention
    reason and  concluded notwithstanding those findings that the Appellant
    did not face risk on return, said [D48]:-

         "I am not satisfied, (barely the correct test be  applied  to  such
         evidence) that the Indian authorities are  interested  in  charging
         the Appellant with any offences.  That is  because  they  have  had
         ample opportunity to charge him and seem, even on  the  Appellant's
         own account, to be more interested in getting information from  him
         as to the LTTE activities in Tamil Nadu  state  and  in  extracting
         money from his family in order  to  secure  his  release.   If  the
         authorities  including  the  police  and/or  CID   were   genuinely
         interested in charging him then they would have charged him in 2013
         when the Appellant says he  acknowledged  that  he  was  personally
         involved in transporting explosives, medication  and  fuel  to  the
         LTTE in Sri Lanka."

7.   The judge also went on to say at [D49]:

         "Not only have I not seen any documents suggesting the  authorities
         are interested in  charging the appellant with any  offence  if  he
         returns  to  India,  but  I  have  seen  no  documentary   evidence
         confirming that he is of any official interest to  the  authorities
         there."

8.   It was difficult to see what such documentary evidence might have  been
    obtained or produced to show the Appellant of such  official  interest,
    bearing in mind the judge's acceptance of, even though not  subject  to
    charges, repeated occasions the Appellant had been  detained  and  ill-
    treated.

9.   The judge seems to have limited the risk  into  one  of  being  charged
    rather than the risk of the  Appellant  being  the  object  of  adverse
    interest to  secure  information  concerning  the  LTTE  and  terrorist
    activities insofar as they might touch upon the Indian authorities at a
    local level.  It also seemed to me to be a  manifest  mistake  to  have
    attributed the risks simply on a local basis, bearing in mind the wider
    interests that the Indian authorities have  in maintaining security and
    resisting terrorist acts both in India and without.

10.  I find the judge's reasoning confused as to  first,  his  understanding
    of the Refugee Convention claim  and  the  risks  associated  with  it.
    Secondly, in relation to the  issue  of  internal  relocation  and  its
    reasonableness and effectiveness when the state is the principal  agent
    responsible for the ill-treatment of the Appellant.   Thirdly,  in  the
    assessment of the sufficiency of protection elsewhere from either local
    or national  authorities.   As  such  the  assessment  of  the  Refugee
    Convention  claim  was  simply  mistaken  as  expressed  and  currently
    reasoned.  In the circumstances I have found that the Original Tribunal
    decision cannot stand. The following decision must be substituted, that
    the matter is returned to be dealt with in the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions
(1)  Transferred to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House
(2)  Not to be listed before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford  or  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N. Bennett
(3)  Time estimate: 2 hours
(4)  Tamil interpreter required
(5)  Any further documents relied upon in support of the issue  of  risk  on
    return to be served not later than 10 working days before  the  further
    hearing of this matter.

Anonymity was ordered by the judge and that should be continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 1 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
