
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05801/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st April 2015                        |On 26th May 2015                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                              Mr amadou jallow
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Amadou Jallow, a citizen of the Gambia  born  10th
    February 1989.  He appeals against the decision of the Respondent  made
    on 28th July 2014 to refuse to grant asylum and to remove him from  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant appealed against that decision  and  his
    appeal was heard on 11th September 2014 by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Birrell who dismissed it.  Permission to appeal was granted and  on  on
    5th January 2015 having heard submissions I  found  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the  determination of Judge Birrell   in  that
    she had applied the  wrong  version  of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Having set her  decision  aside  I  now  proceed  to
    remake the decision.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK in  October  2013  with  a  visit  visa
    having made a number of previous visits funded by an English couple, Mr
    and Mrs Prendergast, who at that time supported him  and  his  sisters.
    He began to suffer from headaches and when he had an MRI  scan  it  was
    discovered that he had a brain tumour.  This was removed by surgery  at
    Preston Royal Infirmary and he then had a course of radiotherapy  which
    finished in March 2014.  He has other health problems  including  dwarf
    deficiency which gives him the appearance of a child of around 10 to 12
    years of age.  Judge Birrell accepted that the removal  of  the  tumour
    had been deemed a success but that  it  had  left  the  Appellant  with
    significant health problems because  it  had  caused  pituitary  damage
    which gives rise to  a  lifetime  requirement  for  three  medications,
    namely Hydrocortisone, Desmopressin and Levothyroxine.  She had medical
    evidence from an oncologist at the Christie  Hospital  which  confirmed
    that the Hydrocortisone must be taken three times  a  day  and  if  the
    Appellant stopped taking it he would rapidly become very unwell.  If he
    developed an infection or other  illness  he  would,  according  to  Dr
    Higham, "certainly die".  Dr Higham said that it  is  absolutely  vital
    that the Appellant takes the medication every day for the rest  of  his
    life.  Desmopressin  has to be taken three times  a  day  in  order  to
    concentrate the Appellant's urine and failure to take that would result
    in him  rapidly  losing  significant  amounts  of  fluid  resulting  in
    dehydration and to a high sodium level from which he could subsequently
    die.  Dr Higham said that this could happen very quickly  -  within  24
    hours.   The  Levothyroxine  is  to  replace  the  thyroxine  that  the
    Appellant does not produce  as  a  result  of  the  deficiency  in  his
    pituitary gland.  He could also die from this but it would  not  be  as
    rapid as any death from the need for  Hydrocortisone  or  Desmopressin.
    The medical report states that the Appellant requires other  medication
    to improve the quality of  life  such  as  testosterone  and  a  growth
    hormone.  This medication is not  vital  to  his  survival  but  if  he
    remained in the UK he would have access to it.

 3. Judge Birrell also made findings on the availability of healthcare  for
    the Appellant in the Gambia, findings which I preserved.  She cited and
    relied upon the COIS Report on the  Gambia  along  with  more  specific
    information provided by  the  Appellant's  representatives.   The  COIS
    Report  essentially said that there is a periodic shortage of medicines
    and other medical  supplies  and  the  long  process  involved  in  the
    procurement  of  pharmaceutical  supplies  requires  improvement.   The
    evidence from the representatives was as follows:

       . There are no endocrinologists and no oncologists in the Gambia.

       . Chemotherapy and radiotherapy are not routinely available.

       . MRI scans are not available.

       . Most clinics would not have the drugs  the  Appellant  requires  as
         they struggle to maintain a reliable supply of even basic essential
         drugs.  Some private clinics may be able to  obtain  them  but  the
         cost would be "significant" and "likely to be beyond the  means  of
         most Gambians".

       . The main supplier for this NGO could not supply the drugs.

       . The Medical Research Council might be able to help.

 4. The Appellant's representatives had  also  provided  a  letter  from  a
    doctor at a teaching hospital in the  Gambia  who  confirmed  that  the
    medicines required by the Appellant for survival rather  than  improved
    quality of life i.e. Desmopressin and Levothyroxine, were  not  readily
    available and would be too expensive for an average Gambian. They would
    have to be ordered from abroad on a regular basis.  Some Hydrocortisone
    is in fact available in some pharmacies in the urban areas.   There  is
    no facility for neurosurgery and cancer treatment and it would  not  be
    possible to do an acceptable follow-up for the Appellant with regard to
    the removal of his brain tumour.

 5. I have a statement from the Appellant in which he says  that  since  he
    moved to Manchester he has been regularly attending the mosque.  He met
    a friend of his father's there who he now calls  "uncle"  and  who  has
    become his family.  They spend time together after Friday  prayers  and
    at the weekend.  He has other  friends  that  he  has  met.   He  gives
    details of them.  Six months ago he joined the Gambia  Support  Network
    which meets on the last  Sunday  of  every  month.   There  are  social
    gatherings.  He has a large network of friends.

 6. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant who adopted his statement.

 7. In cross-examination Mr Harrison asked him about the Prendergast family
    who had sponsored him to come to the UK and who had  looked  after  him
    and his sisters.  The Appellant confirmed that this family had provided
    a property in Gambia for him and his sisters to live in.   Mr  Harrison
    asked him what had happened to make  the  Prendergasts  fall  out  with
    them.  The Appellant said he does not know.  He has tried to find  out.
    He phoned but they told him not to call back. They told him he was  out
    of their lives.  He said he has  no  idea  what  caused  them  to  stop
    speaking  to  him.  He  confirmed  that  his   involvement   with   the
    Prendergasts had lasted ten years and that they had promised his father
    that they would look after him and his siblings.  They had provided him
    with a job and has lost that.  He said they no longer have the business
    in Gambia for which he worked and he does not know where they are.   He
    is in touch with his sisters on the internet.  The oldest is 29 and the
    two younger ones are 16 and 13.

 8. Judge Birrell accepted that on return to the Gambia the Appellant would
    in all likelihood die within weeks not  because  appropriate  treatment
    and accommodation and support are not available but  because  he  would
    not be able to afford to pay for the medication and it is not available
    free of charge.  All the doctors agreed that the  medication  he  needs
    would be beyond the reach of the average Gambian and would be difficult
    to source.  His sisters do  not  have  the  resources  to  provide  the
    medication and there is no other  family  to  help.    I  accept  these
    findings.

 9. Dr Mynott had made it clear at the hearing on the issue of whether  the
    determination of Judge Birrell contained a material error of  law  that
    his main submission at the re-hearing of the appeal would be  that  the
    appeal  should  be  allowed  under   paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
    Immigration Rules. Paragraph 276ADE is headed 'Requirements to  be  met
    by an applicant for leave to remain on the grounds  of  private  life'.
    276ADE(vi) refers to an applicant who,

         '... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK
         for less than twenty years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
         integration into the country to  which  he  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK.'

10. Dr Mynott notes that the position of  the  Respondent  in  the  refusal
    letter was that the Appellant would be  able  to  "Seek  any  necessary
    treatment you may require either immediately on your return or  at  any
    time in the future" and that medical treatment is available to  him  on
    return to the Gambia.  Judge Birrell's undisputed findings in the First-
    tier Tribunal contradicted these presumptions.  She said,

         "On return to Gambia I am satisfied that the Appellant would in all
         likelihood die within weeks".

    Dr Mynott says that the question therefore is whether  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration  into  Gambia
    and using a commonsense reading of the Rule it is clear  that  imminent
    death would constitute a very significant obstacle to integration.   If
    that proposition is accepted the relevant requirements of the Rules are
    met in this case.  There is no requirement under the Rules to  consider
    the degree of private life established by the Appellant in the  UK  and
    this approach is in accordance  with  the  proper  construction  of  an
    Immigration Rule as confirmed in Mahad v Entry Clearance Officer [2009]
    UKSC 16 that an Immigration Rule -

         "... is to be discerned objectively from  the  language  used,  not
         divined by reference to supposed policy considerations".

    He relies on Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 74 where Underhill  LJ  cited
    the statement in Edgehill v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  402  that  the  Rules
    should be understood in accordance with the  interpretation  which  any
    ordinary reader would place upon them.  He  says  that  the  fact  that
    paragraph 276ADE(1) is the means by which the Respondent has sought  to
    incorporate Article 8 jurisprudence into the Immigration Rules does not
    displace the authorities cited above,   particularly  since  Singh  and
    Edgehill were both concerned with transitional provisions  between  the
    old Rules and the new Rules.

11. With regard to Article 8 ECHR it  is  submitted  that  the  Appellant's
    removal would breach Article 8.  It is accepted that Paragraph 117B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has to be  taken  into
    account.  This states

         (1) The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (3) It is  in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b) are better able to integrate into society.

         (4) Little weight should be given to-

             (a) a private life, or

             (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.

         (6)In the case of a person who is not liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

12. Dr Mynott submitted that the considerations to which the Tribunal  must
    have regard under 117B are factors which must be considered in light of
    all the relevant matters and the nature of the Appellant's private life
    is relevant in a structured Article 8 assessment.  It is submitted that
    there are two particular factors which have to be  taken  into  account
    when considering the nature of the private life established.

    (1)  Firstly the Appellant enjoyed lawful leave when  he  suffered  the
         medical  emergency  resulting  in  his  dependence  on  life-saving
         medication.

    (2)  Secondly his dependence  on  life-saving  medication  arose  as  a
         result of the intervention by the medical services in the UK.

13. Dr Mynott further submitted that the  Appellant's  case  is  one  which
    falls within the scope of EU law because he is a person who has made  a
    request for international protection  under  paragraph  327(b)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Such a claim not only encompasses a claim under the
    Refugee Convention (which has never been substantively pursued  by  the
    Appellant) but also a claim for humanitarian  protection  granted  when
    there is a real risk of "serious harm" including "inhuman or  degrading
    treatment or punishment".  He submitted that account would be taken  of
    the core principle of "dignity" in the context of Directive  2004/83/EC
    discussed in the decision of A v  Staatssecretaris  van  Veiligheid  en
    Justitie (UNHCR) intervening [2014] EUECJ - C - 148/13.

14. In oral submissions Dr Mynott said that the meaning of "integration" is
    the establishment of an ongoing life.  The Appellant has no home and no
    job in the Gambia.   He  cannot  step  back  into  his  old  life.   He
    submitted that paragraph 276ADE(vi) can be applied in  this  way.   The
    idea that a purposive construction should be given to  the  Immigration
    Rules was dismissed in Mahad and Iqbal.  The fact that the Appellant is
    likely to die within a few weeks without the necessary medication  must
    be interpreted as a significant obstacle to integration.  The timescale
    is the issue.

15. Dr Mynott relied on paragraph 117B(1) pointing out that the reality  of
    the situation is that the NHS undertook the  Appellant's  care  then  a
    different government  department  decided  to  throw  him  out  of  the
    country.  "Effective" in the context of immigration  control  does  not
    mean that people have to be removed.  There is no  public  interest  in
    the removal of this Appellant.

16. He relied on GS (India) and ors v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  40  and  MM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ
    279 submitting that Article 8 is engaged.  The Appellant has a  private
    life here.  With regard to Humanitarian Protection he pointed out  that
    the  definition  of  serious  harm  includes  inhuman   and   degrading
    treatment.  He also relied on the comments  made  about  the  right  to
    dignity in Pretty v United Kingdom (2002) 35 EHRR 1.

17. Mr Harrison said that he had little to add to what had been said in the
    refusal letter.  He questioned whether Judge  Birrell  was  allowed  to
    make a finding that the Appellant would have no funding for medication.
    He  said  that    we  do  not  have  any  information  as  to  why  the
    Prendergasts have withdrawn their support and the Appellant has friends
    here.  He might be able to get the money.  In any event the  medication
    would be available on the internet. He submitted that there is  settled
    jurisprudence  on  the  weight  to  be  given  to  medical  issues   in
    considering Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.  He dismissed the  submissions  made
    by Dr Mynott under 276ADE(vi). There is nothing to stop  the  Appellant
    integrating.  It would be possible to get the necessary medication.  It
    is available.  He pointed out that the Appellant is a gregarious person
    who makes friends easily.  He has friends and  family  in  the  Gambia.
    His private  life  would  be  interrupted  but  not  disproportionately
    interfered with.  The drugs are available.

My Findings

18. This is a very difficult and troubling case. I have  taken  account  of
    all the evidence before me and I have carefully considered the  various
    points made by Dr Mynott.

19.  I begin by saying that I must accept that I  am  bound  to  take  into
    account the decisions of the Court of Appeal in GS and  MM  (Zimbabwe),
    that of the House of Lords in  N  v  SSHD  [2005]  2  AC  296  and  the
    decisions of the Strasbourg Court in Bensaid v  United  Kingdom  (2001)
    EHRR 205, D v UK (1997) 24EHRR 423 and Pretty.   The  position  of  the
    Secretary of State, simply put, is that the United Kingdom  cannot  and
    should not be expected to provided free health care for those  who  are
    unable to access the required care in their own country.

20. With regard to the decision in GS, five  of  the  six  Appellants  were
    suffering from terminal renal failure or end stage kidney  disease,  an
    irreversible condition.  One had  already  had  a  transplant  and  the
    others were hoping for a transplant and in the meantime were  dependant
    on dialysis three times a week in the UK.  It was accepted by the Court
    of Appeal  that  dialysis  was  either  not  available  in  their  home
    countries, was limited  or  was  too  expensive  and  that  these  five
    Appellants would be at risk of 'a very early death', probably within 2-
    3 weeks, if returned. The  sixth  was  at  an  advanced  stage  of  HIV
    infection with a life expectancy without his current level of  care  of
    'months or if lucky a year or two'.

21. The Court said at paragraph 46,

         "The case of a person whose life will be drastically  shortened  by
         the progress of natural disease if he is removed to his home  State
         does not fall within the paradigm of Article 3. Cases such as those
         before the court can therefore only succeed under that  Article  to
         the extent that it falls to be enlarged  beyond  the  paradigm.  In
         response to humanitarian imperatives, the Strasbourg court and  the
         House of Lords have accepted a degree of enlargement to Article  3.
         The starting-point for an examination of these departures is the  D
         case."

22. They went on to discuss whether the exception to the Article 3 paradigm
    vouched by the D case is limited to a state of  affairs  in  which  the
    applicant is in effect on his deathbed whether or  not  he  is  removed
    from the host state. They then cited from N,

         "42. In summary, the Court observes  that  since  D  v  the  United
         Kingdom it has consistently applied the following principles.

             Aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle  claim
             any entitlement to remain in the territory  of  a  Contracting
             State in order to continue to benefit from medical, social  or
             other  forms  of  assistance  and  services  provided  by  the
             expelling State. The fact that the applicant's  circumstances,
             including his life expectancy, would be significantly  reduced
             if he were to be removed from the  Contracting  State  is  not
             sufficient in itself to give rise to breach of Article 3.  The
             decision to remove an alien who is suffering  from  a  serious
             mental or physical illness to a country where  the  facilities
             for the treatment  of  that  illness  are  inferior  to  those
             available in the Contracting State may raise  an  issue  under
             Article 3, but only in a  very  exceptional  case,  where  the
             humanitarian grounds against the removal are  compelling.   In
             the D case the very exceptional circumstances  were  that  the
             applicant was critically ill  and  appeared  to  be  close  to
             death, could not be guaranteed any nursing or medical care  in
             his country of origin and had no family there willing or  able
             to care for him or provide him with  even  a  basic  level  of
             food, shelter or social support.

         43. The Court does  not  exclude  that  there  may  be  other  very
         exceptional cases where the humanitarian considerations are equally
         compelling. However, it considers that it should maintain the  high
         threshold set in  D  v  the  United  Kingdom  and  applied  in  its
         subsequent case-law, which it  regards  as  correct  in  principle,
         given that in such cases the alleged future harm would emanate  not
         from the intentional acts or omissions of public authorities or non-
         State bodies, but instead from a naturally  occurring  illness  and
         the lack of sufficient resources to deal with it in  the  receiving
         country.

         44. Although many of the rights it contains have implications of  a
         social or economic nature, the Convention is  essentially  directed
         at the protection of civil and  political  rights...  While  it  is
         necessary, given the fundamental importance of  Article  3  in  the
         Convention system, for the Court to retain a degree of  flexibility
         to prevent expulsion in very exceptional cases, Article 3 does  not
         place an obligation on the  Contracting  State  to  alleviate  such
         disparities through the provision of free and unlimited health care
         to all aliens without a right to stay within  its  jurisdiction.  A
         finding to the contrary would place  too  great  a  burden  on  the
         Contracting States.

         45.  Finally,  the  Court  observes  that,  although  the   present
         application, in common with most of those  referred  to  above,  is
         concerned with the expulsion of a person  with  an  HIV  and  AIDS-
         related condition, the same principles must apply  in  relation  to
         the expulsion of any person afflicted with any  serious,  naturally
         occurring physical or mental illness  which  may  cause  suffering,
         pain and reduced life expectancy and  require  specialised  medical
         treatment which may not be so readily available in the  applicant's
         country of origin or which may be  available  only  at  substantial
         cost."

23. The Appellant is not on his deathbed. He is in  no  worse  a  situation
    that the Appellants in N or GS. Dr Mynott justifiably made much of  the
    fact that the Appellant had been in the UK lawfully when he became  ill
    and more importantly that the  dependence  on  medication  arose  as  a
    result of intervention by the UK medical services.  This  is  a  common
    situation in such cases and does  not  alter  the  position  under  the
    applicable caselaw.  I am bound therefore to dismiss the  appeal  under
    Article 3 ECHR.

24. I turn now to Article 8.

25. Again the caselaw is clear. Lord Justice Laws   said in GS,
        86. If the Article 3 claim fails (as I would hold  it  does  here),
        Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
        factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
        - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
        affairs having some affinity with the paradigm. That approach  was,
        as it seems to me, applied by Moses LJ (with whom McFarlane LJ  and
        the Master of the Rolls agreed) in MM (Zimbabwe)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
        279 at paragraph 23:
            "The only cases I can foresee  where  the  absence  of  adequate
            medical treatment in the country to which  a  person  is  to  be
            deported will be relevant to  Article  8,  is  where  it  is  an
            additional factor to be  weighed  in  the  balance,  with  other
            factors which by themselves engage Article 8. Suppose,  in  this
            case, the appellant had established firm  family  ties  in  this
            country, then the availability of continuing  medical  treatment
            here, coupled  with  his  dependence  on  the  family  here  for
            support, together establish 'private life' under Article 8. That
            conclusion  would  not  involve  a  comparison  between  medical
            facilities here and those in Zimbabwe. Such a finding would  not
            offend the principle expressed above that the United Kingdom  is
            under no Convention obligation to provide medical treatment here
            when it is not available in the country to which  the  appellant
            is to be deported."
        87. With great respect this seems to me to be  entirely  right.  It
        means that a specific case has to be made under Article 8. It is to
        be noted that MM (Zimbabwe) also shows that the  rigour  of  the  D
        exception for the purpose of Article  3  in  such  cases  as  these
        applies with no less force when the claim is put under Article 8.

26.  I cannot see anything in  the  Appellant's  circumstances  that  would
    enable me to find that his removal would be disproportionate. I  accept
    that he has a private life in the UK and that Article 8 is  potentially
    engaged. His medical care is part of that private life.  The  Appellant
    has no family life in the UK. He has family  in  the  Gambia  where  he
    lived for many years and where he was educated and had a job. There  is
    nothing to indicate that he had any problems there.   The  only  factor
    that would  engage  Article  8  is  his  need  for  medical  treatment,
    medication and perhaps the follow up care  following  his  surgery.   I
    have taken account of section 117B of the 2002 Act and  I  accept  that
    the Appellant with the aid of his medication would be able to get a job
    and support himself. I accept that he was legally in the UK and that he
    did not come here for medical treatment. Dr Mynott submitted that there
    is no public interest in the Appellant's removal. I see  the  force  of
    that argument but it must be remembered that there is a financial  cost
    to the UK of medical treatment and medication  which  is  a  matter  of
    public interest.  Having considered Article  8  in  the  light  of  the
    caselaw discussed above, I find that the Appellant has not  established
    that his removal would be disproportionate so the appeal cannot succeed
    under Article 8.

27. The principal argument put by Dr Mynott was that  under  paragraph  276
    ADE (1)(vi). It is an interesting argument to  which  I  have  given  a
    great deal of consideration. There has to my knowledge been no decision
    by either this Tribunal or a higher  Court  on  the  meaning  of  'very
    significant obstacle to integration'. I accept  the  submission  of  Dr
    Mynott that this  phrase  must  be  given  its  ordinary  meaning.  His
    submission was essentially that the  Appellant  will  not  be  able  to
    integrate because he will have no money, will not be able to  work  and
    in any event  will  be  dead  within  weeks.  The  objection  from  the
    Presenting Officer to this submission when it was  first  made  at  the
    error of law hearing was that paragraph  276ADE  is  relative  to  long
    residence in the UK. I do not  agree  with  that.  It  is  relative  to
    private life and it is clear  that  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  confirms  an
    acceptance that  there will be cases where an applicant cannot meet the
    'length of residence' requirements  at subparagraphs   (i)  -  (v)  but
    there is something which will amount to a very significant obstacle  to
    him  integrating  into  his  home  country  that  gives   rise   to   a
    disproportionate interference with his  private  life  and  warrants  a
    grant of leave to remain. As I have said, no  indication  is  given  of
    what would meet this test but it is clearly a  very  high  threshold  -
    presumably a deliberate move by those drafting the Rules  to  create  a
    much more onerous test than the previous one of a lack of  ties  to  an
    applicant's homeland. I accept  that  it  was  probably  never  in  the
    contemplation of those responsible for the provision that it  would  be
    used in medical cases and I assume that any attempt to  utilise  it  in
    this way would be met by a staunch challenge. To allow  the  appeal  on
    the basis that the Appellant cannot  integrate  into  his  own  country
    because he will die within weeks for want of necessary medication would
    fly in the face of the caselaw on Articles 3 and 8 which is clear  that
    possible or indeed certain   early death from  lack  of  medication  of
    itself fails to give rise to a breach of Article 3 or 8. I do take into
    account  Dr  Mynott's  view  that  the  UK  voluntarily  undertook  the
    Appellant's care and are now abandoning him. I must  however  take  the
    view that they were entitled to do that. He has had the benefit of  the
    surgery to remove his brain tumour and the subsequent care.

28. I have to consider the ordinary meaning of 'integrate'. The root of the
    word 'integration' is the Latin verb meaning 'to make whole'. A  person
    returning  to  their  home  country  has  to  be  able  to  have  equal
    participation in the life of his country, to be part of society  there,
    to fit in.  Illness is not a bar to integration in one's  home  country
    and nor is the likelihood of early death. Illness and death are part of
    a society. I do not dispute that the probability of  early  death  from
    lack of medication could arguably be a  very  significant  obstacle  to
    integration for a person who has been away from his homeland for a very
    long time and has no ties, or family or  friends  to  support  him  but
    these factors would in any event be  relevant  in  a  consideration  of
    Article 8. There are no such additional factors here.  The Appellant is
    Gambian. He has lived all his life in the Gambia. There is  nothing  to
    suggest he had any difficulties there.  He has  only  been  in  the  UK
    since October 2013. He has three sisters in the Gambia.  They  are  his
    family. They presumably have some means of support.   He  would  be  at
    home. He would not be returning to the same life as he  had  previously
    but that is not what 'integration' means.

29. I find therefore that the Appellant has not established that  he  meets
    the criteria set out in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

30. I have a great deal of sympathy with the Appellant and have  been  very
    troubled by this case.  The situation for such a young man is  dreadful
    and tragic. I have however considered the submissions made in terms  of
    the applicable law as I am bound to do and find that I must dismiss the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside  is  replaced
with this decision. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules  and
on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 18th May 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


