










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05170/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 11 February 2016                   |On 18 March 2016                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Sayed Ahmed Sultani
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, counsel, (instructed by Lawrence and Co
Solicitors)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the "secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge K Lester, who allowed the claimant's  appeal
      on asylum grounds in a decision promulgated on 3 August 2015.


   3. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan.  He  appealed  against  the
      decision of the secretary of state dated  8  July  2014  refusing  his
      application for asylum and humanitarian protection. His  age  was  the
      subject of dispute.


   4. He arrived in the UK clandestinely on  30  October  2009  having  left
      Afghanistan in June 2009. He claimed asylum several days later on  the
      basis  that  he  feared  the  government  and  the  Taliban  [2].  His
      application  was  refused  in  February  2010  but  he   was   granted
      discretionary leave to remain until 3 July 2010. He  claimed  that  he
      was born in 1996 and that he would thus have been 13 at  the  time  of
      his arrival. There was an age assessment by the Coventry City  Council
      dated 18 November 2009. There was  some  dispute  as  to  whether  the
      assessment was Merton compliant.


   5. His application for further leave to remain was refused on 11  October
      2010.  He  appealed  that  refusal.  The  appeal  was   dismissed   by
      Immigration Judge Tipping who in a  determination  dated  30  November
      2010 found the claimant's  account  implausible  and  inconsistent  in
      various aspects.


   6. On 16 March 2012, his solicitors made a fresh claim for asylum on  his
      behalf. That was refused  in  July  2014  after  the  commencement  of
      judicial review proceedings [4].


   7. In support of his claim that he was born in 1996, he submitted a  copy
      of an identity document, a Taskira,  stating  that  according  to  his
      physical appearance, he was 13 years old in 2009.  That  document  was
      examined by an independent expert, Dr  Zadeh,  who  concluded  in  his
      report dated January 2015 that the document was  genuinely  issued  to
      the claimant.


   8. Coventry Social Services assessed his age  on  the  basis  of  an  age
      assessment interview in November 2009. His cousin, Mr  Mohammed  Rafi,
      was also his guardian and wrote  to  the  team  'explaining'  that  he
      concluded that the claimant was 13 [7].


   9. In due course, the Enfield council became appraised of the  claimant's
      situation. There was a further age assessment  undertaken  by  Enfield
      council. That assessment did not appear  to  have  been  before  Judge
      Tipping [9].


  10. Judge Lester noted that there was no copy of that  age  assessment  in
      the  file.  There  was  however  correspondence  referring  to   their
      assessment and the council's undertaking to  be  responsible  for  him
      which post dated that decision.  A  letter  from  Ms  Wallace  of  the
      Enfield Council Adolescent and Leaving Care team confirmed that he was
      in a placement with his cousin, Mr Sultani, that he is  in  full  time
      education and that he would be  supported  by  the  borough  until  he
      reached 21. The headings to the letter gave his date  of  birth  as  1
      January 1996.  Accordingly  for  the  purpose  of  his  education  and
      support, it appeared that the Enfield council was 'content' to  accept
      his birth date as 1 January 1996 [9].


  11. Judge Lester noted that in addition to  the  Enfield  age  assessment,
      there were other documents that were  not  before  Judge  Tipping  and
      which formed the basis of the fresh claim [10]. The  letter  from  his
      solicitors dated May 2012 in relation to the detention of the claimant
      referred to documents which were not referred  to  by  Judge  Tipping,
      namely two letters  of  summons  from  the  Baghalan  Police  dated  8
      November 2007 and 12 November 2007 [10].


  12. Judge Lester also referred at [11] to other evidence forming the basis
      "of the fresh claim", including the letter from Ms Ayed  Rashid  dated
      May 2011 sent to the claimant's cousin and guardian. There  were  also
      letters from  the  Palmers  Green  Mosque  confirming  the  claimant's
      knowledge of the Koran; a statement from a  Mr  Amazai  who  knew  the
      claimant's father and of his involvement with the  Taliban;  a  letter
      from the office of the Attorney General of Afghanistan dated 27  March
      2012; a letter from the Taliban, Baghalan Province  dated  7  February
      2012; a letter from Mr Mohammed  Rafi  to  the  claimant's  solicitors
      explaining how he instructed his  friend  Said  Rashid  to  visit  the
      claimant's home town to find out about his  family;  evidence  of  the
      claimant's unsuccessful attempts to trace his family through  the  Red
      Cross and finally an expert report prepared by Dr Giustozzi  dated  11
      March 2012.


  13. She set out the findings from Dr Giustozzi's report, noting  that  the
      Taliban agitation in Baghlan had stepped up greatly from 2008 and that
      the security situation was recently  worsening.  The  bomb  attack  in
      which the claimant's father was killed has been attributed to  various
      elements including the  Taliban.  It  is  highly  plausible  that  the
      claimant's father might be suspected  as  a  culprit.  Arresting  male
      relatives  is  common  practice.  It  is  unusual  to  arrest   female
      relatives. The claimant would very likely be seen by  the  authorities
      as being involved with the insurgency because of his family background
      and his madrasa education in Pakistan even if they lacked evidence  of
      his own personal involvement [12].


  14. Judge Lester referred to the claimant's stay in  Kabul.  Dr  Giustozzi
      averred that he could only escape detention there if he did  not  have
      to seek accommodation or look for employment, i.e., if he  could  stay
      in hiding [13].


  15. The Judge set out in full a summary of the  respondent's  reasons  for
      refusal dated 8 July 2014. She also set out the evidence in support of
      the appeal at [17] onwards. That included the statement prepared by Mr
      Kholozai who knew the claimant's father. He  regarded  the  claimant's
      father as a very influential Taliban because of his close relationship
      with Mr Mohammed Essa and his position as Director to  promote  virtue
      and prevent evils [24].


  16. She had regard to a statement from Mr Rafi, the Kinship  Foster  Carer
      of the claimant, his cousin. He  stated  that  the  claimant's  social
      worker from Enfield council  informed  him  that  he  had  been  under
      pressure from the Home Office to agree that the claimant was  born  in
      1993.  He  claimed  that  the  Coventry  assessment  was  not   Merton
      compliant. He knew about the claimant's father and knew  the  claimant
      when he was very young as they grew  up  in  the  same  compound.  His
      father was with Hesb-I-Islami and later with the Taliban.  He  learned
      that he died when he travelled to Pakistan to see his family in 2009.


  17. Mr Rafi stated that they had had no contact with the claimant's mother
      and siblings. He had tried  to  contact  them  or  obtain  information
      through his friend without success. He travelled to Afghanistan to see
      whether he could find out any information  without  success.  The  Red
      Cross have not succeeded in tracing the family.


  18. Judge Lester referred to an additional report prepared by Dr Guistozzi
      dated 15 January 2015 for the purpose of the appeal. Baghlan had  seen
      a further intensification of violence with the Taliban  claiming  back
      most of the northern part of the province during 2014. If the  Taliban
      saw the  appellant  as  a  deserter  or  were  seen  to  approach  the
      authorities, they would target him and he would be at "extreme  risk."
      [28] The repressive activities of the government remained intense with
      an increasing  number  of  suspected  insurgents  being  arrested  and
      further evidence of the use of torture and  arbitrary  detention.  The
      Taliban have increased and intensified their activities in Kabul [28].




  19. Dr Giustozzi concluded that he confirmed his previous assessment  that
      the claimant would be at risk  from  the  authorities  more  than  the
      Taliban. The latter will represent a physical danger to  the  claimant
      if they will consider him as  a  deserter.  The  authorities  will  be
      inclined to suspect him of being linked to the insurgency. Because  of
      the weak rule of law, even an arrest for the purpose of  interrogation
      can lead to long detention without trial, torture  and  other  abuses.
      The refusal letter of 2105 had not  considered  the  material  in  his
      previous report [29].


  20. Finally, Judge Lester referred to further  evidence  provided  by  the
      claimant's solicitors relating to the return to Afghanistan [30].  She
      summarised the claimant's evidence at his hearing and that given by Mr
      Rafi and Mr Kholozai.


  21. She had regard to the submissions on behalf of the secretary of  state
      and the claimant, referring to a skeleton argument produced by counsel
      - not Mr Bazini - who represented the claimant at the hearing.


  22. Judge Lester directed herself regarding asylum claims by unaccompanied
      children. She referred to paragraph  351  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
      noting that account should be taken of the claimant's maturity and  in
      assessing the claim of  a  child,  more  weight  should  be  given  to
      objective indications of risk than to the child's state  of  mind  and
      understanding of the situation [50].


  23. She stated at [51] that she had set out the evidence in support of the
      appeal in some length, largely because most of it was not available to
      Judge Tipping when he made his decision. Nor was the fact that Enfield
      Council had made their own age assessment of the  claimant  and  found
      him to have been born in 1996. Even though at a  later  date,  Enfield
      had felt compelled to accept the age assessment as determined by Judge
      Tipping, nevertheless, they have continued to support the claimant and
      will continue to do so on the basis that he was born in 1996 [51].


  24. She found that on any view the claimant was a very young  person  when
      things happened to him in Afghanistan and was a very young  person  to
      have undertaken such a journey.


  25. He had provided a Taskira which purports to show that he was  born  in
      1996. That document is a genuine document and has  been  authenticated
      by Dr Zadeh. She noted that the appellant had not  been  present  when
      the Taskira was drawn up. His uncle obtained the document on the basis
      of his word and a photograph [53].


  26. The claimant obtained summonses from the police  department  of  Doshi
      dated 12 November 2007 '....requiring his  re-arrest,  having  escaped
      from custody for involvement  with  his  father.....  in  the  suicide
      attack at a sugar factory in Baghlan'. The summonses were obtained  by
      a friend of Mr Rafi in May 2011. The originals were  lodged  with  the
      Home Office, but despite directions on two occasions, the Home  Office
      had not been returned for authentication. The summonses were  obtained
      by a friend of Mr Rafi in May 2011 [54].


  27. She noted a catch-22 situation  relating  to  such  documents.  If  no
      documents are produced, the secretary  of  state  will  say  that  the
      appellant's  assertion  that  he  is   wanted   by   the   police   is
      uncorroborated, and a fabrication. If they are produced however,  they
      are said to be self serving and not genuine [55].


  28. She noted that the secretary of state does  accept  that  the  bombing
      incident took place. The investigations were not  successful  but  the
      police came under heavy pressure to find culprits because of the death
      of six MPs. It is therefore plausible that the claimant's father might
      have been  suspected  [56].  Accordingly  it  is  plausible  that  the
      claimant, as the oldest son, had been arrested for interrogation which
      no doubt would involve beatings and other physical abuse. Dr Giustozzi
      confirmed that his release by  bribe  "to  a  totally  corrupt  police
      force" was also quite plausible [57] She accepted  that  the  claimant
      had been sent to a madrassa in Pakistan.  There  is  evidence  of  his
      having learned the Koran to a high standard [58].


  29. She also accepted that the  claimant  left  the  Taliban  in  Kandahar
      because he did not wish to become  involved  in  jihad.  His  fear  of
      reprisals by the Taliban is genuine. The fact that his father was with
      the Taliban would be seen by the security forces as a  matter  of  the
      pro-insurgency  inclinations  of  the  whole  family,  even   if   the
      authorities  lacked  any  evidence  of  his  involvement.  The   Judge
      "inclined to the view" that the claimant has much more  to  fear  from
      the police and security forces rather than  the  government,  although
      the Taliban would be able to exert significant psychological  pressure
      on him [59].


  30. She relied at [60] on Dr Giustozzis's report  that  it  was  plausible
      that the claimant was able to remain for seven months in Kabul without
      being found by either the security forces or the Taliban.


  31. She noted that the claimant with the  assistance  of  his  cousin  had
      attempted through the Red Cross to trace his family. There  were  also
      attempts by Mr Rafi to locate  the  claimant's  mother  and  siblings.
      These attempts had thus far been fruitless [61].


  32. She found in the circumstances that it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
      expect the claimant to live in Kabul. Her reasons are set out at [62].
       She also "considered" for the sake of completeness that  forcibly  to
      return the claimant would breach his right to respect for  family  and
      private life [64].


  33. On 20 August 2015, Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Garrett
      granted the secretary of state permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds
      that the Judge arguably failed  to  apply  the  Devaseelan  guidelines
      [2002] UKIAT 00702, without giving adequate reasons for any  departure
      from the earlier determination. Moreover,  it  is  arguable  that  the
      Judge did not engage fully with the credibility issues raised  in  the
      secretary of  state's  refusal  letter  relating  to  the  arrest  and
      detention, continued risk and recruitment by the Taliban.


  34. Mr Bramble relied on the grounds seeking permission to appeal. All the
      alleged facts in the appeal relating  to  issues  of  protection  were
      identical to those determined by Judge Tipping. There were significant
      discrepancies found by   Judge Tipping and the claimant was not  found
      to be credible. That decision  remains  the  starting  point  for  the
      assessment of the  account  and  is  relevant  to  general  issues  of
      credibility.


  35. In addition, a number of discrepancies which the  secretary  of  state
      contended damaged the claimant's account were not  adequately  engaged
      with by the Judge and no reasons were given to explain the key  points
      raised in the refusal.


  36.  He  submitted  that  there  were  only  fleeting  references  to  the
      determination of Judge Tipping at  [35]  and  [51].  She  dealt  in  a
      cursory manner with the issues raised in the reasons  for  refusal  as
      referred to in Judge Tipping's determination. Even if she had properly
      departed from his decision, she had not properly engaged or dealt with
       the issues set out in the reasons for refusal.


  37. Nor were the matters raised under s.8 of the  2004  Act  addressed  at
      all. The contentions had been set  out  at  paragraphs  43-45  of  the
      reasons for refusal letter. Mr Bramble acknowledged however that  this
      "was not the most compelling ground."  He asserted that she had failed
      to address the issue.


  38. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Bazini, who represented him  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, referred to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
      VV (Grounds of appeal) Lithuania  [2016]  UKUT  53  (IAC).  The  Upper
      Tribunal stated that an application for permission to  appeal  on  the
      grounds of adequacy of reasoning in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal must generally demonstrate by reference to the  material  and
      arguments to be placed before that Tribunal that the matter involved a
      substantial issue between the parties at first instance; and that  the
      Tribunal either failed to deal with that matter at  all,  or  to  give
      reasons on that point which are so unclear that they may well  conceal
      an error of law.


  39. At paragraph 2, the Tribunal stated that given that  the  parties  are
      under a duty to help further the overriding objective and to cooperate
      with the Upper  Tribunal  those  drafting  grounds  of  appeal  should
      proceed on the basis that decisions of the First-tier Tribunal are  to
      be read fairly and as a  whole  and  without  excessive  legalism  and
      should not seek to argue that a particular consideration was not taken
      into account by the Tribunal when it can be  seen  from  the  decision
      read fairly as a whole that it was (and the real disagreement is  with
      the Tribunal's assessment of the evidence or the merits). They  should
      not challenge the adequacy of the  reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal without demonstrating how the principles  referred  to  above
      have been breached by reference to the materials  placed  before  that
      Tribunal and the important or substantial issues which it was asked to
      determine in that particular case.


  40. He submitted that from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal read as
      a whole, there is no error of law. It is  clear  that  the  Judge  was
      aware of the determination of  Judge  Tipping.  She  gave  a  detailed
      decision, recognising that the whole nature of the case was different.
       She has in reality applied Devalseelan properly


  41. What was significant in this appeal is the age of the claimant.  Judge
      Tipping found  on the evidence before him that the appellant had  lied
      about his age. He was not 13 years old as claimed, but 16.   He  found
      that the consequence was that the claimant had not told the truth  and
      would be expected to know more.


  42. Judge Lester concluded however that Judge Tipping, through no fault of
      his own, had been wrong about the age.  This  went  to  the  issue  of
      credibility, having regard to the age of the claimant. In  support  of
      his claim he had submitted a copy of an identity document which stated
      that according to his physical appearance he is 13 years old in  2009.
      Judge Tipping then noted at [8] that a full age assessment was carried
      out by Coventry City Council, as a result of which it  concluded  that
      the claimant is now about 17.


  43. The significance of  age  is  clear.  Judge  Tipping  found  that  his
      conclusion as to the appellant's true age further calls into  question
      the credibility of his account of events. He has sought  to  embellish
      his claim by  understating  his  age  and  therefore  overstating  his
      vulnerability.


  44. Mr Bazini submitted that if the appellant had in fact  only  been  13,
      the Judge would have had to deal with the claimant differently.  There
      were various procedures in place which would be  taken  into  account,
      having regard to the potential vulnerability of such a  person.  [23].
      Judge Tipping found that the claimant was, during his journey  to  the
      UK, about  16  years  old.  [24].  He  stated  that  in  reaching  his
      conclusion as to the credibility of the claimant's  evidence,  he  has
      had careful regard to his age.


  45. Accordingly the claimant's age is very important. He was a minor.


  46. In section D of the secretary of state's bundle before  Judge  Lester,
      there was evidence from Enfield Council which made it clear  that  his
      date of birth was accepted as showing that he was 13 when he  came  to
      the UK.  A  letter  dated  14  April  2011  from  Enfield  Council  is
      disclosed.  The  claimant  had  been  referred  to  the  Service   for
      Adolescents and Families in Enfield in December  2010.  He  had  since
      been     attending     therapy     sessions     with      a      CAMHS
      practitioner/psychotherapist  for  migrant  communities   and   asylum
      seekers. Ms Sani, who prepared and signed the  document,  noted  there
      has been destabilisation due to a request for age assessment conducted
      on the claimant for Home Office procedural purposes and this has  been
      considered not necessary. She has recently been informed that  he  has
      now been proved to be 14 years of age and from her dealings  with  him
      he appears to fit  this  age  range  by  virtue  of  how  he  presents
      generally in her sessions.


  47. In a letter from the social worker of Enfield Council dated 2 November
      2011, there is reference to the dispute concerning  his  age.  Enfield
      has now decided that no further age assessment will be carried out and
      that they have accepted his age to be 1 January 1996,  which  was  the
      age provided on health and educational records when he first  came  to
      Enfield. He is acting age appropriately and is achieving well with the
      support of the local authority and his family and carer, Mr Rafi.


  48. The deputy team manager sent a letter to the claimant and Mr  Rafi  on
      20 March 2012. She  informed  them  that  the  Assistant  Director  in
      Enfield has read the papers relating to the claimant's age.  His  view
      is that they have to accept the decision made  "by  the  High  Court."
      (This is accepted to be a reference to Judge Tipping's determination.)




  49. There is a further letter from Enfield Council signed by Ms Sani,  the
      psychotherapist, dated 21 March 2012.  She  was  "....concerned  about
      his level of anxiety around what has been recurring questions relating
      to what authorities perceive as his actual age and what  is  actuality
      (sic) his age assessing it from a variety of dimensions".


  50. She stated that she had a thorough conversation  with  the  claimant's
      cousin and carer who explained that Coventry social services which  he
      was previously under "had come up with a mistaken assessment as to his
      age but unfortunately it has not been possible for Enfield to  dispute
      this and that Enfield is likely to go along with what the Home  Office
      now holds which is treating him as a 19 year old man".


  51. As she has worked  closely  in  the  psychological  context  with  the
      claimant for over a year she felt the need to present her views as  to
      how she perceives the claimant. She set out various facts relating  to
      his  physical,  emotional,  intellectual,  cognitive   and   behaviour
      characteristics,  the  result  being  that  in   her   opinion   these
      characteristics "do not match that of a 19 year old  man  that  he  is
      claimed to be". She accordingly stated that  it  is  appropriate  that
      this case become subject to another  review  to  determine  his  "most
      appropriate age."


  52. The claimant's solicitors corresponded with  Enfield  Council.  On  12
      December 2012 the senior lawyer of Enfield  Council  stated  that  "my
      clients do not believe that their  age  assessment  was  fundamentally
      flawed. However, for pragmatic reasons, my  clients  are  prepared  to
      accept your client as having a date of birth of 1 January 1996 as they
      have done previously. He will therefore revert to having the status of
      a looked after child with immediate effect."


  53. In a letter dated 11 December 2013, the allocated social  worker  from
      the Enfield Council sent a letter "to whom  it  may  concern"  stating
      that the claimant's age was disputed by the borough and a decision was
      made to support the claimant as a young person. Since his age  dispute
      has settled, it has been noticed that there are  positive  changes  in
      him.


  54.  Counsel  submitted  that  Judge  Lester  had  proper  regard  to  the
      determination of Judge Tipping at [3]. She noted that his  age  was  a
      matter of controversy. She referred to the evidence in  the  secretary
      of state's bundle from Enfield Council. She dealt  with  the  identity
      document, the Taskira, which set out his date of birth as 13 years old
      in 2009 [6].  She also had regard to other documents  which  were  not
      before Judge Tipping and which formed the basis of  the  fresh  claim.
      This included the examination of the Taskira by an independent expert,
      Dr Zadeh.  She also had regard to the Enfield evidence referred to  at
      [9].


  55. Mr Bazini accordingly submitted that the  secretary  of  state  cannot
      simply assert that Judge Lester  paid  no  regard  to  the  Devaseelan
      principles. This was all post- decision evidence which  has  not  been
      disputed as being credible. She was entitled to take it into  account.
      She has also considered the Coventry Social Services assessment [7].


  56. He also referred to paragraph 4 of the reasons for refusal where it is
      noted that the Home Office received further submissions  by  post.  In
      August 2013 there was an application for a judicial review  lodged  on
      behalf of the claimant. Mr Bazini informed me that as a consequence it
      was agreed to look at the claim again. It was in effect a fresh  claim
      with new evidence. Most of  this  was  in  the  secretary  of  state's
      bundle.


  57. He submitted that Judge Lester had regard at [8] to a letter dated  16
      March 2011 from the claimant's social worker  noting  that  there  had
      been some discrepancy regarding his age, however, through observations
      and from working with him, they  have  no  grounds  at  this  time  to
      dispute "that science date of birth is 8 September 1996, making him 14
      years of age."  Judge Lester noted that this had not been before Judge
      Tipping [9].


  58. He stated that at the hearing on 20 January 2015, he had  presented  a
      full skeleton argument settled by other counsel to Judge Lester. There
      were detailed arguments relating to  the  claimant's  age.  There  was
      express reference at paragraph 10 to the operation of Devaseelan.  The
      contention was that the factual matrix had moved on considerably since
      the previous appeal hearing  allowing  the  Tribunal  to  depart  from
      previous findings.


  59. Judge Lester noted that in addition to  the  Enfield  age  assessment,
      there were other documents not before him and which formed  the  basis
      of the fresh claim.  There were the two letters of  summons  from  the
      Baghlan police.


  60. Moreover, she looked at the expert report of  Dr  Giustozzi  dated  11
      March 2012 to the effect that it was  plausible  that  the  claimant's
      father might be suspected as one of the participants in the 6 November
      bomb attack.


  61. She considered the evidence in support of the  claimant's  appeal.  He
      had  prepared  a  statement  in  January  2015   responding   to   the
      observations of the secretary of  state  in  the  refusal  letter.  He
      contended that the original age assessment by Coventry was not  Merton
      compliant as there was no appropriate adult present.


  62. She had full regard to the evidence of Mr Kholozai, Mr  Rafi,  and  Dr
      Guistozzi's reports, including his additional report dated 15  January
      2015.


  63. She referred to the identity card that he produced and his claim  that
      as the son of an active insurgent implicated in  a  widely  publicised
      incident, the authorities would consider the claimant to  be  part  of
      the Taliban. She also referred to his evidence of his education in the
      madrassa, the reasons why he did not claim asylum in France and to his
      contentions relating to internal relocation and in particular that  he
      would be at risk in Kabul.  She noted that the claimant gave  evidence
      at the hearing [31]. She has summarised  the  evidence  given  by  the
      claimant and by Mr Rafi and Mr Kholozai.


  64. She referred in  closing  to  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's
      reliance on the reasons for refusal and  the  determination  of  Judge
      Tipping that the claimant was neither plausible nor credible [35]. She
      was invited to consider the documents in the round and in the light of
      the general lack of credibility of the  claimant.  The  expert  report
      threw some light on the situation, but it was clear that  the  Taliban
      did not practice forced recruitment [36].


  65. She was referred by Mr Bazini to the documentation and the  case  law,
      as set out at [42-46]. At [38] she noted that Mr Bazini relied on  the
      skeleton argument presented.


  66. Mr Bazini also submitted additional authorities including A, R (on the
      application of) AAJR [2013] UKUT 342 (IAC). At [55] the Tribunal noted
      that it had been referred to  authorities  on  the  issue  of  whether
      reliance could be placed on an age assessment carried out in breach of
      the requirement that a young person must be asked whether he wished to
      bring an appropriate adult in advance of the interview. In AAM v  SSHD
      [2012] EWHC 2567 Lang J found that the age  assessment  in  that  case
      failed to comply with the Merton standards of good  practice  in  that
      there was no appropriate adult present.


  67. He submitted that the age assessment relied on by  Judge  Tipping  has
      been acknowledged by the Enfield local authority to be incorrect.  The
      claimant is in fact three years younger. There was also the Taskira as
      well as other evidence relating to his age.


  68. He referred to the Court of Appeal decision in JA (Afghanistan) v SSHD
      [2014] EWCA Civ 45 from [28-34]. This related to  provisions  designed
      to safeguard the interests of children. He referred to R (FZ)  v  SSHD
      and the  London  Borough  of  Croydon  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  59  [23-28].
      Reference is made at [23] to the fact that it is generally accepted in
      a variety of contexts that where children or other  vulnerable  people
      are to be interviewed, they should have the  opportunity  to  have  an
      appropriate adult present.


  69. Mr Bazini also relied on KS (Benefit of the  doubt)  [2014]  UKUT  552
      (IAC) at [106]. The Upper  Tribunal  there  dealt  with  some  of  the
      reasons given by the Judge in that appeal for dis-applying the liberal
      application of the notion of applying a liberal benefit of  the  doubt
      rule to that appellant, which they found to be tenuous. These failures
      of explanation were of particular importance because the Judge  should
      have started from the position  that  at  least  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's recounting of events when he was a  minor,  paragraph  351
      had potential application and hence in  assessing  the  claim  of  the
      child, more weight should be given to objective  indications  of  risk
      than to the child's state of mind and understanding of his  situation.
      That in turn would have enhanced the position and the potential of the
      expert report of Dr Giustozzi.


  70. Mr Bazini submitted that in the claimant's case  Judge  Tipping  dealt
      with his age but found that he was lying about his age  and  was  much
      older. Judge Tipping never  had  any  of  the  evidence  which  became
      available.


  71. In reply Mr Bramble submitted that it  is  clear  that  Judge  Tipping
      regarded the claimant as still being a minor. As such  he  found  that
      there were nevertheless discrepancies which were  taken  into  account
      and which affected the credibility of his account.


  72. He submitted that Judge Lester approached the appeal on the basis that
      the earlier decision had never occurred.  She  had  not  given  proper
      reasons as to why "she stepped aside from it." Nor did she engage with
      the reasons for refusal letter.


      Assessment


  73. The secretary of state has  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge failed to apply the Devaseelan guidelines.


  74. I have set out in some  detail  the  decision  and  reasons  from  the
      decisions of both Judge Lester as  well  as  those  from  the  earlier
      decision of Judge Tipping.


  75. The Devaseelan guidelines were approved by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      Djebbar v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 804. The provision of guidance  on  how
      appellate bodies should deal with the fact of an earlier  unsuccessful
      application when  deciding  a  later  one  was  "essential  to  ensure
      consistency of approach." The Court emphasised that the most important
      feature of the guidance is that the fundamental  obligation  of  every
      immigration judge independently to decide each new application on  its
      own individual merits was preserved; the guidelines were  not  written
      in the language of res judicata or estoppel: Djebbar, supra at [15].


  76. The guidelines provide that matters arising since the first  appellate
      decision and facts which were not relevant to the  issues  before  the
      first Immigration Judge can be determined by  the  second.  The  first
      determination is generally to be regarded by  the  second  Immigration
      Judge as an authoritative determination of the issues  of  facts  that
      were before the first appellate  body.  Generally,  the  second  Judge
      should not revisit findings of fact made by the first on the basis  of
      evidence that was available to the appellant at the time of the  first
      hearing. Those facts may be revisited in the light  of  evidence  that
      was not available to the appellant at the time of  the  first  appeal.
      There may be revisited where the circumstances  of  the  first  appeal
      were such that it would be right for  the  second  appellant  body  to
      treat the first determination as if it had never been made.


  77. It may also be appropriate for the second appellate  body  to  revisit
      earlier credibility findings  if  the  issue  of  credibility  remains
      arguably live.


  78. If the second appeal contains asylum  or  human  rights  grounds,  the
      second appellate body in applying the Devaseelan guidelines would have
      to be mindful of the obligations  to  take  account  of  all  relevant
      material and to consider the case with the most anxious scrutiny[1].


  79. Although it might have been more helpful for Judge Lester to have  set
      out the  basis  on  which  she  applied  the  principles  set  out  in
      Devaseelan to the claimant's appeal before her, it is evident that she
      had before her the detailed skeleton argument prepared  on  behalf  of
      the claimant, which referred to that decision.


  80. As already noted, there was express reference  to  Devaseelan  in  the
      skeleton at paragraph 10. It had been contended  before  Judge  Lester
      that the age assessment before  Judge  Tipping  had  not  been  Merton
      compliant as no appropriate  adult  had  been  present.  The  relevant
      authorities were cited in support. It was accepted that he was a minor
      at the time and no reasons had been given for that failure.


  81. It is evident that Judge Lester in fact reminded  herself  on  several
      occasions in the course of a lengthy decision that the earlier refusal
      had been the subject of an  appeal  determined  by  Judge  Tipping  in
      November  2010  who  found  that  his  account  was  implausible   and
      inconsistent in many critical aspects [3].


  82. Moreover she expressly stated that there were  further  documents  and
      evidence subsequently produced which had not  been  available  at  the
      time of the earlier  decision.  This  in  particular  related  to  the
      Enfield Council's concerns as to the age of the claimant, resulting in
      its acceptance that his date of birth was 8 September 1996.


  83. Judge Lester stated that that age  assessment  was  not  before  Judge
      Tipping at the appeal on 23 November 2010. Nor could it have  been.  I
      have referred to the documentation from the Enfield  Council,  and  in
      particular reports from the social worker and others which post  dated
      Judge Tipping's decision. Such evidence has been referred to by  Judge
      Lester at [8] and [9].


  84. In addition, Judge Lester noted that there were  other  documents  not
      before Judge Tipping and which formed the basis  of  the  fresh  claim
      [10]. There were two letters of summons from the Baghlan police  dated
      8 November 2007 and 12  November  2007.  There  was  further  evidence
      including a letter  from  Mr  Rashid  to  the  claimant's  cousin  and
      guardian, Mr Rafi, as well as a letter from the Imam of  the  Palmer's
      Green mosque confirming the  claimant's  knowledge  of  the  Koran,  a
      statement from Haji Amazi who  knew  the  claimant's  father  and  his
      involvement with the Taliban, and a letter  from  the  Office  of  the
      Attorney General of Afghanistan dated 27 March 2012. This evidence  as
      well as further evidence set out at [11] formed the basis of the fresh
      claim.


  85. She had regard to the expert report of Dr Guistozzi  as  well  as  his
      further report dated 7 March 2012 and 15 January 2015 respectively.


  86. At [35] the presenting officer expressly relied on  the  secretary  of
      state's reasons for refusal and the determination of Judge Tipping who
      found the claimant was neither plausible nor credible [35]. As  noted,
      the Judge was invited to consider the documents in the  round  in  the
      light of the general lack of credibility of the claimant.


  87. Mr Bazini relied on the skeleton argument to  which  I  have  referred
      [38]. He submitted that this had been a fresh claim. The determination
      of Judge Tipping was  no  longer  sustainable  in  the  light  of  the
      evidence and the expert report. Nor was the  Coventry  age  assessment
      Merton compliant. There had been no appropriate adult present.


  88. It was contended that taking into account his age,  vulnerability  and
      the trauma he had suffered, that this was a 13 year old who was  being
      interviewed and was dealing with what he had witnessed as an  11  year
      old. The letter from Ms Sani at Annex D of  the  respondent's  bundle,
      who was the claimant's psychotherapist, was clear  that  the  claimant
      was 14 years old in April 2011 and this was the way  he  presented  in
      sessions with her. He was considered  a  looked  after  child  by  the
      council and treating his evidence in any other way would  be  contrary
      to UNHCR guidelines [38].


  89. There had been a concession by the secretary of state that the bombing
      referred to as part of the claimant's appeal had occurred in 2007. The
      fact that the authorities were interested in  the  claimant  had  been
      confirmed by Dr Giustozzi [40].  She found that all  the  elements  of
      his account were consistent  with  the  situation  in  Afghanistan  as
      confirmed by Dr Giustozzi. It had been possible to obtain an  identity
      document through personal connections. It was also submitted that  the
      ability of the claimant to avoid detection in Kabul for  seven  months
      had not been damaging to his claim.


  90. Judge Lester in a thorough and detailed decision has properly directed
      herself with regard to the assessment of an asylum claim [48-49].  She
      referred to the approach to be adopted in respect of asylum claims  by
      unaccompanied children [50]. She again stated at [51] that she set out
      the evidence in support of his appeal at some length  largely  because
      most of it was not  available  to  Judge  Tipping  when  he  made  his
      decision.


  91. She further stated that on any view, he was a very young  person  when
      things happened to him in Afghanistan and was a very young  person  to
      have undertaken such a journey. He had attempted to  substantiate  his
      account and the provision of documentary evidence with the  assistance
      of his cousins.


  92. She had regard to the fact that he had provided a  Taskira  purporting
      to show that he was born in 1996. That  document,  she  accepted,  was
      genuine  and  was  authenticated  by  Dr  Zadeh.  There  had  been  no
      contention otherwise by the presenting officer. She noted the  problem
      raised with that  document,  namely  that  the  claimant  by  his  own
      admission was not present when the document was drawn up. The document
      had been obtained on the basis of his word and the photograph [53].


  93. She noted that the claimant's representatives lodged the  original  of
      the summonses from the police in 2007 requiring his re-arrest after he
      escaped from custody, for involvement with his  father  in  a  suicide
      attack in Baghlan. Those documents however had not been  returned  for
      authentication,  notwithstanding  directions  on  two  occasions.  The
      documents were obtained by a friend of Mr Rafi, his guardian,  on  the
      journey to Afghanistan in May 2011.


  94. The Judge at [55] also had proper regard to the potential shortcomings
      of such documents.


  95. She accordingly turned to the other evidence, including the acceptance
      by the secretary of state that the bombing incident  did  take  place.
      She found from the expert report that it is therefore  plausible  that
      the claimant's father might have been suspected [56]. It was therefore
      plausible that the claimant as the oldest son would have been arrested
      for interrogation which involved beatings and  other  physical  abuse.
      His release by bribe was also quite plausible on  the  evidence  [57].
      She accepted that the claimant was then sent to a madrassa. There  was
      good evidence of his having learned the Koran to a high standard [58].




  96. She accepted that he left the Taliban in Kandahar as he did  not  wish
      to become involved in jihad. Dr Giustozzi doubted  that  he  would  be
      targeted by the Taliban for having left  the  group.  She  accordingly
      "inclined to the view" that he had much more to fear from  the  police
      and security forces rather than the government, although  the  Taliban
      would be able to exert significant psychological pressure on him.  She
      relied on Dr Giustozzi's report of the plausibility of the  claimant's
      assertion that he was able to remain for seven months in Kabul without
      being found by either the security forces or the Taliban.


  97. She also noted that there was ample evidence of the attempt  to  trace
      his family through the Red Cross as well as attempts made by  Mr  Rafi
      to locate his mother and siblings [61].


  98. She found for proper reasons that it would not be reasonable to expect
      the claimant to live in Kabul [62].


  99. In the light of this lengthy assessment, I find that Judge Lester made
      more than "a passing reference"  to  the  earlier  decision  of  Judge
      Tipping. She has on several occasions referred to  his  findings.  The
      contention that she "also omits to  apply  the  guidance  set  out  in
      Devaseelan by making the first decision a starting point before giving
      adequate reasons for any departure from it, is accordingly misplaced.


 100. It is evident, having regard to the  approach  and  reasoning  of  the
      Judge as a whole, that she was well aware of Devaseelan  and  she  has
      provided cogent reasons justifying the departure,  and  in  particular
      those arising from the flawed age assessment that had  been  available
      to Judge Tipping.


 101. It is evident that the Coventry council age assessment was flawed  and
      was not Merton compliant for  the  reasons  set  out.  In  the  event,
      Enfield Council adopted  an  approach  with  regard  to  their  duties
      towards the claimant on the basis that he was three years younger.


 102. In this respect the Judge had the  benefit  of  the  Taskira  document
      albeit that the claimant had not been present when it was  issued  but
      that the document was issued on the  basis  of  a  photograph  of  the
      claimant that was produced.


 103. In the circumstances, the claimant's credibility had to be assessed in
      the light of the approach to be taken with regard to asylum claims  by
      unaccompanied children. Judge Lester approached the  evidence  on  the
      basis that the claimant had been  13  years  old  when  he  was  being
      interviewed and that he dealt with what he had witnessed as an 11 year
      old.


 104. In the light of the further evidence, the findings by  the  Judge  are
      sustainable.  She  has  given  proper  reasons   for   accepting   the
      plausibility of his account as well as his ultimate credibility.


 105.  Her  conclusion  that  he  has  established  "on   the   balance   of
      probabilities" a reasonable  likelihood  that  he  would  be  at  risk
      particularly  from  the  authorities  were  he  to  be  returned,  was
      justified and appropriate having regard to Dr Giostozzi's  opinion  in
      that respect.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date  4/3/2016






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

-----------------------
[1]   Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice, 8th Edition, Volume 1,
19.106.

