
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05966/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 30 July 2014              |
|Ex Tempore                                    |                             |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                    EJPL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal by an Angolan national, against a decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Page promulgated on 12 February 2014 dismissing his
    appeal against the direction for his removal from the United Kingdom to
    Angola which accompanied the Secretary of State's decision refusing  to
    grant asylum or any other form of international protection.  The thrust
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision in the Determination and  Reasons
    dated 12 February 2014 was that the appellant's story that  he  was  at
    risk of being killed by a high-ranking army officer called Brigadier or
    General Cassoma was not credible.  He alleged in his evidence  that  he
    had worked for this Brigadier or General for a long period at his  home
    in Angola.

 2. The appeal is presented by Ms Smith on  behalf  of  the  appellant  who
    submits that the judge has made three errors in his  findings  of  fact
    which go to the appellant's credibility and which amounts to  an  error
    of law. Taken individually or cumulatively, Ms Smith says that, had the
    judge not come to these incorrect findings of fact  or  inferences,  he
    would or should have come to a  positive  finding  on  the  appellant's
    credibility.

 3. Ms Smith first takes issue with paragraph 27 of the  Determination  and
    Reasons  in which the judge said this:

         "During his asylum interview the appellant was unable to answer the
         question when asked to  give  the  address  where  General  Cassoma
         lived.  This is where the appellant  claimed  to  have  stayed  and
         worked for three years, commuting some of the time by bus.  In  his
         witness statement of 13 May 2013 the appellant  said  that  he  had
         lived at the address during the week and had gone home at weekends.
         If this had been true the appellant would have known where  General
         Cassoma lived."

 4. Ms Smith says that this finding was unfair  and  failed  to  take  into
    account the appellant's expert  evidence  that  places  in  Luanda  are
    identified "informally and by reference to local  landmarks  in  Luanda
    rather than by formal street names". The  problem,  however,  with  the
    Appellant's (so-called) expert evidence and that submission is that  it
    flies in the face of the appellant's own evidence in his  interview  in
    which he made it quite clear that  streets  were  identified.   He  was
    asked as follows:

         46:"What was the address of this house at which you stayed with the
             General?

         A:   He had a house at Martis but where the room was where I stayed
             was at Cassenda.

         47:  What street?

         A:   The street is called 17 Cassenda, I think,  is  street  number
             20, I'm not sure.  There was another house that  was  a  flat,
             number 90 or 102 on Prozecto Nova Vida.....

         48:  What was the full address of the house  at  which  you  had  a
             room?

        A:   I only know how to get there, I'm not sure about the number of
             the house or the street."

 5. In our judgment, the  Appellant's  own  evidence  blows  a  large  hole
    through  his  expert  evidence  that  streets  were   only   identified
    informally.  In any event,  it  was  entirely  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude, having read the evidence and having heard  the  witness  give
    evidence, that after  having  stayed  he  alleged  and  worked  at  the
    general's house for three years, that at the very least he should  have
    known the address where the General lived.  We can find  nothing  wrong
    with the judge's finding in this regard.

 6. Ms Smith's second point was criticism of paragraph 19  of  the  judge's
    Determination and Reasons where the judge found that the appellant  had
    given two  irreconcilable  accounts.   In  his  witness  statement  the
    Appellant was, as the judge said, plainly describing what  amounted  to
    full-time work at the General's house. However, in his oral evidence he
    gave a rather different picture of bits and pieces  of  work  including
    washing cars, doing odd jobs and feeding the dog. As Mr Avery says  for
    the Secretary of State in his Rule  24  response  the  clear  issue  in
    paragraph 19 is whether or not the appellant's  claim  in  his  witness
    statement  to  be  working  full-time  at  the  general's   house   was
    reconcilable  was  reconcilable  with  his  other  evidence.  Ms  Smith
    suggested that the appellant was not describing what amounted to  full-
    time work in his witness statement dated 13 May 2013 and that the judge
    was unfair in this regard.

 7. In paragraph 5 of  that  witness  statement  the  appellant  said  this
    (emphasis added):

         "Initially I went to the General's house located in  Cassenda.   It
         was about 30 minutes away from my house by taxi (Candungueiro)  and
         one hour by foot.  In the beginning I was asked to wash his and his
         wife's cars. Later,  when  I  tried  to  explain  my  situation  to
         Cassoma, he gave me a room outside the main house and allowed me to
         stay and work for him.  I used  to  stay  at  the  General's  house
         during the weekdays and go home during the weekends.   Occasionally
         I would spend weekends at the General's house and it depended on my
         workload.  I have been working for the General for the  past  three
         years.  My work involved washing cars,  watering  plants,  sweeping
         the floor and feeding his dog."

    It seems to us quite clear that what the appellant was describing there
    was full-time  work  at  the  General's  house  during  the  week  and,
    occasionally, more work at the weekends. In our judgment there  can  be
    no criticism of the judge's similar finding in paragraph 19 nor of  the
    judge's finding that when the appellant came to give his oral  evidence
    he gave a rather different picture.  In particular, he  was  asked  how
    often he would stay over at the General's house  and  he  replied,  "it
    depended on the amount of cars that  needed  washing".  The  judge  was
    justified in coming  to  the  conclusion  that  his  oral  account  was
    irreconcilable with his written statement.

 8. The third point taken by Ms Smith is in relation to paragraph 30 of the
    Determination and Reasons.  She submits that the judge  was  unfair  to
    conclude on the evidence that there was a difference  between  what  he
    said in his witness statement about there being an arrest warrant  when
    the police allegedly raided his family home compared with what he  said
    in his evidence when he claimed  that  they  did  not  have  an  arrest
    warrant.  It is fair to say in relation to this point that the evidence
    is not entirely pellucid.  In his interview the appellant said this:

         29:  Were they sent to arrest you?

         A:   Yes, they said they had a warrant against me but  they  hadn't
             any document with them.

         30:  On what charge did they want you?

         A:   To my aunt they only said they had a warrant  against  me  and
             wanted to  take  me.   They  had  no  identification  on  them
             either."

 9. In his witness statement dated 13 May 2013 he said this:

         "On 27 March 2013, I was visiting my family at home. That day, five
         hooded men dressed in black clothes carrying  weapons  came  to  my
         house in search of me.  My aunt who was  at  the  entrance  of  the
         house in the front yard confronted these men and  asked  them  what
         they were looking for. They said they were from the police and they
         had a warrant for my arrest. When  my  aunt  demanded  to  see  the
         document they forced their way in and my little sister  started  to
         scream.  When I heard the  commotion  I  jumped  out  of  the  back
         window, ran down the street away from the house  and  hid  under  a
         car.  I stayed under the car for approximately 30 minutes. By  this
         time the neighbours had gathered outside the house to see what  was
         going on."

10. We see some substance in this somewhat makeweight point  by  Ms  Smith,
    that the appellant's various accounts on the question of the  existence
    of an arrest warrant may not be inconsistent. However, when set against
    the large number of adverse findings by the judge on a  host  of  other
    points against the appellant, the materiality of this  minor  point  or
    infelicity in the Tribunal's determination in his findings falls  away.
    The problem with this appeal  like  so  many  other  appeals  involving
    criticisms of minor findings of fact by First-tier Judges  is  that  it
    fails to grapple with the overall cumulative findings of the  judge  as
    to credibility in the light of the evidence.

11. By way of example, one of the discrepancies that the  judge  found  and
    clearly had in mind when coming to his overall determination  was  that
    for instance at paragraph 28 in which he said this:

         "28. I did not  find  the  circumstances  in  which  the  appellant
             claimed to have obtained the  employment  of  General  Cassoma
             credible.  He claimed to have been washing cars  on  the  road
             when he met General Cassoma.  General Cassoma  asked  him  how
             much he was earning and he promised him more money if he would
             come and work at the General's house cleaning cars. I  do  not
             find it credible that a high-ranking army officer who used the
             services  of  someone  washing  cars  on  the  road  would  be
             concerned to enquire how much  he  was  being  paid  and  then
             immediately offer him a job  and  accommodation  at  his  home
             which was one hour away by taxi from where the  appellant  was
             working.

        a.    I am not satisfied that the appellant  was  working  for  the
           General and staying at   the house.  It  was  in  these  claimed
           circumstances that the appellant claims to  have     met  Andrea
           [the General's daughter with whom he alleged he had an  affair].
           If     he was not working there he did not meet Andrea and  have
           the relationship and     there the asylum claim falls away.  The
           appellant retracted his  evidence  in  his    witness  statement
           dated 13 May 2013 when he said that he was only working at   the
           General's house a few hours here and there when required and  it
           was only   when there was more work to do at the house  that  he
           would stay over.  He said    kin answer to  Ms  Thomas  that  it
           would be quite wrong to say that he  was    working  there  five
           days a week. His witness statement adopted at the start  of  the
           hearing said precisely that."

12. Mr Walker has rightly highlighted the following key  paragraph  in  the
    Determination and Reasons in which the judge concluded as follows:

         "32. I remind the parties that this document is a determination  of
             the appellant's appeal  with  reasons  and  not  a  Record  of
             Proceedings. After considering all of the evidence before  me,
             which includes the evidence not specifically  referred  to  in
             this  determination,  I  find   myself   reaching   the   same
             conclusions that the respondent reached in the refusal  letter
             about the core of the  appellant's  asylum  claim.  It  is  an
             obvious invention, so does not meet the low standard of proof.
             The only possible reason for the  discrepancies  is  that  the
             appellant had forgotten what he had said on earlier  occasions
             and later changed his evidence. I find it to be no more than a
             fanciful  possibility  that  the  appellant's  mental   health
             difficulties explain the discrepancies."

13. This judge looked at all the evidence,  considered  it  and  heard  the
    appellant give evidence orally and being cross-examined. We do not find
    there to be  any  proper  basis  for  challenging  his  conclusions  on
    credibility but we deprecate attempts by  appellant  to  pick  away  at
    individual minor findings of fact in order to give the appearance of  a
    proper credible appeal. For all those reasons this appeal is dismissed.


Decision

     1. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


     2. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   We
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).





Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice  Haddon-Cave

