
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05749/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November 2014                        |On 5th December 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     sr
                          (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms P Young, Counsel instructed by Polpitiya & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5th  October  1970.  He
    first came to the UK illegally on 28th July 2013 on a  German  passport
    in the name of SA. He claimed asylum at the Asylum  Screening  Unit  in
    Croydon on 13th August 2013. His application was refused on  22nd  July
    2014. He appealed on 12th August 2014.  His appeal was dismissed  in  a
    determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Gibbs promulgated  on
    1st October 2014.

 2. On 29th October 2014 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal French
    found that there was  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination because  Judge  Gibbs  had  not  had  regard  to
    paragraph 339K of the  Immigration  Rules,  having  accepted  that  the
    appellant had been detained and tortured for a week in  2013  and  that
    this had followed him being identified at a check-point.  It  was  also
    arguable that Judge Gibbs had failed to properly apply the guidance  in
    the case of GJ & Others (post civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]
    UKUT 00319.

 3. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 4. Ms Young relied upon her grounds of appeal. In  summary  these  say  as
    follows. That the First-tier Tribunal had found the appellant to  be  a
    credible witness and that he was a Sri Lankan national. It was accepted
    that he had worked as a van driver for the LTTE until 2009. It was also
    accepted that he had been detained in 2013 at a  check-point  where  he
    was identified, arrested, detained and then severely tortured.  He  was
    released on payment of a bribe.

 5. During his detention the appellant was shown  photos  to  identify  and
    asked where the  LTTE  hid  their  arms.  He  could  not  answer  these
    questions and was tortured as a result. The facts of the detention were
    noted to be consistent with the respondents OGN  at  paragraph  3.9.15.
    However despite these findings Judge Gibbs  found  that  the  appellant
    would not be at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 6. Judge Gibbs ought to have applied paragraph  229K  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in these circumstances as clearly the appellant had already  been
    subject to persecution. The role of the Tribunal thereafter was to look
    for good reasons why such persecution would  not  be  repeated.  As  no
    material changes in the situation in  Sri  Lanka  had  been  identified
    since that time the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred in law.

 7. The country guidance case of GJ  should  have  led  the  appeal  to  be
    allowed as there was clear evidence of the appellant  being  identified
    and targeted. Saying that there was no risk as the appellant  was  only
    persecuted due to "wrong time wrong place"  is  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence accepted that he had been identified by  his  persecutors.  In
    the circumstances Judge Gibbs ought  to  have  considered  whether  the
    appellant was on stop list or watch list post-conflict,  and  therefore
    at risk.

 8. Mr Bramble accepted that there had been  no  application  of  paragraph
    339K of the Immigration Rules but said this was not a material error of
    law. Judge Gibbs had set out GJ and  also  taken  into  account  of  KK
    (application of GJ) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00512 at paragraphs 39 and 40
    of her  determination.  She  had  dealt  with  the  argument  that  the
    appellant could be caught by the risk category (7a) at paragraph 41  of
    her determination.

 9. Ms Young argued in reply that as the appellant's parents were dead  and
    his wife was in India that there was no one in Sri Lanka to inform  him
    if there was an arrest warrant so it was possible in the  circumstances
    of the case that the appellant fell within the (7d) risk  category,  in
    any case the appellant should be seen as someone perceived as a  threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka under (7a).

10. I informed the parties that I found that  Judge  Gibbs  had  materially
    erred in law for the reasons argued by Ms Young, and set out  below.  I
    therefore set aside the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    appellant was not at future risk of  persecution  if  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka and the decision dismissing the appeal.  The  findings  of  Judge
    Gibb with respect to the appellant's past persecution and  nationality,
    which were not said by either party to be unsound, were preserved.

Conclusions - Error of Law

11. At no point in her determination did Judge  Gibbs  refer  to  paragraph
    339K of the Immigration Rules despite making clear  findings  that  the
    appellant had been detained and  tortured  for  one  week  in  2013  at
    paragraph 38 of her determination. This was a material misdirection  of
    law as she did not point to any change in the situation  in  Sri  Lanka
    since 2013 and because the dismissal of future risk on the  basis  that
    the appellant's persecution was explained as a chance mistake or "wrong
    place wrong time" (paragraph 41 of her determination)  is  at  variance
    with her finding at paragraph 35  of  her  determination  that  he  had
    suffered  detention  and  torture  due  to  being  "identified   at   a
    checkpoint."

Submissions - Re-making

12. Mr Bramble submitted that as there was no evidence the appellant was on
    a stop or watch list that he did not come within any of the  categories
    set out in GJ. I should dismiss the appeal.

13. Ms Young submitted that there had been no change  of  circumstances  in
    Sri Lanka since the appellant was detained and tortured in 2013. He had
    been forced to flee Sri Lanka and come to the UK which was a  place  of
    diaspora activity. In such circumstances there was a real risk he would
    again be identified and tortured,  particularly  as  he  has  prominent
    scars from his last torture which would indicate that he is an opponent
    of the regime. This was realistic given the paranoid state of  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities which is the evidence of the Swiss  Refugee  Council
    which is set out in the respondent's own Operational Guidance  Note  at
    paragraph 3.9.15 and cited in  the  determination  of  Judge  Gibbs  at
    paragraph 39.

14. At the end of the hearing I informed the parties I  would  be  allowing
    the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds. My reasons are  set  out
    below.

Conclusions - Re-making

15. As set out above the appellant had been previously  identified  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities at a check-point and detained  and  tortured  in
    2013 as a result of his LTTE involvement prior to 2009. He paid a bribe
    and escaped to the UK where  he  claimed  asylum.  He  has  significant
    scarring on his body from torture.

16. I therefore find that the appellant has previously suffered persecution
    as he was tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities due to his actual  and
    imputed political opinions. In accordance with paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules I must therefore find that he has a well-founded fear
    of future persecution unless there are good reasons which show it  will
    not be repeated. There is no evidence before me that the  situation  in
    Sri Lanka has changed in any  material  respect  since  2013  when  the
    appellant was tortured.

17. If the Sri Lankan authorities had in some  way  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant was not a political opponent and had been detained  in  error
    then it would have been possible to conclude, as Judge Gibbs did,  that
    this was a "chance incident" and a case of "wrong time,  wrong  place".
    However there is no evidence of this: he was not released after a  week
    at the instigation of the authorities because he was of no interest  to
    them, but only escaped unlawfully through payment of a bribe  from  his
    uncle in Canada.

18. If the appellant were returned to Sri Lanka it would appear that  there
    would be exactly the same reasons  that  he  might  be  identified  and
    detained  again,  along  with  potential  additional  interest  in  him
    generated by the fact that he has been in a centre of diaspora interest
    (London)  and  due  to  his  unlawful  escape  from  detention.  As  GJ
    identifies the focus of the  Sri  Lankan  government  is  currently  on
    preventing diaspora  Tamil  separatist  destabilising  the  Sri  Lankan
    states (see (3)  of  the  headnote).  I  appreciate  however  that  the
    Tribunal also found that the Sri Lankan authorities  had  sophisticated
    intelligence to identify  those  who  were  intent  on  reviving  Tamil
    separatism and the appellant has made no case that he  is  involved  in
    any such activities. As Ms Young has argued it is hard to tell  if  the
    appellant is on a "watch list". The evidence of GJ  is  that  he  would
    only be on a watch list if an  arrest  warrant  had  been  issued  (see
    paragraph 16). As the appellant has no close family in Sri Lanka he  is
    unlikely to get to know if this was the result of his  absconding  from
    detention or not. The country guidance (at (9 of the headnote) suggests
    that generally the appellant would only be detained if on such a  watch
    list if surveillance suggested he was involved with Tamil activism.

19. The appellant has credibly set out that he has  only  a  historic  low-
    level involvement with the LTTE prior to 2009. The  country  of  origin
    materials reviewed in GJ find that such a person does not have  a  real
    risk of serious harm in Sri Lanka today.  However  this  appellant  was
    persecuted, as he was detained and horribly tortured  for  his  imputed
    political opinions in 2013 and only escaped by use  of  a  bribe.  This
    leads me to conclude that he must have been perceived  as  someone  who
    has a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism by
    the authorities (risk factor 7(a) in GJ). This would  be  an  erroneous
    view  but  even  the  most  sophisticated  intelligence  machines  make
    mistakes, and there is no evidence that the Sri Lankan authorities have
    acknowledged their error. The appellant's  absconding  from  detention;
    spending time in London (a known diaspora  centre);  and  having  clear
    scarring from torture (still  an  issue  potentially  arousing  greater
    suspicion with suspects if they are detained - see evidence  in  GJ  at
    paragraph 126) are factors which are more likely to confirm rather than
    undermine this mistaken view. I find that the appellant is at real risk
    of being detained for reason  of  his  imputed  political  opinions  on
    return to Sri Lanka as a result.

20. GJ finds that if a person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
    services that they remain at real risk of ill-treatment and  harm,  and
    that internal relocation is not an option for a  person  at  real  risk
    (see paragraphs (4) and (5) of the headnote).

21. I find, applying the lower civil level of proof  applicable  in  asylum
    cases,  that  the  appellant  therefore  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution in accordance with 7(a) of the country guidance set out  in
    GJ. His appeal is allowed in accordance with the UK's obligations under
    Article 3 ECHR on the same grounds.

Decision

   1. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

   2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   3. The appeal is remade allowing the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  in
      accordance with Article 3 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 3rd December 2014


Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date 3rd December 2014

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
