

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05110/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                           |
|On 9 February 2016                       |               On 12 February 2016    |
|                                         |                                      |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between


                                     HN
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Preliminary
    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellants  because  of  the  nature  of  the  case.   I  consider   it
    appropriate to make  a  similar  order  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
    Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    To give effect to this order the appellant is to be referred to by  the
    initials above.


 1. The appellant was born on 28 August 1979 and is a  citizen  of  Gambia.
    She appeals against the decision and reasons  statement  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pirotta that was promulgated on 24 June 2015.   Although
    expressed at length, she has three grounds of appeal.

        a. She complains that the judge refers at several places  to  Ghana
           rather than Gambia.  This is of particular concern in paragraphs
           32  and  35  where  the  judge  refers  to  background   country
           information.

        b. She complains that the judge acted unfairly  by  preventing  her
           raising new issues  during  the  hearing  that  related  to  the
           conduct of the Home Office interviews, pointing out that one  of
           the records of interview had only been disclosed at the hearing.

        c. She complains that the judge used  stereotyping  when  assessing
           her  sexual  orientation  and  therefore  did  not  examine  the
           appellant's evidence objectively.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Kopieczek  on  3
    September 2015.  At the end  of  his  grant  he  issued  the  following
    directions.

         No later than 7 days before the hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal
         the following must be filed and served.

         (i)  a  witness  statement  from  a  person  from  the   solicitors
         representing  the  appellant  setting  out  when  the   appellant's
         solicitors were first served with a) the screening interview and b)
         the asylum interview.

         (ii) a witness statement from the appellant setting out  in  detail
         the points of  contention  in  relation  to  the  accuracy  of  the
         screening and asylum interviews.

         (iii) a skeleton argument on behalf of the  appellant  which  deals
         with the question of the materiality of any error of law raised  in
         the grounds.

 3. There has been no reply to any of these directions.

 4. Notice of hearing was issued to the parties on 18 January 2016.  On  23
    January 2016, the appellant's solicitors  informed  the  Tribunal  that
    they were no longer representing the appellant and  advised  that  they
    had "been trying to locate and correspond with the  client  but  to  no
    avail."

 5. In light of this information and having regard to rule 38 of  the  2008
    Procedure Rules, being  satisfied  that  notice  of  hearing  had  been
    properly given and noting that there were no other reasonable steps the
    Tribunal could take to notify the appellant of the hearing,  I  decided
    to proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellant.

 6. The lack of instructions explains why the solicitors failed  to  comply
    with directions.  But this leaves me with the grounds only to consider.
     Mr Harrison addressed me in respect of each ground but because I  have
    decided to dismiss this appeal there is no need for me to  recount  his
    submissions in detail.  I consider each ground of appeal in turn.

 7. With regard to the first ground,  although  I  accept  that  the  judge
    erroneously refers to Ghana at least four times in her decision, it  is
    also evident that she refers correctly to Gambia at other junctures.  I
    can find nothing in the decision or  reasons  that  suggests  that  the
    judge had evidence about Ghana in mind.  It is  clear  that  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's claim because of internal inconsistencies  and
    credibility  issues  rather  than  because  of  issues  regarding   the
    treatment of LGBT persons in Gambia.  If  fact,  the  grounds  fail  to
    identify  how   these   slips   (which   are   most   unfortunate   and
    unprofessional) affected the outcome.  For these reasons,  I  find  the
    first ground is not made out.

 8. The second ground is disposed of by reference to paragraph  19  of  the
    judge's decision.  It records:

         19.  I determined that the Appellant should  not  be  permitted  to
         raise the new issues.  Counsel for the Appellant did  not  seek  an
         adjournment so that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  taken  by
         surprise, but agreed not to pursue these arguments in this  hearing
         or any further appeal.

 9. I do not know why a party should seek to suggest that a judge has erred
    in law by accepting a concession such as that given in this  case.   It
    may be that the appellant's solicitors were not happy with the approach
    taken by counsel (Mr Jussab) and are  seeking  to  re-open  the  issue.
    However, since they instructed Mr Jussab and since he  had  conduct  of
    the matter, they are stuck with his  concession.   I  cannot  find  any
    fault in the way the judge proceeded given this concession and  I  find
    there is no error of law.

10. The third ground  is  also  unproven.   The  judge  does  not  use  any
    stereotyping when making her decision.  When assessing the evidence  to
    decide if the appellant was  a  lesbian  as  claimed  the  judge  noted
    numerous inconsistencies  and  implausibilities.   The  author  of  the
    grounds misreads the judge's findings.  When  read  in  context  it  is
    clear that Judge Pirotta found it implausible that the appellant  would
    attend a Pride event in Manchester but not more local events.  This was
    an additional reason for finding against the appellant; other parts  of
    her account had been rejected because  of  inconsistency.   Read  as  a
    whole, there is no legal error.

11. As the appellant has failed  to  show  there  is  legal  error  in  the
    decision and reasons, they are upheld.

Decision

The decision and reasons of Judge Pirotta do not  contain  any  legal  error
and her decision is upheld.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
