
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05002/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st November 2016                 |On 16th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp,  Counsel  instructed  on  behalf  of  the
Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant  is  a  national  of  Pakistan.   In  the  light  of  the
    circumstances of the  Appellant's  claim  I  make  an  anonymity  order
    pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
    Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify him.  This direction  applies  both  to
    the Appellant and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal panel, who in a determination promulgated on  3rd  August
    2015, dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse
    his protection claim based on his religion as an Ahmadi.

 3. The Appellant's immigration history is not in dispute.  In summary, the
    Appellant was born into an Ahmadi household and in consequence followed
    the Ahmadi faith.  There is no issue in this case  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant is in fact an Ahmadi Muslim.  On 28th April 2006  he  applied
    for a visa to enter the UK and was issued with a  two  year  multivisit
    visa valid from 24th July 2006 until 24th July 2008.  Pursuant to  that
    visa he arrived in the  UK  on  13th  September  2006.   The  Appellant
    remained in the UK after the visa expired unlawfully.

 4. In July 2013, he was encountered on an  immigration  enforcement  visit
    and was arrested and served with a notice of liability to  be  removed.
    Three days after that, the Appellant made his claim for asylum.

 5. In  pursuance  of  that  claim,  a  substantive  asylum  interview  was
    completed and on 10th March 2015 the Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    claim for protection on the basis that she was not satisfied  that  the
    Appellant established a well-founded fear of persecution on account  of
    his religion.  The Respondent set out  the  basis  of  her  case  in  a
    detailed reasons for refusal letter taking into account the Appellant's
    factual claim, the country materials available and in the light of  the
    country guidance case of MN and Others (Ahmadis - country conditions  -
    risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC).

 6. The Appellant appealed that decision  and  as  a  consequence  it  came
    before the First-tier Tribunal panel on 5th June 2015.

 7. In a determination promulgated on 3rd August 2015, the panel  dismissed
    his claim.  The panel set  out  the  factual  basis  of  his  claim  at
    paragraphs [8] to [20] of the determination.  The  Appellant's  account
    was that when he was in Pakistan he  would  participate  in  activities
    with the Ahmadiyi Jamaat.  The Appellant was a member of  an  auxiliary
    organisation called the Majlis Khuidamul Ahmadayya  looking  after  the
    affairs of males under the age of 40.

 8. He asserted that on 24th April 2005 he took a male friend, who was  not
    of the Ahmadi faith, to an Ahmadi event and the  friend  had  collected
    leaflets containing information.  On the  following  day  his  friend's
    father and others came to the house and knocked on the  door.   He  was
    beaten and sustained injuries to his arm.  The incident was reported to
    the police but because of his faith as an Ahmadi the incident  was  not
    registered.  The  panel  noted  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence
    provided in support of that account.

 9. In April 2005 the Appellant went to live at his uncle's  house  however
    his friend had contacted him and on 13th August 2005  he  was  attacked
    after leaving his uncle's house.  He lost consciousness and was treated
    in hospital for two days.  Once he had been discharged, he remained  at
    his uncle's house rarely venturing out save  for  every  two  to  three
    weeks to visit his uncle's shop.  His father arranged for an  agent  to
    obtain a visa to get to the UK.

10. The Appellant arrived in the UK on 13th September 2006.

11. Since his  arrival  in  the  UK,  the  Appellant  has  participated  in
    activities on behalf of the A Association UK and at the hearing  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, they heard evidence from a witness  Mr  A  and
    considered  the  written  documentary  evidence  from  the  association
    alongside a number of photographs showing the Appellant practising  his
    faith.

12. The panel's findings are set out at paragraphs  [22]  to  [33]  and  in
    reaching their findings of fact they  considered  the  account  of  his
    experiences in Pakistan and also his activities in the UK.

13. As to the events in Pakistan, the panel rejected his account of  having
    been beaten  in  April  and  August  2005  for  the  reasons  given  at
    paragraphs [24] to [26].  They took into account that  the  Appellant's
    uncle with whom he had lived in Pakistan now lived  in  the  UK  having
    arrived in 2008 however, he  had  not  been  called  to  give  evidence
    despite the fact that he  would  have  been  able  to  corroborate  the
    reasons given by the Appellant for coming to live with him in Pakistan;
    and that he would have been well placed to confirm that  the  Appellant
    had been beaten in August 2005 and also provide evidence to support the
    Appellant's claim given the Appellant's account was that he  had  lived
    with him for the  last  sixteen  and  a  half  months  before  he  left
    Pakistan. The panel also found at [26] that a medical  report  had  not
    been provided to corroborate or substantiate any injuries  from  having
    been beaten.

14. The panel  also  took  into  account  other  matters  relating  to  the
    Appellant's credibility at paragraphs [27] to [32].  At paragraph  [27]
    they took into account the method by which he had gained admittance  to
    the United Kingdom which included representations  being  made  on  his
    behalf which were false.  Furthermore, he  had  overstayed  in  the  UK
    rather than admit the deception referred to at paragraph [27] and  that
    he had not made a claim for asylum until nearly seven years  after  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom and only after he had been arrested as an
    overstayer.  The panel also rejected his claim, made for the first time
    in cross-examination, that he had influenced Mr S  to  convert  to  the
    Ahmadi faith.  The panel found that to be a late embellishment  to  his
    claim.

15. The Respondent and the First-tier  Tribunal  panel  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was an Ahmadi Muslim.  The First-tier Tribunal panel set  out
    and then sought to apply the country guidance decision in MN and Others
    (as cited), when applying the country guidance to the factual  findings
    made, they stated at [31] that they had not  accepted  his  account  of
    what had happened in Pakistan and thus they  had  to  consider  whether
    there was any truth in the Appellant's assertion that the freedom to be
    more open about his faith in the UK had given him a "sincere desire  to
    continue with the activities in the UK" which the panel accepted he had
    performed.  The panel went on to state, "If that were true, it is clear
    that he would be evincing an intention to engage in  what  the  country
    guidance refers to as paragraph 2(i) behaviour."   At  [32]  the  panel
    took into account that there was no evidence from the Appellant's uncle
    and that the finding they had made  in  which  they  had  rejected  his
    recent claim of having converted a person to  the  Ahmadi  faith  which
    they found to be a  lie  calculated  to  promote  his  case  about  how
    prominent a proselytiser he was in Pakistan.

16. At [33] the panel acknowledged that  whilst  it  might  seem  to  be  a
    natural development for any Ahmadi to compare and contrast the  freedom
    which this country afforded him to openly practise his faith  with  the
    lack of freedom which Pakistan affords him,  the  panel  did  not  find
    there to be a reasonable degree of likelihood that the Appellant "has a
    sincere desire to practise and manifest his faith in such a  manner  as
    would attract persecution in Pakistan."  Whilst the panel accepted that
    he had been involved in religious activities in the UK, in view of  the
    Appellant's "severely damaged credibility"  they  did  not  accept  the
    activities could be regarded as a sincere indication of  how  he  would
    wish to practise his faith in  Pakistan.   Consequently  they  did  not
    accept that fear of persecution would prevent him from  practising  his
    faith in the manner he wishes.  Thus they dismissed his appeal.

17. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and relied upon
    two principal grounds as set out in the papers before  me.   Permission
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal on 21st August 2015.

18. In a determination  promulgated  on  the  13th  June  2016,  the  Upper
    Tribunal gave its reasons as to why the First-tier Tribunal  panel  had
    erred in law in reaching its overall decision to  dismiss  his  appeal.
    This  determination  should  be   read   in   conjunction   with   that
    determination.

19.  Consequently, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  thus  set
    aside and the appeal was listed for  a  resumed  hearing  on  the  11th
    August 2016.  The hearing did not go ahead due to witness  availability
    and was adjourned until the 1st November.  At that hearing the  parties
    agreed  a  schedule  of  findings  which  was  approved  by  UT   Judge
    Rimmington. They are as follows:

20. Schedule of Findings

      1) The  Appellant's  identity  (including  his  nationality  has  been
         accepted) (RFRL paragraph 22);

      2) It is accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  an  Ahmadi  Muslim  (RFRL
         paragraph 26, FTT paragraph 22);

      3) The Appellant's immigration history is not in dispute, the  account
         of it in the Respondent's RFRL being accepted (UTJ Reeds  paragraph
         3);

      4) The following findings of the FTT are preserved;

          a) The Appellant was not beaten in 2005 because of  his  religion
             or religious activity (FTT paragraphs 26 - 28, 30 - 31);

          b)  The  Appellant  did  not  convert  another  man,  S,  to  the
             Appellant's own faith (FTT paragraphs 29 - 32);

      5) The Appellant has been able to express his faith more freely in the
         United Kingdom than in Pakistan and has been involved in  at  least
         some religious events whilst in the United Kingdom  (FTT  paragraph
         33).

21. The issue for re-hearing  is  whether  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    protection on the basis of a relevant threat to his freedom to manifest
    his faith in Pakistan, notwithstanding the rejection of  parts  of  his
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.(See MN and Others  (Ahmadis  -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389 (IAC)).

22. Although some of the previous findings are preserved,  the  nature  and
    extent of the Appellant's faith  in  Pakistan(  as  relevant)  and  the
    United Kingdom and his  present  commitment  to  manifest  that  faith,
    remain to be determined.

Hearing and Evidence

23. At the hearing before me, further evidence was filed on behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  This was prepared in a supplementary bundle which  included
    an AMA (UK) letter dated 8th August 2013, a further updated  letter  of
    8th August 2016 and the amended witness statement of the witness  Mr  A
    dated 29th May 2015 but amended on 1st November 2016.   In  addition  I
    heard oral evidence from the Appellant which was the subject of  cross-
    examination by Mr Bates.

24.  At the conclusion of the evidence I heard submissions from each of the
    advocates which I will set out in my Record of Proceedings and which  I
    will refer to in my assessment of the relevant issues.

25. As set out above, the relevant country guidance concerning the risk  to
    Ahmadi Muslims on return to  Pakistan  is  MN  and  Others  (Ahmadis  -
    country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT  00389  (IAC)  which
    establishes that a risk of persecution  may  exist  to  an  Ahmadi  who
    openly (rather than privately) practises their faith.

26. At paragraph [2(i)] of the head note in MN and Others, the restrictions
    on Ahmadis practising their faith is summarised:-

         "2.  (i) The background to the risk faced by Ahmadis is legislation
                  that restricts the way in which they are  able  openly  to
                  practise their faith.  The legislation not only  prohibits
                  preaching and other forms of  proselytising  but  also  in
                  practice restricts other  elements  of  manifesting  one's
                  religious beliefs, such as holding  open  discourse  about
                  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not  amounting  to
                  proselytising.  The prohibitions include openly  referring
                  to one's place  of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
                  religious leader as an Imam.  In addition, Ahmadis are not
                  permitted to refer to the call to prayer as  azan  nor  to
                  call themselves Muslims or refer to their faith as  Islam.
                  Sanctions include a fine and imprisonment and if blasphemy
                  is found, there is a risk of the death  penalty  which  to
                  date has not been carried out although there is a risk  of
                  lengthy incarceration if the penalty is imposed.  There is
                  clear evidence that this legislation is used by  non-state
                  actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis.  This includes  the
                  filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step
                  in  any  criminal  proceedings)  which   can   result   in
                  detentions whilst prosecutions are being pursued.  Ahmadis
                  are also subject  to  attacks  by  non-state  actors  from
                  sectors of the majority Sunni Muslim population."

27. However, at paragraph [2(ii)] of the head note the Upper Tribunal noted
    that practise of faith in private is different:-

         "2.  (ii)     It is, and has been, possible in general for  Ahmadis
                  to practise their faith on a restricted  basis  either  in
                  private  or  in  community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without
                  infringing domestic Pakistan law."

28. At paragraph [3(i)] of the head note of MN and  Others,  the  potential
    risk to those falling within paragraph [2(i)] is identified:-

         "3.  (i) If an  Ahmadi  is  able  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  of
                  particular  importance  to  his  religious   identity   to
                  practise and manifest his  faith  openly  in  Pakistan  in
                  defiance of the restrictions in the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
                  (PPC)  under  sections  298B  and  298C,  by  engaging  in
                  behaviour described in paragraph 2(i) above, he or she  is
                  likely to be in need of protection, in the  light  of  the
                  serious nature of the sanctions that potentially apply  as
                  well as the risk of prosecution  under  section  295C  for
                  blasphemy."

29. Further, following HJ (Iran) and Another v the sshd [2010] UKSC 31,  in
    MN and Others it is recognised at paragraph [3(ii)] of  the  head  note
    that:-

         "3.  (ii)     It is no answer to expect  an  Ahmadi  who  fits  the
                  description just given  to  avoid  engaging  in  behaviour
                  described  in  paragraph  2(i)   above   (paragraph   2(i)
                  behaviour) to avoid a risk of prosecution."

30. As the Upper Tribunal identified at paragraphs [5] and [6] of the  head
    note, the steps which must be  undertaken  or  answered  are  set  out.
    Firstly in paragraph [5] it is recorded that the Tribunal must identify
    whether the individual is genuinely an Ahmadi.  In  this  case  it  was
    accepted by the Secretary of State and by the First-tier Tribunal panel
    that the applicant was an Ahmadi. I therefore proceed on this basis.

31. Then at paragraph [6], the second step  is  set  out  relating  to  the
    individual's intentions or wishes as to  their  faith  if  returned  to
    Pakistan.  It reads as follows:-

         "6.  The next step (2) involves  an  enquiry  into  the  claimant's
             intentions or wishes as to his or her faith,  if  returned  to
             Pakistan.  This is relevant because of the need  to  establish
             whether it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the  religious
             identity of the Ahmadi concerned to engage in  paragraph  2(i)
             behaviour.  The burden is on the claimant to demonstrate  that
             any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects of  the
             faith openly that are not permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code
             (PPC) is genuinely held and of particular  importance  to  the
             claimant to preserve  his  or  her  religious  identity.   The
             decision maker needs to evaluate all the evidence.   Behaviour
             since arrival in the UK may also be relevant.  If the claimant
             discharges  this  burden  he  is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
             protection."

32. At paragraph [8], the Upper Tribunal noted that for  those  seeking  to
    bring themselves within paragraph [6]:-

         "8.  Ahmadis who are not able to show  that  they  practised  their
             faith at all in Pakistan or that they did so on anything other
             than the restricted basis described in paragraph  2(ii)  above
             are in general unlikely to be able to show that their  genuine
             intentions or wishes are to practise and manifest their  faith
             openly on return, as described in paragraph 2(i) above."

33. The decision also considers sur  place  activity  in  the  UK  and  its
    relevance to the issue of  an  individual's  intentions  on  return  to
    Pakistan at paragraph [9]:-

         "9.   A  sur  place  claim  by  an  Ahmadi  based  on  post-arrival
             conversion or revival in  belief  and  practice  will  require
             careful  evidential  analysis.   This  will  probably  include
             consideration of evidence of the head of the claimant's  local
             United Kingdom Ahmadi community and from the UK  headquarters,
             the latter particularly  in  cases  where  there  has  been  a
             conversion.  Any adverse findings in the claimant's account as
             a whole may be relevant to the assessment of likely  behaviour
             on return."

34. When applied to this particular appeal, the Appellant's case is that he
    falls within the risk category identified in paragraph [3(i)] read with
    paragraph [2(i)] of the head note in MN and Others.

35. I have given careful consideration to the evidence that  I  have  heard
    from the Appellant and his witness and the written evidence that is set
    out  in  the  supplementary  bundle.  I   have   also   given   careful
    consideration to the submissions made on behalf of both parties. I have
    reached the following conclusions from that  evidence,  having  applied
    anxious scrutiny.

36. Mr Bates on behalf of the Secretary of State accepts that  the  adverse
    findings of  credibility  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  not
    determinative, but he submits that they  are  strongly  influential  in
    making an assessment of this Appellant's motivation.  He submitted that
    there was evidence from the AMA (UK) and that the Tribunal  would  have
    to consider whether the Appellant's motivation was genuine  or  whether
    his attendance and his activities was done out of the  belief  that  it
    would assist him in establishing a claim.  He  further  submitted  that
    the vast majority of his activities were "unremarkable"  and  could  be
    carried out in Pakistan and that in terms of practising his  faith,  he
    was not a "significant player" who was not the "driving  force"  behind
    the activities.

37. By way of  reply,  Mr  Fripp  invited  the  Tribunal  to  consider  the
    Appellant's activities in the light of the  country  guidance  decision
    and in particular the prohibition to practising his faith as set out in
    the Pakistani Penal Code as set in the country guidance  decision.   He
    reminded  the  Tribunal  of  the  prohibitions  as  to   the   everyday
    expressions concerning the identity of those of the  Ahmadi  faith  and
    the opposition that they faced in this regard (paragraphs 101 - 103  of
    MN and Others (as cited)), and that the PPC  does  not  refer  only  to
    proselytising but how the faith is considered and interpreted by  other
    Muslims.  He acknowledged the adverse credibility findings made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but invited this Tribunal  to  consider  the  other
    evidence in support of the Appellant's case, including the letters from
    the AMA (UK) which shed light on his practise  of  his  faith  both  in
    Pakistan and in the UK and the oral and  documentary  evidence  of  the
    witness Mr A.  In particular, he submitted, weight should be  given  to
    the evidence notwithstanding his poor immigration history and that  the
    Appellant had been practising his faith as an Ahmadi in  the  UK  since
    2007 which was a significant period of time  before  he  had  made  his
    asylum claim in 2012.

38.  The first issues relates to the Appellant's practice of his  faith  in
    Pakistan. I begin my consideration the preserved findings of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The panel were not satisfied that he had converted Mr S
    to the Ahmadi faith.  At paragraph [29] they considered that  claim  to
    have done so was a late embellishment of his  claim  and  that  had  it
    occurred it would have been put forward at an earlier stage.

39. At paragraph [9], the panel repeated the Appellant's claim that he  had
    participated in activities with the Ahmadiyi Jamaat and considered  his
    circumstances in Pakistan and the events in April and August  of  2005.
    At paragraph [17], they recorded his evidence that:-

         "He had felt a sense of relief in this country knowing that he will
         not be persecuted for his religious identity.  He  is  able  to  be
         open about his faith in a manner he could not be in  Pakistan.   He
         asserts he is more than determined to continue with the  activities
         he has performed in this country in connection with his faith.   He
         says 'I am at the stage where  I  do  not  wish  to  compromise  my
         religious identity any more or live  the  rest  of  my  life  as  a
         hypocrite.'"

    The only finding on this issue is at paragraph [25] whereby  the  panel
    stated:-

         "To some degree the Appellant himself seeks to draw  a  distinction
         between the manner in which he practised his religion  in  Pakistan
         and in the UK.  It was in Pakistan that  he  was  compromising  his
         religious identity.  Now, having tasted the freedom afforded him in
         this country, he no  longer  wishes  to  compromise  his  religious
         identity."

40. The Appellant's evidence is that  he  actively  engaged  in  duties  in
    Pakistan and had tried to attend prayers discreetly because  to  do  so
    openly would bring "danger to my life".   He stated that he  could  not
    preach publicly because it  was  not  allowed  by  the  authorities  in
    Pakistan it being against the Pakistani Penal Code and because  of  the
    Kathum Nabawat.  He further stated that  if  there  had  not  been  any
    restrictions in place he would have carried  out  the  duties  such  as
    leafleting and organising  exhibitions  as  he  did  in  the  UK  (oral
    evidence).

41. In cross-examination he was asked about how he practised his  faith  in
    Pakistan and he said that he went to the mosque "daily" or "regularly".
     When asked to  indicate  the  longest  period  that  he  went  without
    visiting the mosque he stated that it was a "day and a half"  and  that
    he could not go there openly.

42. It is plain that the account given by the Appellant now in his evidence
    is inconsistent with the evidence given by him  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  As  set  out  at  paragraph  [13]  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    recorded his account that following the alleged attack in August  2005,
    he had remained at his uncle's  home  rarely  venturing  out  save  for
    visits every two to three weeks to visit  his  uncle's  shop.   On  his
    account he had continued to  live  with  his  uncle  for  approximately
    thirteen months.  Thus the account of going to the mosque  "daily"  and
    the longest period of his non-attendance being one day to a day  and  a
    half is inconsistent with that account.

43. However the First-tier Tribunal rejected his account of persecution  in
    Pakistan and his account of the attack in  August  2005  and  thus  the
    factual account set out at [13] and recited above.   However  they  did
    accept that he was an Ahmadi Muslim and that he had practised his faith
    in Pakistan.

44. I have therefore considered the other evidence available.  The  witness
    could not give evidence concerning  the  Appellant's  practise  of  his
    faith in Pakistan.   However  there  is  some  written  evidence  which
    provide and lend support to the Appellant's account of  practising  his
    faith there.  The AMA (UK)  has  provided  a  letter  of  support  (see
    document 1; 8/2013) in which they set out relevant evidence  concerning
    the Appellant's faith which had been confirmed by their headquarters in
    Pakistan on 28th December 2011.  That information confirmed that he was
    an Ahmadi Muslim by birth and in terms of his faith that  he  had  been
    connected to the auxiliary organisation which looked after the  affairs
    of male members under the age of  40  years.   They  set  out  that  he
    discharged his financial obligations to the community  and  the  duties
    assigned to him.

45. Having considered the evidence, I am satisfied to the  lower  standard,
    and as the First-tier Tribunal found, that he had been born  an  Ahmadi
    Muslim (both parents were Ahmadis) and that he had practised his  faith
    in Pakistan and had been connected to the  auxiliary  organisation  who
    looked after the affairs of male members.  The decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK: letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    511, makes reference to the weight to be given to information  provided
    by  the  organisation  and  its  provenance.   Having  considered  that
    evidence in its totality, I am  satisfied  that  the  contents  of  the
    letter (see document 1 of the supplementary  bundle)  are  an  accurate
    summary of the Appellant's practise of his faith in  Pakistan.   Whilst
    the panel did not believe his account of the events in April and August
    of 2005, the Appellant has therefore not demonstrated that he has  been
    subjected to persecution in Pakistan by reason of his faith.  However I
    find, as the First-tier Tribunal panel did, that the Appellant did  not
    practise his faith openly.

46. I have had to consider the reasons as to why he was  "compromising  his
    religious identity"; was it because he was satisfied  to  practise  his
    faith privately or because of the risk of persecution from others? (see
    HJ (Iran) and another v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 and paragraph 3(ii)  of  MN
    and Others).

47. I have considered this question in the context of the totality  of  the
    evidence before me, including that of the Appellant,  his  witness  and
    the documentary evidence.  I have also considered it in  the  light  of
    the oral evidence given before the First-tier Tribunal and the findings
    of fact which were preserved.

48. The Appellant's evidence before the FTT at [17] and [25]  was  that  he
    had been able to practise his faith openly in the UK  and  that  he  no
    longer wished to  compromise  his  religious  identity.   The  evidence
    before the Upper Tribunal is to the same effect and that he  contrasted
    the freedom that he had had in the United Kingdom and  the  nature  and
    the practice of his Ahmadi faith now.

49. As the decision in AB (as cited) makes plain, where  credibility  is  a
    significant issue, the more that a letter from the AMA (UK) as  to  the
    individual's  activities  in  the  UK  can  be  supported  by  specific
    information, the more likely that it would  be  given  greater  weight.
    When applied to this case, the documentary evidence makes reference  to
    the activities carried out by the Appellant in furtherance of his faith
    which includes attendance at congregation  prayers,  annual  gatherings
    and participating  in  preaching  programmes  including  attending  the
    tabligh stall and training classes (I refer  to  the  evidence  in  the
    original appeal bundle and letters therein and also the photographs and
    the AMA (UK) letters in the supplementary bundle).

50. I consider that the evidence should be afforded weight in the light  of
    the written and oral evidence of Mr A, whose evidence I wholly  accept.
    He makes reference to knowing the Appellant since 2007 as  a  community
    member  and  that  he  has  served  the  Ahmadi  community  in  various
    capacities including catering  and  cleaning,  that  he  is  a  regular
    attender at prayers and has  called  the  azan  (call  to  prayer)  and
    confirmed that he had assisted in preaching and actively  participating
    in leaflet distribution.

51. In his submissions, Mr Bates made reference to  what  he  termed  is  a
    discrepancy between the evidence of the Appellant as to the  number  of
    times he would distribute such  literature  and  that  of  Mr  A.   The
    documentary evidence refers to twice per month as did the oral evidence
    of the witness however the Appellant's evidence was that  it  would  be
    three weekends.  I do not consider that there was such  a  discrepancy.
    The evidence of the witness focused on one particular branch of the AMA
    (UK) whereas the Appellant's evidence  referred  to  his  participation
    with a number of other branches  and  participation  at  their  stalls.
    Consequently I do not find there to be a discrepancy as submitted by Mr
    Bates.

52. Furthermore I do not accept the  submission  that  his  activities  are
    "unremarkable".  The nature of the enquiry at paragraph [6]  of  MN  is
    whether the Appellant would be active in Pakistan in breach of the  ban
    and  whether  he  would  be  suppressing  any   activity   because   of
    persecution.  As Mr Fripp pointed out in his submissions,  the  country
    guidance case identifies a range of behaviour linked to the identity of
    Ahmadi Muslims which includes private prayers, prayers with family.

53. Having considered the evidence in its totality I am  satisfied  to  the
    lower standard of proof  that  notwithstanding,  the  Appellant's  poor
    immigration history as set out in the determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, the Appellant  has  been  an  active  member  of  the  Ahmadi
    community since 2007.  For the reasons I have given I accept  the  body
    of the written evidence from the AMA (UK), which has been supported  by
    the oral evidence of a credible witness before the Tribunal.  That body
    of evidence does not depend on the Appellant's own credibility, aspects
    of which have been found to be adverse to him, but that evidence  lends
    support and weight to his account that he is  an  Ahmadi  Muslim  whose
    intention to practise and manifest his faith is genuinely held  and  of
    particular importance to hi given  his  lengthy  involvement  with  his
    faith in the UK.

54. Furthermore I am satisfied to the lower standard of proof that  he  has
    not practised his faith openly because he has suppressed  his  activity
    due to the risk of persecution.

55. Consequently for those reasons that I have given, the Appellant  brings
    himself within the categories set out in MN and Others (as  cited).   I
    am satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood that upon return  to
    Pakistan he would continue to manifest his faith as he has now done  in
    the United Kingdom which would bring him to the attention of others  in
    Pakistan and would therefore be at risk on return.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law on a point of law and the  decision  is  set  aside.   The  decision  is
remade as follows;
The appeal is allowed.


Signed                              Date 6/11/2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

