
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05871/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision Promulgated            |
|On 5 December 2016              |On 6 December 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|          |The Secretary of State for the Home        |Appellant  |
|          |Department                                 |           |
|                                                                  |
|and                                                               |
|          |FS                                         |Respondent |
|          |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                     |           |

                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify FS or any member  of  her  family.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify any  of
them.  This direction applies to both the applicant and to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms. E Daykin, of Counsel, instructed by Irving & Col
                    Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Permission has been granted to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M Simpson who, following
    a hearing on 14 June 2016, allowed the  appeal  of  FS  (hereafter  the
    "claimant") on asylum grounds. FS is a national of Somalia  born  on  1
    December 1995. The judge concluded that humanitarian protection grounds
    do not arise. The judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds,  in
    relation to Articles 2 and 3 for the same reasons as the asylum ground.
    In relation to Article  8,  the  judge  found  that  the  claimant  had
    established family life with a British citizen  with  whom  she  has  a
    British daughter and that removal would be "contrary  to  international
    obligations" and therefore contrary to law and disproportionate.

 2. The issue in this case is whether, in reaching her finding that FS  had
    a well-founded fear of persecution in Somalia, the judge had materially
    erred in law in deciding the issue of future risk on the basis that the
    claimant would be returning to Somalia as a lone woman from a  minority
    group without connections or networks of support in Somalia.

 3. The Secretary of State contends that the judge overlooked the fact that
    the claimant has a husband (Mr Ali) who is himself of Somali origin  as
    is his mother  and  that,  given  that  the  relationship  between  the
    claimant and Mr Ali was formed "in highly precarious circumstances", no
    reasons had been advanced as to why the  claimant  would  be  returning
    alone and could not be expected to  return  with  Mr  Ali  who  (it  is
    contended) would be able to support and protect the claimant.

Relevant background

 4. Given the limited terms in which permission was sought and granted,  it
    is not necessary to rehearse the  entire  immigration  history  or  the
    basis of the claimant's asylum claim. It is sufficient to  provide  the
    following summary of the relevant background/findings of the judge:

 5. The claimant left Somalia with her mother in 2000 (when she was about 5
    years of age) and went to live in Kenya until 2013. In  December  2013,
    she left her mother in Kenya  and  travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom,
    arriving either on 1 December 2013 or 6 December 2013. On arrival,  she
    was taken to the address of her mother's cousin. She met Mr Ali through
    a relative. They belonged to the same minority clan,  the  Bajuni.  She
    moved in to live with Mr Ali on 9 February 2015.  They  married  in  an
    Islamic ceremony on 1 March 2015. In  the  meantime,  she  had  claimed
    asylum, on 21 January 2014. By  the  date  of  her  substantive  asylum
    interview on 16 February 2015, she was pregnant.  A daughter  was  born
    to the couple on 20 March 2015. As at the date of  the  hearing  before
    the judge (14 June 2016), the claimant was pregnant again  with  a  due
    date of 7 December 2016.

 6. Mr Ali was born a Somali national, on 10 February 1991. He  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom with his mother in May 2000.  He  was  9  years  old
    then. On 13 May 2005, he was granted indefinite leave to  remain  as  a
    refugee. He was then 14 years of age. On  19  May  2006,  he  became  a
    British citizen. At the date of the hearing, he was 27 years of age.

The judge's decision

 7. Credibility was in issue before the judge. The judge accepted that  the
    claimant was a national of Somalia; that she was a member of a minority
    clan, namely the Bajuni clan, sub-clan Nofali; that she was  originally
    from Chula island; that she fled  Somalia  at  a  young  age  with  her
    mother, by dhow, from their home in  Chula  after  the  deaths  of  her
    father and brother; that she  and  her  mother  then  lived  in  Dadaab
    refugee camp in Somalia and later in Mombasa in a precarious existence;
    and  that she arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2013. The judge
    also accepted that the Islamic "marriage" between the claimant  and  Mr
    Ali was a genuine and subsisting marriage. The Secretary of  State  has
    not challenged these findings.

 8. Nor has the Secretary of State challenged the judge's decision that the
    decision would be in breach of Article 8.

Submissions

 9. At the commencement of the  hearing,  I  asked  Mr  Duffy  whether  the
    Secretary of State had advanced the argument before the judge that,  if
    she found the claimant credible and made findings of fact in favour  of
    the claimant, the judge should  assess  the  future  risk  taking  into
    account the possibility  of  Mr  Ali  returning  to  Somalia  with  the
    claimant. Mr Duffy submitted that this was an obvious  issue  that  the
    judge should have considered whether or not  it  was  advanced  on  the
    claimant's behalf.  He submitted that the issue was "an elephant in the
    room".

10. However, Mr Duffy acknowledged that  the  consideration  of  the  issue
    would have required evidence as to whether  Mr  Ali  would  in  reality
    return to Somalia with the claimant. Since there  was  no  evidence  in
    this issue before the judge, he submitted that there would need to be a
    further hearing at which evidence on the issue would have to be heard.

11. I heard briefly from Ms Daykin and Mr Duffy in reply, following which I
    reserved my decision.

Assessment

12. It is plain from the judge's decision that the claimant's case was that
    she was at real risk of persecution on return  to  Somalia  as  a  lone
    woman. It is also plain that, notwithstanding that  the  basis  of  the
    claimant's case was clear, the Secretary of State's case centred on the
    claimant's credibility. At no point was it argued  that,  even  if  the
    claimant was credible and the  judge  made  findings  of  fact  in  her
    favour, she would not be returning to Somalia as a lone  woman  because
    Mr Ali would accompany her.

13. It is important to note that Mr Duffy accepted that, in the event  that
    I decided that the judge should have considered  whether  the  claimant
    would be returning to Somalia as a lone woman or whether Mr  Ali  would
    return with her, further evidence as to whether Mr Ali would in reality
    return to Somalia with  the  claimant  would  be  necessary.  In  these
    circumstances, I am satisfied that the  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to
    argue her case before the Upper Tribunal on a basis that was  not  made
    apparent  in  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier   Tribunal.   I
    acknowledge that the burden of proof is upon the claimant to  establish
    that she is a refugee. Nevertheless, if  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    advanced before the FtT the argument she now seeks to  rely  upon,  the
    claimant could have led evidence at  the  hearing  before  the  FtT  to
    address the point.

14. It is therefore clear that the Secretary of State  seeks  to  have  the
    decision of the judge set aside on a ground not relied upon before  the
    FtT. In all of the circumstances, I have decided that the judge  cannot
    be said to have materially erred in law in  failing  to  deal  with  an
    issue that was not before her.

15. The Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore
    dismissed.




    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


[pic]

Signed   Date: 5 December 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
