
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05561/2012
                                                               AA/05562/2012
                                                               AA/04388/2012
                                                               AA/04390/2012
                                                               AA/05564/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Sent           |
|on 13th March 2014                            |on 30th May 2014             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     NM
                                     SNM
                                     AM
                                     HSM
                                     KA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss Pickering instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts.

For the Respondent: Mr Mangion Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is a resumed hearing in  respect  if  the  above  citizens  of
        Pakistan.  NM (born 4/1978), SNM (born 6/1985), AM (born  12/1976),
        and HSM (born 1/1954).  They form a family unit  of  three  sisters
        and their mother. KA is the son of NM and is a minor child born  in
        2011. Although stated to be an appellant in his own right there  is
        no material that would permit KA to succeed on that basis and so he
        is,  in  reality,  dependant  upon  his  mother's  claim.  I  shall
        therefore focus on the cases advanced by the remaining appellants.


     2. The appellants have been linked for the purposes  of  this  hearing
        although arrived at this point by  differing  routes.  Following  a
        hearing at North Shields on 12th August  2013  I  found  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Sacks  had  materially  erred  in  relation  to  the
        determination  of  NM,  SNM  and  KA's   claims   such   that   his
        determination was set aside. The factual  findings  made  regarding
        these appellants immigration history and religious  identities  are
        preserved.  In the 21st  October  2013,  at  North  Shields,  Judge
        Aitken (Deputy Chamber President - HESC) considered a challenge  to
        the determinations written by First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor  by
        AM and HSM. Having found an error  of  law  Judge  Aitken  set  the
        determination aside but stated there were  no  preserved  findings.
        There is however no  dispute  before  me  regarding  the  religious
        identity of these appellants either.  It is accepted that the above
        appellants are all members of the Ahmadi faith.



Background


NM
     3. In her evidence to the First-tier Tribunal NM stated that  she  had
        worked as a teacher whilst in Pakistan lecturing at the  University
        of  Architecture.  She  married  in  October  2008.   Her   husband
        travelled to the United Kingdom in July 2010 and at that time  they
        were separated although did communicate with each other. KA is  the
        child of this relationship.  After  marriage  she  lived  with  her
        husband's parents until she became pregnant when she moved to  live
        with her own mother.


     4. NM claims that from childhood she has faced  problems  in  Pakistan
        due to her faith although from May 2011  the  problems  intensified
        both with regard to her and her sister.  At this time she  and  her
        sister, SNM, moved to  Karachi  where  they  met  a  lady  and  her
        daughter named Arsheem.  There were  invited  to  Arsheem's  house.
        They called in two to three days later and in general  conversation
        NM claims she started talking about her Ahmadi faith.  NM  believes
        that Arsheem became interested.  A few days after  the  meeting  NM
        and SNM were on their way to a shop when they were stopped by three
        men who accused them of being 'qadiani' and threatened that  unless
        they stopped preaching they will be killed.  NM did not report  the
        incident to the police and they carried on to the shop.


     5. NM alleges a second incident occurred in June  2011  when  she  was
        walking home from work.  Three men stopped  her  and  made  threats
        against her whilst at the same time attempting to steal her  purse.
        They were not the three individuals who had stopped her earlier.


     6. NM alleges a third incident occurred about 9th June 2011  when  she
        claims that whilst returning home from work she was stopped outside
        the door of her home by three more men, one of whom she  recognised
        as one of the men who had threatened her previously.  She claims on
        this occasion threats were issued against her son  because  of  her
        faith.  NM alleges she was told that the men were  aware  that  she
        worked in a highly paid job and that no Ahmadi should be allowed to
        work in such a position.


     7. NM reported the matter to the police who it  is  alleged  were  not
        interested and who refused to listen to them. NM also alleged  that
        she had been followed to work by a person on  a  bicycle  and  that
        there were further incidents in mid-June 2011,  when  three  people
        again approached her and her sister and issued threats, and on 25th
        September 2011  when  three  men  approached  her  and  her  sister
        carrying weapons, made verbal threats, and pointed a gun towards KA
        although they were all allowed to return to their home.


     8. NM had applied for a visa to come to the  United  Kingdom  and  she
        decided after the final threats to leave Pakistan.   She  left  the
        accommodation in Karachi on 18 October 2011  and  returned  to  the
        family home in Hyderabad  where  she  and  KA  remained  until  9th
        November 2011 when they travelled to the United Kingdom  using  her
        valid student visa. NM did not claim asylum on arrival. The  second
        appellant, SNM, had left  Pakistan  and  travelled  to  the  United
        Kingdom earlier on 18th October 2011.


     9. NM told the First-tier Tribunal that since February 2012 the people
        who threatened her and her sister have also begun causing  problems
        for her family in Pakistan. She has a sister  AM  who  works  at  a
        hospital and NM told the First-tier Tribunal  that  those  who  had
        been issuing the threats against her attended the hospital and made
        threats against her sister and told her sister they will not  leave
        NM and KA alone. NM claimed that on 24th February 2012 an  incident
        occurred when AM was travelling between Hyderabad and Karachi.  She
        claimed she believed she was being followed  by  a  car  containing
        individuals who looked similar to those who had threatened  her  at
        work. She panicked and asked the driver to speed up at which  point
        there was a collision. AM broke her shoulder in  the  accident  and
        was admitted to hospital.


    10. NM conceded that  since  that  date  there  has  been  no  specific
        problems other than the family being generally harassed because  of
        their Ahmadi faith; although she fears that if returned to Pakistan
        she shall be targeted by those  who  threatened  her  in  the  past
        because of the fact she has been talking to people about her  faith
        coupled with the fact that she has a good job.


    11. In a supplementary witness statement dated 5th March 2014 NM claims
        that the family have moved  from  their  original  family  home  to
        another  address  within  Hyderabad  as  they  received  a  further
        threatening letter. It is claimed this move occurred in August 2012
        and that they experienced no problems until people learned they are
        Ahmadi. She claims it is difficult for them to leave the  house  as
        people follow them, her uncle's daughter has been told not to  play
        with some children due to her religion, and her uncle only  attends
        the local mosque on Friday afternoon prayers due  to  the  risk  of
        being attacked and varies his route and tries to dress  differently
        so as not to be recognised.  Since January  2013  he  has  received
        calls from people asking to meet him in various  locations  to  get
        information regarding the Ahmadi Jamaat. She states her uncle tried
        to leave the country but has not been successful to date.


    12. NM also alleges that another cousin has been targeted  due  to  his
        faith and shot dead.


    13. In relation to her activities within the United Kingdom  NM  states
        that there are around 15 to 20 Ahmadi families near to where she is
        staying and that they meet at each other's houses once a month  for
        religious meetings and to discuss other issues. She also states she
        has attended  the  annual  convention  and  religious  events.   In
        October 2012 NM was nominated  to  provide  information  about  the
        faith to new converts. She attended a Quran exhibition at Newcastle
        library, has distributed leaflets, and tries to  preach.   She  has
        been  involved  in  anniversary   celebrations   and   prepared   a
        presentation 'History of Ahmadiyya Community in the UK'  which  was
        given by the President of the  Women's  Group  at  the  anniversary
        celebrations.


    14. NM also claims to have attended the  local  annual  female  meeting
        held in Newcastle on 14th September 2013  where  there  are  speech
        competitions,    Quranic    recitation    competitions,     reading
        competitions, poetry competitions and indoor games.  It is attended
        by all Ahmadi  ladies  from  Newcastle  and  NM  won  the  speaking
        competition. She also attended the North East regional  meeting  in
        Bradford in September and took part in a speaking competition there
        in which she came third, but did not attend the National meeting in
        London as she has her son to care for; although she did attend  the
        National meeting in 2012.


    15.  NM  refers  to  work  undertaken  with  a  local  school,  further
        exhibitions, invitations to attend other  national  events  in  the
        United Kingdom which she has not attended as her son would not have
        stayed away from his home overnight  and  other  family  could  not
        assist.  There is an International  Women's  Day  seminar  on  12th
        March 2014 in Newcastle at which they hope to explore the  role  of
        women in Islam as defined by the Quran at which NM is due to speak.


    16. NM claims that since arriving in the  United  Kingdom  she  is  now
        preaching to all her friends in Pakistan and  she  is  a  lot  more
        confident in preaching to them as she knows she is safe in the  UK.
        She uses an e-mail account and would never have  thought  of  doing
        such in Pakistan due to the fear of retribution. NM states  she  is
        willing to  talk  to  anybody  who  will  listen  about  her  faith
        including that of the groups and organisations who have knocked  on
        her door attempting to convert her to Christianity.  NM states that
        after working as a Secretary Nau Muba'ia  (new  converts)  she  was
        nominated as a Secretary Tabligh (preacher) in  October  2013.   In
        her previous post she would go to the homes of recent  converts  to
        the Ahmadi faith twice a month to teach the Ahmadi syllabus. In her
        new role she is required to encourage all the women in  the  Jamaat
        to try and preach to others.


    17. In November 2013 NM became Secretary of Wagf-e-Jadid and  Tehrik-e-
        Jadid a role which she is required to chase  donations  from  every
        woman who is registered in Newcastle to give regular  donations  to
        the Ahmadi  Association,  an  activity  she  continued  with  until
        January 2014.


    18. On 14th January 2014 the biennial elections for the post  of  local
        Lajna President occurred. The current office holder was  re-elected
        for a further two years and thereafter NM nominated as Secretary of
        Publications.  This  requires  her  to  persuade  others  to  write
        articles  and  publish  them  and  help  organise   and   arranging
        bookstores and exhibitions.


    19. In paragraph 17 of the supplementary statement NM states  "I  never
        even thought of preaching in Pakistan  because  I  knew  the  risks
        involved for us as Ahmadis.  We have grown up  being  discriminated
        against and marginalised in society. We knew  from  growing  up  we
        were not liked as Ahmadi and that people were even killed for being
        Ahmadi. We therefore would not even mention  that  we  were  Ahmadi
        unless somebody showed a genuine interest. When I  applied  for  my
        studies or work I would always mention that I am a  Muslim  because
        this is what I believe I am.  However,  in  Pakistan,  we  are  not
        recognised as Muslims. In Pakistan we are deemed to  be  non-Muslim
        (kafir). We are not even allowed to  call  ourselves  Muslims.  How
        could I even  think  about  preaching  when  Ahmadi  are  not  even
        considered to be Muslims in Pakistan."


    20. NM states that she feels the aim of her life is to preach about her
        faith and which she wishes to do freely.  Her son is also an Ahmadi
        who she would like to be a preacher one day but she states it  will
        be very dangerous if they continued  to  remain  in  Pakistan,  but
        which he can do safely in the United Kingdom.


    21. NM confirmed the content of her statements are  true  in  her  oral
        evidence before the Upper Tribunal.  In reply to questions  put  to
        her in cross-examination she confirmed she moved to Karachi in 2006
        as a result of obtaining her job at the  University.  She  was  not
        married at that time but married in  October  2008,  although  then
        asserted it was not a proper marriage but that they were contracted
        to marriage. She lived with her in-laws after the wedding in  2010.
        She remained in Pakistan when her  husband  went  to  work  in  the
        United Kingdom although stated in her oral evidence that  they  are
        not formally separated. She claimed there was no contact  but  then
        not there was no contact but just not  the  type  of  contact  that
        there should have been between them.


    22. NM stated she rented accommodation in Karachi after  the  birth  of
        her child as a result of her employment. Initially  the  child  and
        her sister remained at the in-laws too but that did  not  work  out
        and so they rented a place they could live in together.  Her  uncle
        had no objection as she was in Karachi where she had a job and they
        were not worried about them living on their own.


    23. NM was asked about the threats and stated she was not threatened at
        her place of work but when  she  lived  with  her  sister  she  was
        threatened. She gave up her  work  when  she  came  to  the  United
        Kingdom, shortly before that.


    24. NM stated that she was aware of relatives in Karachi  but  did  not
        have much contact with them even though she had received threats.


    25. NM claims that her cousin was attacked but has  now  recovered.  He
        wishes to leave the country as do his family.


    26. NM was asked when she made the decision to leave which  she  stated
        was when she started work and receive the threats in Karachi.  That
        was when she made her mind up by June and decided to  go  with  her
        sister.  When asked why when she had decided to leave she  did  not
        return to Hyderabad, she stated that it was important to remain  in
        Karachi for a work and claimed that people will get  her  there  in
        any event.


    27. NM was asked about the 2011 application to obtain a visa  to  study
        in the United Kingdom and whether it was genuine or just  a  method
        to get to the United Kingdom to which the reply was "Yes  I  wanted
        to claim asylum".


    28. NM was asked if she intended to  study,  why  her  sister  took  an
        English test in February 2011 prior to the event she complains  of,
        which NM claims was because her sister  returned  from  the  United
        Kingdom and wanted to test her knowledge of  English.  She  herself
        undertook the test as she wanted  to  leave  the  country  and  her
        previous test expired  at  that  stage.  She  claimed  she  had  no
        knowledge of asylum.


    29. NM claimed her mother/uncle sold  the  family  house  in  May  2011
        although accepted it could be later. She was therefore asked why in
        her visa application in September 2011 she gave the same address as
        her residential address which she claimed was because  the  address
        had not changed and that she used to go there to collect her  mail,
        although then claimed she did not go there  physically  as  another
        person did. The home address was also  used  while  she  was  in  a
        hostel in Karachi as that remained her home address.


    30. NM was asked why she did not claim asylum on arrival in the  UK  to
        which she replied that her sister was coming here and was not  sure
        of the procedures and wanted to check how to apply for asylum here.
        When it was put to her that the reason  she  had  not  claimed  was
        because she knew AM was intending to join her and she did not  want
        to cause trouble for her, she claimed she was worried at  the  time
        for her and her child, but did not directly answer the question and
        claimed that it could  be  merely  coincidental  that  she  claimed
        asylum six days after her sister arrived in the United Kingdom.


    31. NM confirm that she maintained contact with her sister after coming
        to the United Kingdom and that she  knew  she  had  made  the  visa
        application although claimed not to be able to  remember  when  she
        learned this fact.


    32. NM is asked about the comment in the asylum interview that she  did
        not have to be qualified to be a preacher  and  why  she  therefore
        only started preaching when she came to the  United  Kingdom.   She
        referred to the fact there is no proper training for a preacher but
        her knowledge of her religion is something she has and that she can
        speak about. She confirmed she has never met Dr Chaudhry  and  when
        asked whether her sister and mother had ever met him  she  referred
        to similar questions at the previous  hearing  and  referred  to  a
        conversation on the telephone about  the  evidence,  proceeding  to
        have the evidence,  and  that  he  wanted  to  know  how  long.  NM
        confirmed that Dr Chaudhry stated he followed his own procedures in
        obtaining the evidence and that she had great respect for him.  She
        believes the evidence was obtained  from  Pakistan  and  also  from
        Newcastle. NM was advised that the letter from Dr Chaudhry does not
        mention any community activities in Pakistan  which  she  mentions,
        only what she has undertaken in the United Kingdom,  to  which  she
        claims that in Pakistan it is impossible to obtain  such  material.
        When asked why she held no positions of responsibility in  Pakistan
        she claimed it was because she was a female and could not  do  what
        her uncle was doing as he was able to do many things. NM  confirmed
        she had no conversation with Dr Chaudhry regarding  her  uncle  and
        did not think any of her relatives did either.


    33. It was put to NM that as it is  claimed  there  are  strong  family
        connections to the Ahmadi faith it would have been helpful to  have
        got something regarding her uncle. She stated it  was  her  beliefs
        and that she did not have to go through her  uncle.  He  was  their
        guardian and the family are in Sunderland because of him.


    34. NM confirmed that she met Mr Tahir and she came to Newcastle. He is
        the President of the local Ahmadi community as a whole.  He  is  at
        the centre when she attends, she has met him, and  sometimes  rings
        him when she has questions although she does not need to  speak  to
        the President directly as she is able to go through  other  members
        such as the female President.  NM was asked if it was necessary for
        her to go through the female President  why  that  person  was  not
        present to give evidence for her, to which she stated  she  made  a
        request for  somebody  to  come  and  support  them  and  that  the
        President was sent.


    35. There is in a bundle a letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association
        UK dated the 7 January 2013 [section B] relating to NM  written  by
        Dr Chaudhry, the Secretary of the General Affairs Department of the
        Association in the UK. In  relation  to  information  derived  from
        contacting the headquarters in Rabwah in respect of NM  the  letter
        confirms that (i) she is an Ahmadi Muslim  by  birth  (ii)  she  is
        married (iii) the contact incorporation within  the  Ahmadi  Muslim
        community was good (iv) she was good in discharging  her  financial
        obligations to the community and the duties reposed in  her  (v)  a
        general moral condition was good (vi)  she  was  connected  to  her
        auxiliary organisation (in her case the Lajna Imaillah which  looks
        after the affairs of female members of the community)  (vii)  there
        was no case  registered  against  her  by  another  member  of  the
        community (viii) general impression about her within the  community
        was good (ix) a character in  borrowing  and  lending  transactions
        within the community was good.


    36. In relation to information  obtained  from  the  President  of  the
        Newcastle  upon  Tyne  branch,  it   is   said   NM   (i)   attends
        congregational prayers, Eid festivals,  annual  convention  of  the
        community, annual gathering of the  females  and  branches  general
        monthly meetings (ii) participated in the preaching  programmes  of
        the branch including  door-to-door  distribution  of  leaflets  and
        creating awareness of Islam and invite members of the public to the
        message of the Ahmadiyya Muslim  community  (iii)  helping  holding
        Quran exhibition  (iv)  inviting  her  non-Ahmadi  friends  to  the
        branch's functions, and (v) performing the duties assigned  to  her
        by the community officials.

SNM

    37. In her evidence to the First-tier Tribunal SNM stated that she used
        to go with NM and distribute  leaflets  at  the  library,  in  GP's
        surgeries, and at neighbour's houses in the UK  providing  leaflets
        regarding the Muslim faith.  It is recorded that when she was asked
        what she did in Pakistan for the Ahmadi faith SNM  stated  she  was
        not able to do anything for if anyone found  out  she  was  of  the
        Ahmadi faith they would not react favourably or even talk  to  her.
        She states that on Friday they would say prayers and  would  inform
        other females about meetings that were being held with  the  female
        members of the faith.


    38. SNM had previously travelled to the United Kingdom  lawfully  as  a
        student but claims that on the occasion she last entered, it was to
        save her life. At a resumed hearing on 23rd  February  2013  before
        the First-tier Tribunal, photographs relating to an art  exhibition
        at  Newcastle  Civic  Centre  did  not  show  SNM  in  any  of  the
        photographs and it is recorded that  at  the  earlier  hearing  she
        admitted that she had limited knowledge of the Ahmadi faith.


    39. In her oral evidence SNM confirmed  the  contents  of  her  witness
        statements was true and in reply to supplementary questions claimed
        she wished to convey the message of her religion  to  everybody  as
        she feels that it is the message of her religion.


    40. In reply to questions put in cross-examination  SNM  confirmed  her
        uncle had no objection to her living with  her  sister  in  Karachi
        although he would ask about their well-being.  She  confirmed  that
        after the first threat she told her uncle straight  away  who  told
        them to return home although they did not as her sister had  a  job
        there. The uncle did not visit them as they told him not  to  come.
        She did not know whether the family had contacted anybody  else  to
        protect them. She claimed there was nobody for them to turn  to  in
        Karachi. When asked why they did not move SNM  claimed  there  were
        problems with the state wherever they went.


    41. SNM stated in June she decided  to  leave  Pakistan  although  when
        asked why therefore she had taken the English language test  before
        this date she claimed it was because she had recently returned from
        the United Kingdom and wished to test her level of English. SNM was
        asked why at the previous hearing she did not recognise her cousins
        name, which she claimed was because although she  knew  she  had  a
        cousin she had not met him. She claims not to have met any  cousins
        in Pakistan.


    42. SNM confirmed in her asylum interview that she  stated  the  reason
        she did not claim asylum at the airport was because she  was  going
        to move elsewhere in a few years  time,  which  she  confirmed  was
        correct, and that was why she therefore did not claim  until  after
        her other sister arrived.  She confirmed that it was a  week  after
        her sister arrived that they made the claim. She confirmed that she
        was in contact with AM in the UK  and  the  fact  she  had  claimed
        asylum eleven days after her sister was granted  a  visa  was  pure
        coincidence.


    43. SNM was asked about activities she undertook in Hyderabad which she
        stated was attending meetings, saying her prayers, and  going  with
        her mother. She did not preach  and  did  not  undertake  religious
        activities  discreetly.  She  claims  to   have   undertaken   many
        activities in the UK and to have held positions  of  responsibility
        such as the Secretary of Health and Safety and to  have  instructed
        members regarding their health such as the right foods and physical
        issues. These activities are undertaken at member's  houses  during
        the week. She claims the role  was  given  to  her  by  the  female
        President of Newcastle. It was put to SNM that Mr Tahir had claimed
        she was elected although she claimed there was no election and that
        the female President decided she could to do the job which was  why
        she was chosen.  SNM also claims to teach the children in a 'Sunday
        school' type structure/environment and to have distributed leaflets
        in the local library.  It was put  to  SNM  that  at  the  previous
        hearing she had  said  she  was  not  distributing  leaflets.   She
        confirmed she would take her sister to the library who would do the
        leafleting and that she would help her sister but that her  English
        was not good enough.  SNM was  asked  why  as  she  had  previously
        studied and undertaken examinations in the United Kingdom  she  did
        not think her English was good enough, to which she stated  it  was
        not her first language although she does hand out leaflets now  and
        has taken a course at college.


    44. SNM was asked why when she was in the United Kingdom  between  2009
        and 2011 as a student she did not get involved in  the  Association
        in the UK at that time. She stated it was because she was a student
        and she had studies and a job and no free time and that her English
        was not good enough, although when it  was  put  to  her  that  her
        studies and work would have been in English and that  her  standard
        must have been good enough to do that, she was unable to provide  a
        satisfactory explanation.


    45. It was also put to SNM that on the last occasion she was unable  to
        name the head of the Newcastle branch which she stated was  because
        she has to address him as President and that she only knew his name
        recently.


AM
    46. It is recorded in the First-tier Tribunal determination relating to
        the appeals of AM and HSM that AM is a medically  qualified  doctor
        who entered the United Kingdom  on  24th  March  2013  having  been
        granted entry clearance as a visitor. She was  accompanied  by  her
        mother HSM and they both claimed asylum on arrival.


    47. AM's case is that she was born in Hyderabad where she lived all her
        life. Her father died in 1989 and she lived with  her  parents  and
        two sisters. After her father's death her maternal  uncle  came  to
        live with them. Her two sisters NM  and  SNM  came  to  the  United
        Kingdom in October and November 2011 when they claimed  asylum.  At
        the time they left Pakistan they  had  been  living  with  AM,  her
        mother, and uncle.


    48. AM states that she has been an Ahmadi Muslim since  birth  and  the
        threat to her life arises as a result of her encountering  problems
        on account of her religious  beliefs.   She  claims  that  she  was
        socially boycotted  and  faced  discrimination  at  work.  Her  two
        sisters left Pakistan in 2011 as a result  of  problems  they  were
        experiencing on account of their religious beliefs at the hands  of
        extremist Muslims who lived in the  area  and  who  turned  against
        them. AM claims that her own problems  were  initially  limited  to
        acts of discrimination although they escalated in early  2012.   AM
        alleges that on 7th February 2012 whilst working at  the  Aga  Khan
        Hospital in Hyderabad three men entered  the  room  where  she  was
        working posing as  a  patient  and  attendants.   She  claims  they
        identified her as Ahmadi and told her she could not  be  Muslim  in
        Pakistan and that they would not leave her alone and made reference
        to finding "two girls" which she took to  be  a  reference  to  her
        sisters who had previously encountered problems  at  the  hands  of
        Muslim  extremists.  She  therefore  believed  her  problems   were
        associated with those of her sisters.  After  issuing  threats  the
        men left the hospital without harming her. AM  claim  she  did  not
        tell the hospital authorities but chose to telephone her mother and
        thereafter continued her work.


    49. On 24th February 2012 she had been to Karachi to attend  a  medical
        event and was returning to Hyderabad in a taxi. She claimed she was
        being chased by the same people who had previously  threatened  her
        and requested the driver to drive faster as she feared she might be
        shot although the taxi collided with another vehicle, as  a  result
        of which she was knocked unconscious and injured. She was taken  to
        hospital and treated for a damaged right arm.  Her  uncle  reported
        the matter to the police who she claims viewed it as a simple  road
        traffic accident and not one connected to any element of  religious
        persecution.  AM did not return to work or leave her home  for  two
        to three months, finally leaving it in May 2012.


    50. AM then accepted in her evidence that she had in fact left the home
        prior to May 2012 as it was necessary for her to  apply  in  person
        for her student visa which she did on 2nd  April  2012.   She  also
        travelled to Islamabad on 10th April 2012 to  attend  an  interview
        relevant to her entry  clearance  application  resulting  in  entry
        clearance being granted.


    51. AM claims that in March 2012 unidentified youths  threw  stones  at
        the home which had attached to  them  notes  which  it  is  claimed
        contained threats to kill her and  references  which  she  believed
        were to her two sisters  and  nephew  who  had  already  fled  from
        Pakistan in 2011.


    52. AM claimed that from  June  2012  to  February  2013  she  did  not
        experience any 'major  incident'.   She  did  not  leave  her  home
        frequently and believed there were people who wished to  harm  her.
        She claims people would stare at her and her mother who looked like
        the people who had previously tried to harm her.


    53. In February 2013 AM travelled to Rabwah in order to marry.  It  was
        an arranged marriage and her husband is a  Pakistani  national  who
        holds a Green Card entitling him to work and  live  in  the  United
        States of America. He travelled to Pakistan for the  wedding  which
        took place on 26th February 2013. After the wedding she stayed with
        her in-laws in Rawalpindi.  Three to four days  later  her  husband
        took her and her mother to a shopping area.  She  claimed  she  was
        about to get out of the car when she saw a man standing  there  who
        she felt was going to target her because he "looked  that  type  of
        person". AM decided that she had to leave Pakistan.   She  and  her
        mother returned to Hyderabad on 19th March  2013  and  her  husband
        returned to the USA. She claims that at the time she was absent her
        uncle received threatening phone calls from what she thought was  a
        'jihadi' group.


    54. AM experienced no further problems and left on 24th March 2013. She
        experienced no problems exiting Pakistan and  flew  to  the  United
        Kingdom. She claims that if returned to Pakistan she will be killed
        by the people who previously targeted her and her family solely  on
        account of their Ahmadi faith.


    55. AM advised the First-tier Tribunal that her plans are to follow her
        husband to the United States  of  America  and  when  he  gets  his
        citizenship he will call her over. They maintain telephone  contact
        on a daily basis and via Skype.


    56. During the hearing Miss Pickering handed the Upper Tribunal a  copy
        of a letter from the United States Department  of  State,  National
        Visa  Centre,  addressed  to  AM  referring  to  her  interest   in
        emigrating to the United States of America and informing  her  that
        visa numbers are not presently available for her use and  that  she
        will receive further notification when the  authorities  are  in  a
        position to process the application.  The letter refers to the fact
        there appears to be a cap on the number of  migrants  permitted  to
        enter in law and that the number of applicants exceeds  the  number
        of available visas. The letter states she has a  priority  date  of
        4th November 2013 and indicates that for some categories,  such  as
        F3 or  F4,  applications  could  take  many  years;  although  AM's
        category is stated to be F2A - spouses and  unmarried  children  of
        permanent resident.


    57. In her oral  evidence  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  AM  confirmed  the
        contents of  her  witness  statements  to  be  true.  In  reply  to
        supplementary questions asked by Miss Pickering she confirmed  that
        she will set out her religious views wherever she may be because as
        a Muslim this is what she has to do, which is what they  were  told
        to do by their Creator. AM stated that she was born in Pakistan but
        in Pakistan she did not have the freedom to  discuss  faith  openly
        whereas in this country they are able to discuss their faith.


    58. In cross-examination she was asked about the  first  occasion  when
        she claims to have been threatened and denied saying  that  one  of
        the men had a gun although she had an idea that  he  had  a  hidden
        weapon. It was put to her that  in  a  letter  she  wrote  for  her
        sister's appeal AM had stated that she had been shown the  gun  and
        she was asked why she is now claiming it was hidden, to  which  her
        reply was that the man did not produce the gun and show it  to  her
        but that they were pointing to the gun.


    59. In relation to the road traffic accident,  AM  was  asked  who  was
        driving the car to which she stated it belonged to the hospital and
        was a car from the hospital. She claims  to  have  read  about  the
        accident. The driver was unaware of any previous  threats  and  she
        told the driver to speed up when she saw the people  following  her
        and she became worried. When asked  where  the  car  was  that  she
        thought was following she stated they had  left  Karachi  and  were
        going to Hyderabad. She claimed she was sitting in the back seat of
        the car when she looked back and realised they were being followed.
        When asked whether the vehicle following had come along side as  if
        to overtake them AM claimed that she saw them  from  the  side  and
        that this when she knew that she was being followed.  It  was  then
        put to AM that in the letter written in  support  of  her  sister's
        appeal she had only said that the car was following and  was  close
        behind which suggested it was  then  she  realised  she  was  being
        followed. Her response was to say she was not looking backwards and
        that the car tried to overtake and that  she  told  the  driver  to
        hurry up. It was also put to AM that on two occasions in  interview
        she had said that following the accident she had not left the house
        for two and a half months and had not mentioned going to  Islamabad
        which would have necessitated her leaving the house, to  which  her
        reply was that  she  had  to  go  to  Islamabad  for  an  interview
        regarding her Visa. When she was asked why she claimed not to  have
        left the house for two and a half months when clearly she had,  she
        stated that she did not consider going to the  interview  as  going
        out and that she was really frightened to go anywhere  during  that
        period. When asked whether other than for the  Islamabad  interview
        she had left the house during this period she claimed she  did  not
        go  anywhere.   AM  was  asked  whether  she   had   any   hospital
        appointments regarding her injuries but claimed she  contacted  the
        hospital by telephone although it was then put to her that she  had
        had a cyst removed within the two and a half  month  period,  which
        she confirmed was the case. AM claims she never had  to  return  to
        the  hospital  during  this  period  despite  having  metal  plates
        inserted in her body and when it was put to her there was  evidence
        of a follow up appointment on Friday 2nd March at 9:30  AM  in  the
        documents she claimed she did not attend as she  did  not  want  to
        leave the house and went to a follow up appointment in Hyderabad.


    60. AM was asked why she obtained a medical certificate if she  had  no
        intention of returning to work in Karachi  which  she  claimed  she
        needed because she had metal in her body. When asked  why  she  had
        not left Pakistan as soon as she had received a Visa she claimed it
        was due to the accident and because she was depressed. In  relation
        to the event in the car park after her marriage she claims she  had
        a feeling about the man who was there. When asked  whether  it  was
        due to that incident she decided to leave Pakistan she  claims  she
        explained the circumstances to her husband and the in-laws  and  it
        was decided she needed to leave the country. Her  husband  returned
        to America but she did not accompany him as she did not have a Visa
        and thought a visa would take a long time to acquire. AM  confirmed
        that her husband had applied to the immigration authorities for her
        to join him which produced the letter referred to  above  from  the
        American Department of State. She confirmed it is her intention  to
        join her husband, whether or not she will  be  accompanied  by  her
        other family members.


    61. AM was asked about the lack of a letter from the Ahmadi Association
        regarding her activities but she claimed the letter from  Mr  Tahir
        referred to her. She claimed that during the last few years most of
        the activities had stopped at the Association but before  that  she
        went to a convention and worked in the Ahmadi hospital. When it was
        put to her that Mr Tahir had not mentioned this in his material she
        claims that his letter refers to the whole family. AM also referred
        to two letters from Dr Chaudhry and the Association and that he had
        been told about her activities in the United Kingdom.  AM  confirms
        that Mr Tahir would have known of her activities through the female
        President of the section.


    62. A letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK  dated  2nd  June
        2013  and  written  by  Dr  Chaudhry  relating  to  AM  refers   to
        information received from the headquarters in Rabwah  stating  that
        (i) AM is an Ahmadi Muslim by birth, (ii) she is married, (iii) the
        contact and corporation which the community were good, (iv) she was
        good in charging her financial obligations to the community and the
        duties assigned to her, (v) a general moral conduct was good,  (vi)
        she was connected with her auxiliary organisations (in her case the
        Majlis Lajna Imaillah, the auxiliary organisation that looks  after
        the affairs of female members), (vi) there was no  case  registered
        against her by  another  member  of  the  community.  There  is  no
        reference to any other activities undertaken by her in Pakistan.


HSM

    63. HSM contended  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  if  she  is
        returned to Pakistan she will face ill-treatment on account of  her
        Ahmadi religious beliefs. She had  only  undertaken  two  or  three
        years education in her youth but has never worked  and  has  always
        been a housewife. She had no personal involvement with  the  Ahmadi
        community while she was living in Pakistan due to  objections  that
        were in place in 1984.  The only occasion she had spoken about  her
        religion to anyone was with a woman who she employed as  a  cleaner
        in her home although the conversation had not come to anything  and
        all she had done was explain her Ahmadi faith.


    64. HSM relies upon the fact that AM had been threatened at  her  place
        of work in a hospital, that stones had been thrown  at  their  home
        with notes attached to them, which she stated contained threats  as
        a result of their religious identity.   She  claims  to  have  been
        present in Rawalpindi in February 2013 with her daughter and son-in-
        law when she claimed they had been followed but managed to  escape.
        She left Pakistan with a valid visa  entitling  her  to  visit  the
        United Kingdom and identified no other adverse incidents concerning
        her personal circumstances  on  account  of  her  Ahmadi  religious
        beliefs.


    65. HSM advised the First-tier Tribunal  that  since  arriving  in  the
        United Kingdom she is now actively involved with her  local  Ahmadi
        Association and referred to her other daughters who arrived in  the
        United Kingdom in 2011 and claimed asylum. In her oral evidence she
        confirmed that all of her own brothers remain in Pakistan  and  one
        sister, allegedly, encountering problems due to their Ahmadi faith.
        She also claims to have health  problems  such  as  diabetes,  high
        blood pressure and heart problems and not to have a good memory.


    66. HSM advised the First-tier Tribunal that she spent most of her time
        at home in Pakistan that she had not encountered problems from  the
        lady who she employed and spoke to about her faith.   Her  brother,
        who assisted following the  death  of  her  husband,  continues  to
        occupy the family home in Hyderabad. He occupies his  part  of  the
        home with his wife and four children, a son aged 20, daughters aged
        15/16, 12 and 4 (evidence given July 2013). HSM claimed the  family
        members have been  harassed  and  in  her  witness  statements  and
        interview record claimed others had expressed interest in  her  and
        her daughter since they  left  Pakistan,  which  she  clarified  by
        reference to the fact that there was no particular  interest  about
        her or  her  daughters  but  that  her  brother  had  spoken  about
        difficulties the Ahmadi's were facing in general.


    67. In her oral evidence to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  HSM  confirmed  the
        contents of her witness  statements  were  true  and  in  reply  to
        questions  put  in  cross-examination  confirmed  that  after   her
        husband's death her brother moved in with her in her household.  At
        that time there were  five  people  in  the  family  including  her
        daughter's but later her brother married and lived there  with  his
        wife and children. When her daughters moved to Karachi she lived in
        the house with her eldest daughter, her brother, and his family.


    68. HSM confirmed her brother received  telephone  calls  from  numbers
        threatening him although the threats were only on his mobile  phone
        not made in person.


    69. HSM was asked about activities she undertook for the  community  in
        Pakistan to which she stated she used to take  part  in  activities
        for the faith but later stopped. She was  asked  if  following  the
        accident to her daughter they moved house to  rented  accommodation
        and that if they have, in fact, moved twice which she stated was to
        avoid the attention of the neighbours. The last move was in  August
        2012 prior to coming to the UK. HSM was  asked  whether  she  would
        preach or try to convert at her property which she stated  she  did
        within the household where she considered the risk  to  be  slight.
        The person who worked for her work did so at two addresses.


    70. HSM confirmed she has  four  brothers  and  one  sister  living  in
        Hyderabad and one in another place. She claims they have  all  been
        targeted as all members of the Ahmadi community are  targeted.  She
        stated none of the siblings has attempted to leave Pakistan but are
        in fear. HSM confirmed she had not undertaken  any  activities  for
        the Association in the UK as she claimed she cannot  speak  English
        although she would speak to an Urdu speaking family  and  that  she
        does distribute leaflets.


    71. The letter from the Ahmadiyya Muslim Association UK dated 2nd  June
        2013  regarding  HSM,  signed  by  Dr  Chaudhry  refers  to  checks
        undertaken with their headquarters in Rabwah from which it is  said
        that (i) HSM is an Ahmadi Muslim by birth,  (ii)  her  contact  and
        corporation which the community were good, (iii) she  was  good  in
        discharging her financial obligations  to  the  community  and  the
        duties assigned to her, (iv) her general moral  conduct  was  good,
        (vi) she was connected with her  auxiliary  organisations  (in  her
        case the Majlis Lajna Imaillah,  the  auxiliary  organisation  that
        looks after the affairs of female members), (vi) there was no  case
        registered against her by another member of the community (vii) the
        general impression about within the clear that he was good.


    72. The Upper Tribunal also heard evidence from Mr  Tahir  who  entered
        the United Kingdom  in  2003  seeking  asylum  but  was  eventually
        granted ILR under the legacy  scheme  and  who  is  now  a  British
        citizen.  He  is  president  of  the  Newcastle   branch   of   the
        Association.


    73. In his letter of 1st March 2014, which stands as  his  evidence  in
        chief, he states that all four adult appellants are active  members
        of  the  Newcastle   branch   especially   within   the   auxiliary
        organisation relating to the female members of  the  community.  Mr
        Tahir states that to the best of his knowledge each member  of  the
        family took part in all or some of  the  following  activities  (i)
        attending the annual regional convention in Bradford  and  national
        convention in London which is for  women  only  together  with  the
        annual convention for every member of the  Association,  (ii)  hold
        regular  one-to-one  discussions  about   Islam/Ahmadiyyat,   (iii)
        circulate the books, leaflets to non-Ahmadis',  (iv)  attend  Quran
        exhibitions organised in Newcastle libraries  in  addition  to  all
        exhibitions held by the women's  organisation,  (v)  the  awareness
        campaign in local schools about the faith, (vi) attempt to bring as
        many guests to their question and  answer  sessions  in  Newcastle,
        (vii) invite friends at home and make good relationships.


    74. Mr Tahir also states that the President of the  women's  group  has
        made the following appointments:


          NM:     Secretary Nau Maubeen (new converts) in 2002


              Secretary Tabligh in 2013 for a period of one month


              Secretary Tehreke Jadid/Weqfe Jadid (new scheme) in 2013


              Appointed to the office of Secretary Ishaat  by  President  of
   women in                January 2014.


          SNM :


              Secretary Nasirat (young girls) in 2013.


              Appointed for the office of Secretary Health  and  Fitness  by
   Pres of women           in January 2014.


    75. In reply to supplementary questions Mr Tahir claimed  that  as  the
        President of the local branch he has  personal  contact  with  each
        member of the community together with contact with the President of
        the women's side, who he asked, who did what.


    76. In reply to questions put in cross-examination he confirmed he  met
        the appellants in person in 2012 when they came  to  Newcastle  and
        that he has sometimes seen them individually. When  asked  why  the
        President of the women's side had not  come  to  give  evidence  he
        claimed it was not up to him  to  decide  who  was  coming  as  the
        decision was made by the main Association and that they are  unable
        to attend without permission.  He was unaware why nobody  from  the
        Association attended the previous hearing as he was unable  to  say
        whether an application was made for anybody to attend.


    77. Mr Tahir was asked whether  he  had  personally  seen  any  of  the
        appellants preaching in the UK.  He confirmed he had not personally
        but what he knew he had heard from the women's President as he  was
        not involved with the women. When he received the requests for help
        he contacted the women's President who told him what they had  done
        and details of their work in the  community.  He  stated  that  all
        activities are recorded in a book and the list of  the  events  are
        recorded.




The law


    78. In  MN and others (Ahmadis - country conditions - risk) Pakistan CG
        [2012] UKUT 00389(IAC) the Tribunal  held  that  (i)  This  country
        guidance replaces previous guidance in MJ &  ZM  (Ahmadis  -  risk)
        Pakistan  CG   2008  UKAIT  00033  and   IA   &   Others   (Ahmadis
        Rabwah) Pakistan CG [2007] UKAIT 00088. The guidance  we  give  is
        based in  part  on  the  developments  in  the  law  including  the
        decisions of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) [2010]  UKSC  31, RT
        (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 38 and the CJEU decision in Germany v. Y (C-
        71/11) & Z (C-99/11). The guidance relates principally  to  Qadiani
        Ahmadis; but as the legislation which  is  the  background  to  the
        issues raised in these appeals affects Lahori  Ahmadis  also,  they
        too are  included  in  the  country  guidance  stated  below;  (ii)
        (a)  The background to the risk faced by  Ahmadis  is  legislation
        that restricts the way in which they are able  openly  to  practice
        their faith. The legislation not only prohibits preaching and other
        forms  of  proselytising  but  also  in  practice  restricts  other
        elements of manifesting one's religious beliefs,  such  as  holding
        open  discourse  about  religion  with  non-Ahmadis,  although  not
        amounting  to  proselytising.  The  prohibitions   include   openly
        referring to one's place of  worship  as  a  mosque  and  to  one's
        religious leader as an Imam. In addition, Ahmadis are not permitted
        to refer to the call to prayer  as  azan  nor  to  call  themselves
        Muslims or refer to their faith as Islam. Sanctions include a  fine
        and imprisonment and if blasphemy is found, there is a risk of  the
        death penalty which to date has not been carried out although there
        is  a  risk  of   lengthy   incarceration   if   the   penalty   is
        imposed.  There is clear evidence that this legislation is used by
        non-state actors to threaten and harass Ahmadis. This includes  the
        filing of First Information Reports (FIRs) (the first step  in  any
        criminal  proceedings)  which  can  result  in  detentions   whilst
        prosecutions are being pursued. Ahmadis are also subject to attacks
        by non-state actors from  sectors  of  the  majority  Sunni  Muslim
        population; (ii) (b) It is, and has long been, possible in  general
        for Ahmadis to practise their faith on a restricted basis either in
        private or in community  with  other  Ahmadis,  without  infringing
        domestic  Pakistan law;  (iii)  (a)  If  an  Ahmadi  is  able  to
        demonstrate that it is of particular importance  to  his  religious
        identity to practise and manifest his faith openly in  Pakistan  in
        defiance of the restrictions in the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) under
        sections 298B and  298C,  by  engaging  in  behavior  described  in
        paragraph (ii)(a) above, he or she is  likely  to  be  in  need  of
        protection, in the light of the serious  nature  of  the  sanctions
        that potentially apply as well as the  risk  of  prosecution  under
        section 295C for blasphemy; (iii)(b) It is no answer to  expect  an
        Ahmadi who fits the description just given  to  avoid  engaging  in
        behaviour described in paragraph (ii)(a) above ("paragraph  (ii)(a)
        behaviour") to avoid a risk of  prosecution;  (iv)  The  need  for
        protection applies equally to men and women. There is no basis  for
        considering that Ahmadi women as a whole are  at  a  particular  or
        additional risk; the decision that they should not  attend  mosques
        in Pakistan was made by the Ahmadi Community following attacks on
        the mosques in Lahore in 2010. There is no evidence that women in
        particular were the target of those attacks; (v) In light  of  the
        above, the first  question  the  decision-maker  must  ask  is  (1)
        whether the claimant genuinely is an Ahmadi. As with  all  judicial
        fact-finding the judge will need to reach conclusions  on  all  the
        evidence as a whole giving such weight to aspects of that  evidence
        as appropriate in accordance with Article 4  of  the  Qualification
        Directive.  This is likely  to  include  an  enquiry  whether  the
        claimant was registered with an Ahmadi community  in Pakistan and
        worshipped and engaged  there  on  a  regular  basis.  Post-arrival
        activity will also be relevant. Evidence  likely  to  be  relevant
        includes confirmation from the UK Ahmadi headquarters regarding the
        activities relied on in Pakistan and confirmation from the  local
        community in the UK where the claimant is  worshipping;  (vi)  The
        next step (2) involves an enquiry into the claimant's intentions or
        wishes as to his or her faith, if returned to Pakistan.  This  is
        relevant because  of  the  need  to  establish  whether  it  is  of
        particular importance to  the  religious  identity  of  the  Ahmadi
        concerned to engage in paragraph (ii)(a) behaviour. The  burden  is
        on the claimant to  demonstrate  that  any  intention  or  wish  to
        practise and manifest aspects of the  faith  openly  that  are  not
        permitted by the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) is genuinely held and of
        particular importance to  the  claimant  to  preserve  his  or  her
        religious identity.  The decision maker needs to evaluate all  the
        evidence. Behaviour since arrival in the UK may also be relevant.
        If the claimant discharges this burden he is likely to be  in  need
        of protection; (vii) The option of internal relocation,  previously
        considered to be available in Rabwah, is not in general  reasonably
        open to a claimant who  genuinely  wishes  to  engage  n  paragraph
        (ii)(a)  behaviour,  in  the  light  of   the   nationwide   effect
        in Pakistan of the anti-Ahmadi legislation; (viii) Ahmadis who are
        not able to show that they practised their faith at all in Pakistan
        or that they did so on anything other  than  the  restricted  basis
        described in paragraph 2(ii) above are in general  unlikely  to  be
        able to show  that  their  genuine  intentions  or  wishes  are  to
        practise and manifest their faith openly on return, as described in
        paragraph 2(a) above; (ix) A sur place claim by an Ahmadi based on
        post-arrival conversion or revival  in  belief  and  practice  will
        require careful evidential analysis.  This  will  probably  include
        consideration  of  evidence  of  the   head   of   the   claimant's
        local United Kingdom Ahmadi Community and from the UK headquarters,
        the latter particularly in cases where there has been a conversion.
        Any adverse findings in the claimant's account as a  whole  may  be
        relevant to the assessment  of  likely  behaviour  on  return;  (x)
         Whilst an Ahmadi who has been found to be not reasonably likely to
        engage or wish  to  engage  in  paragraph  2(a)  behaviour  is,  in
        general, not at real risk on return  to  Pakistan,  judicial  fact-
        finders may in certain cases need to consider whether  that  person
        would nevertheless be reasonably likely to be targeted by non-state
        actors on return for religious persecution  by  reason  of  his/her
        prominent social and/or business profile.


    79. In relation to the weight to be given to letters from the Ahmadiyya
        Association: in  MN and others  (Ahmadis  -  country  conditions  -
        risk) Pakistan CG [2012] UKUT 00389(IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that
        evidence  likely  to  be  relevant   includes   confirmation   from
        the UK Ahmadi headquarters regarding  the  activities  relied  on
        in Pakistan and confirmation from the local community in  the UK
        where the claimant is worshipping. In AB (Ahmadiyya Association UK:
        letters) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00511  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  in
        deciding a claim to international protection based  on  a  person's
        Ahmadi faith where credibility was in issue, the more that a letter
        from the Ahmadiyya Association UK contained specific information as
        to the claimant's activities in the United Kingdom, the more likely
        the letter was to be given weight.



Discussion



    80. In his submissions to the Upper Tribunal Mr Magnion sought to  rely
        upon the four recent refusal letters but not  those  parts  of  the
        letter alleging that there is a relocation option.  He confirmed it
        was accepted that all appellants are Ahmadi from Pakistan and  that
        the question was whether they are genuine Ahmadi and  whether  they
        would engage in what they cannot do on return without risk.


    81. In assessing the activities and  risk  to  each  appellant  I  have
        considered the evidence in  the  round  with  the  degree  of  care
        required that of the most anxious scrutiny.  I  do  find  from  the
        evidence that there does appear to be a degree of collusion  within
        this family unit and do not find that they have substantiated their
        case to the degree that they may have sought to do in their written
        and oral evidence, although that may not mean that they are not  at
        risk on return. The issue in these appeals has always been what the
        answer is to the second key question posed in MN, namely  what  are
        the appellants intentions or wishes as to their faith, if  returned
        to Pakistan.  As found in MN this is relevant because of the need
        to  establish  whether  it  is  of  particular  importance  to  the
        religious identity of the Ahmadi concerned to engage  in  paragraph
        (ii)(a) behaviour. The burden is on  the  claimant  to  demonstrate
        that any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects of  the
        faith openly that are not permitted  by  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code
        (PPC) is  genuinely  held  and  of  particular  importance  to  the
        claimant to preserve his or her religious identity.  The  decision
        maker needs to evaluate all the evidence. Behaviour  since  arrival
        in the UK may also be relevant. If the claimant  discharges  this
        burden she is likely to be in need of protection.


    82. This case also involves  alleged  acts  of  persecution  against  a
        highly qualified medical practitioner and university  lecturer  and
        so in addition it is necessary  for  me  to  consider  whether  the
        evidence  supports  the  contention  made  by  Miss  Pickering   in
        submissions that these two individuals are reasonably likely to  be
        targeted by non-state actors on return for religious persecution by
        reason of their profile.


    83. I make a general finding that the evidence shows that  there  is  a
        family home available to any appellant who is  unable  to  succeed.
        The evidence is that HSM's brother and family  still  live  in  the
        family home and it has not been established that any appellant  who
        has to return to Pakistan cannot  live  there  and  do  so  safely.
        Claims that the brother  or  other  family  members  have  received
        threats I do not find to be  substantiated  on  the  evidence.  The
        burden is upon an individual to prove what they are alleging and in
        relation to other family members this has not been  proved  to  the
        level that would sustain a finding that they could  not  return  to
        their previous home.  Similarly it has not been established that AM
        who worked as a  medical  doctor  and  NM  who  is  the  university
        lecturer would not  be  able  to  re-establish  their  professional
        careers in Pakistan or that  other  family  will  be  destitute  or
        unable to support themselves, any claim to  the  contrary  has  not
        been substantiated.


    84. The information regarding AM's application for a visa to  join  her
        husband in the United States of America  has  been  noted  but  the
        Tribunal is required to determine the issue  at  the  date  of  the
        hearing and so this can only be taken as an indication of a  future
        intention to settle with her husband rather than being an offer  of
        a life elsewhere whether she is at risk of persecution  or  not.  I
        make this finding as the removal  direction  to  Pakistan  was  not
        withdrawn by the Secretary of State in light of this new evidence.

         NM
    85. NM, the university lecturer, does not specifically  claim  to  have
        been targeted as a result of her status  and  only  speaks  of  one
        event in Pakistan relating to her  religious  activities  when  she
        claims to have spoken to a woman by the name of Arsheen  about  her
        faith in May 2011. She claims as a result she was warned  by  three
        men and again in June and September although there  is  a  material
        discrepancy in her  evidence  regarding  the  alleged  incident  in
        September.  In  her  earlier  evidence,  including  interview,  she
        claimed she was threatened with a gun but, as reported above, later
        did not claim to have been so threatened but claimed the individual
        only pointed to a gun.  Either she saw a gun or she did not and  to
        have claimed she did but then did not is  relevant  to  the  weight
        that can be given to this element of the claim, which is not much.


    86. I find that NM  has  not  substantiated  any  claim  to  have  been
        involved with her faith in Pakistan  as  a  preacher,  or  to  have
        practised her  faith  in  the  manner  identified  in  the  country
        guidance case so as to place her at risk. She states that following
        her leaving the United Kingdom there are  no  examples  of  attacks
        upon the family, rather what she describes as harassment.


    87. The fact NM, an academically gifted  individual,  failed  to  claim
        asylum on arrival when claiming to have fled in fear  of  her  life
        damages her credibility by virtue of section 8  of  the  2004  Act.
        Claiming she did not know how to claim asylum has no merit  as  she
        could have asked at the airport when she  came  into  contact  with
        immigration staff, yet she did not.  She entered using a visa  that
        had been lawfully issued to her yet seems to infer that it was  her
        intention never to return which justifies  a  conclusion  that  the
        visa was obtained fraudulently.  If it was a genuine  student  visa
        she would have anticipated  returning  to  Pakistan,  but  that  is
        contrary to her evidence.


    88. Notwithstanding the lack of any evidence of appropriate involvement
        in Pakistan, based upon her own evidence or  the  letter  from  the
        Association, it is clear from the evidence that NM more than any of
        the other appellants has  involved  herself  substantially  in  the
        activities of the association in  the  United  Kingdom.   This  has
        involved more than attending prayers and handing out  leaflets  but
        involvement with the number of committees and seeking and obtaining
        appointments within the various  groups  and  undertaking  work  on
        behalf of the organisation which is corroborated by Mr Tahir.


    89. Perhaps the most important part of NM's  evidence  is  a  statement
        that she has undertaken the work she  has  in  the  United  Kingdom
        because she is not able to undertake such work  in  Pakistan  as  a
        result of the fear of retribution and threats.  She indicates  that
        she wishes to continue with such work if she was returned but it is
        clear that she could not do so as work of that nature, which  would
        require her to preach attend events/activities  outside  her  faith
        group and therefore not to act discreetly, will place her  at  risk
        of persecution or ill treatment at the hands of the Muslim  zealots
        or others within Pakistan,  including  potential  breaches  of  the
        criminal code as identified in the country guidance  case.   If  NM
        wished to continue her activities in Pakistan as  she  had  in  the
        United Kingdom, but did not do so solely as a result of the fear of
        the consequences, having demonstrated that  these  aspects  of  her
        faith are of importance to her, then she  is  entitled  to  succeed
        based upon the HJ (Iran) principal, again identified in the country
        guidance case.


    90. Having considered the evidence in the round  I  find  that  NM  has
        discharged the burden of proof upon her to the required standard to
        show that she will face a real risk on return to Pakistan and  that
        the answer to the second question posed in MN is that whilst it may
        not have been the case in the past that  NM  has  demonstrated  any
        intention or wish to practice and manifest  aspects  of  her  faith
        openly that are not permitted by  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code  (PPC)
        which are genuinely held and of particular importance to the her to
        preserve her religious identity which she was not  able  to  openly
        expressing Pakistan, she has done  since  arriving  in  the  UK  at
        Newcastle when she has been free to undertake such  activities  and
        that her wish to be able to do so on return has been  substantiated
        to the lower standard applicable to appeals of this nature .


         SNM
    91. In her evidence SNM confirmed  that  she  had  not  undertaken  any
        activities in Pakistan although did attend Friday prayer and  speak
        to other females who attended those meetings.  This  is  indicative
        of such activities  being  undertaken  discreetly  within  a  large
        group.  SNM refers to the fact that had she spoke  openly  she  may
        have been a risk but this does not  appear  to  be  a  case  of  an
        individual wishing to do more but feeling unable  to  do  so  as  a
        result of the risk of persecution, but of somebody who chose to act
        discreetly  and  limit  their  activities  to  those   within   the
        community.


    92. SNM's case  is  also  one  in  which  I  make  adverse  credibility
        findings. She was in the United Kingdom  as  a  student,  lawfully,
        previously but there is no  evidence  that  she  made  any  attempt
        during that period to join any of the  Ahmadi  communities  in  the
        United Kingdom which she would have been free to have done, without
        fear, if she was genuinely interested in her faith  to  the  extent
        that she now claims.   She  could  have  engaged  in  any  activity
        (within the laws of the United Kingdom) but the evidence  does  not
        even suggest she approached any of the  Association  groups.   When
        asked about this she claimed it was because  she  was  working  and
        studying and that her English was not  adequate  but  I  find  this
        provides no plausible explanation.  SNM was studying in English and
        no doubt worked in an environment in which  there  was  a  need  to
        speak English.  She has not substantiated her claim  that  she  did
        not have time to attend to her faith if so required.   The  reality
        is that SNM entered the United Kingdom to study and work, and  that
        this was more important to her than her faith or an opportunity  to
        express her faith individually or  through  converting  others.  In
        addition there was the point that having returned she  undertook  a
        further test to obtain an English-language certificate.  I  do  not
        find the explanation provided that she wished to test the level  of
        English at all plausible and the fact that she took steps to obtain
        a further English-language certificate when the  previous  one  had
        expired is indicative of a desire or intent to return to the United
        Kingdom at some point in the future, for which the certificate  was
        one of the mandatory requirements.


    93. I also find the chronology damages SNM's credibility.  She  entered
        the United Kingdom but only claimed asylum  after  her  sister  had
        obtained a visa.  Although  she  tried  to  explain  this  away  by
        claiming it was "a coincidence" I do not accept  this  explanation.
        This is clearly a very close family group  where  the  sisters  and
        their mother communicate and liaise with each other on what appears
        to be a regular basis and the suggestion that the real  reason  she
        delayed in making her claim was because she did not want  to  cause
        difficulties for her sister in her visa application I  find  to  be
        the more likely explanation.


    94. In relation to her activities in the United Kingdom,  the  evidence
        suggests that she has distributed  leaflets  with  her  sister  and
        recently on her own and been appointed to Secretary Nasirat  (young
        girls) in 2013 and as Secretary Health and Fitness in January 2014.
          I do not accept her claim regarding the lack of  language  skills
        as a plausible explanation for the lack of  additional  activities.
        These are posts within the Ahmadi community itself and there is  no
        evidence that they involve any form of external preaching.  I  have
        taken into account the letter from  the  Ahmadiyya  Association  UK
        dated 7th January 2013 which confirms the  lack  of  activities  in
        Pakistan, and attendance at events within the community within  the
        United Kingdom.  The content of  the  letter  is  in  general  form
        rather than containing  any  specific  particularised  evidence  of
        events which will place  her  at  risk  if  repeated  in  Pakistan.
        Having considered all the evidence in the round I am not  satisfied
        that SNM has demonstrated any intention or  wish  to  practice  and
        manifest aspects of the faith openly that are not permitted by  the
        Pakistan Penal Code (PPC)  as  genuinely  held  and  of  particular
        importance to her to preserve her religious identity.  I find  this
        was an attempt to use her religion and religious activities in  the
        UK to create a ground on which she will be permitted to  remain  in
        the United Kingdom which, despite her best attempts, has failed.  I
        find she lacks credibility and has failed to substantiate her claim
        to have suffered any act of persecution in Pakistan  or  to  be  at
        risk on return.


         AM
    95. AM is highly qualified as a doctor with  additional  qualifications
        in surgery. She entered the United Kingdom with her mother  HSM  in
        March 2013 with a visit visa but then immediately claimed asylum on
        arrival claiming that she fled Pakistan in fear of her life.   This
        raises the question whether when making the visit visa application,
        at which point she would have told the entry clearance officer  she
        intended to return to Pakistan,  it  was  a  valid  application  or
        whether that application was fraudulent and sought as  a  means  to
        enable her to come to the United Kingdom to make the claim that she
        did on arrival.


    96. AM claims to have suffered problems at work when men  came  in  and
        harassed and threatened her and made references which she  took  to
        be to her two sisters. I find it lacks credibility that  she  would
        not have reported such issues to the hospital authorities and there
        are a number of  other  issues  arising  from  AM's  evidence  that
        warrant adverse credibility findings being made against  her.   She
        was asked in cross-examination about a material change in  evidence
        regarding whether the person allegedly threatening her had a gun or
        not and  it  is  clear  that  her  evidence  in  this  respect  was
        inconsistent. The key event that she states  illustrates  the  risk
        she will face on return was the accident in the car.  AM claims she
        was returning from a medical meeting/conference on one occasion  in
        a taxi and elsewhere in a car owned by the hospital. She claims  on
        one occasion that she was looking behind when she realised she  was
        being followed as she was able to identify one of  the  individuals
        in the other vehicle, and asked her driver to go faster,  but  that
        there was an accident during which she was knocked unconscious.  In
        another part of her evidence, however, she claimed  she  recognised
        the individual as being the one who previously approached her  when
        the cars came alongside hers as if to overtake.  This is a material
        discrepancy as to whether the car was behind or alongside and it is
        not unreasonable to expect a degree of consistency with  regard  to
        such a simple fact.  AM claims that she suffered injury and had  to
        have a metal plate inserted.  It  is  not  disputed  that  she  was
        involved in a car accident or required medical treatment  but  this
        is not determinative of her claim although it appears arguable that
        she is using this event to bolster her claim.


    97. AM was  also  inconsistent  when  she  alleged  that  she  was  too
        frightened to leave the house and so remained in the house for  two
        and a half months whereas the evidence indicated that this was  not
        true.  She attended an interview with the British  High  Commission
        in Islamabad during this intervening period and it  is  implausible
        that she would not have had medical checkups even though she denied
        attending those in relation to which  evidence  exists  within  the
        bundle.  I  find  the  attempt  to  explain  away  the  discrepancy
        regarding the claim to have remained in hiding for two and  a  half
        months, that she did not consider travelling to Islamabad  for  the
        interview to amount to going out of her home, to lack all plausible
        or credibility, especially with such an intelligent individual.


    98. AM returned home where she married but claims she  felt  threatened
        by  individuals  who  she  thought  were  looking  at  her  and  an
        individual standing around when they entered a car  park  with  her
        husband and mother on a shopping  expedition.   Even  if  true  and
        therefore representing a subjective fear, such a claim has not been
        substantiated as being objectively well founded, and appear to lack
        any rationale at all, again bearing in mind the intellect  that  AM
        clearly possesses. I find these are accounts that she has invented,
        along with other aspects of her evidence,  to  bolster  her  asylum
        claim.


    99. In relation to activities in Pakistan  there  is  no  evidence  she
        undertook activities of the nature of those that would place her at
        risk in Pakistan and I do not accept she has substantiated a  claim
        that she would face any risk as a result of her profession  on  the
        facts.  In relation to activities in the United  Kingdom  the  only
        evidence is that she has undertaken general tasks as identified  by
        Mr Tahir and other family members.  I am not satisfied that SNM has
        demonstrated any intention or wish to practise and manifest aspects
        of the faith openly that are not permitted by  the  Pakistan  Penal
        Code (PPC) which are genuinely held and of particular importance to
        her to preserve her religious identity.  I find, as with SNM,  that
        this is an attempt to use her religion and religious activities  to
        create a ground on which she will be permitted  to  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom which, despite the best attempt, has failed.


         HSM
   100. I do not find that HSM has  been  involved  in  any  activities  in
        Pakistan such as to create a real risk as her account of not  doing
        so as a result of the outcome is not plausible. Her  activities  in
        the United Kingdom have been very limited and I do not  accept  her
        claim she does not speak English as a plausible explanation for not
        doing more. HSM entered in 2013 with her daughter  AM  and  claimed
        asylum on arrival. As with her daughter  this  gives  rise  to  the
        question  whether  the  visit  visa  applications  were   in   fact
        fraudulent if it was their intention all along to claim asylum  and
        not return to Pakistan.


   101. The claim to not to speak English as an excuse  for  not  involving
        herself further is not accepted as all the appellants gave evidence
        through an interpreter in court and there is no indication that all
        members of the association in Newcastle only speak English.   As  a
        religion based in Pakistan it is more likely that  members  of  the
        faith speak HSM's language and the reason she has not been involved
        to the extent one of the daughters has is because faith is  not  as
        important to her as she alleges.  Having  considered  the  evidence
        carefully  I  am  not  satisfied  that  HSM  has  demonstrated  any
        intention or wish to practise and manifest  aspects  of  the  faith
        openly that are not permitted by  the  Pakistan  Penal  Code  (PPC)
        which are genuinely held and of particular  importance  to  her  to
        preserve his or her religious identity.  I find this was an attempt
        to use her religion and religious activities to create a ground  on
        which she would be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom and no
        more.





        KA

   102. KA is the child of NM.   Although  due  to  his  age  there  is  no
        evidence of engagement in religious activities such as to create  a
        real risk on return, NM  is  his  primary  carer  and  as  she  has
        succeeded with her appeal KA is entitled to a  grant  of  leave  to
        remain in the United Kingdom in line with his mother .


   103. In summary, I find this is a concerted attempt by this family  unit
        who have abandoned their lives in Pakistan  and  attempted  to  re-
        settle in the United Kingdom through their  asylum  claims.  Whilst
        the situation in Pakistan is accepted as not being as it should  be
        for religious minorities it is clear from the country guidance case
        law that the burden is upon an individual appellant to  prove  that
        what  they  claim  regarding  their  entitlement  to  a  grant   of
        international protection is true. In this  case,  for  the  reasons
        stated above, NM has discharged the burden entitling KA  to  remain
        in line. The remaining appellants have not.


   104. Miss Pickering  asked  that  in  the  event  that  some  appellants
        succeeded whilst others did  not,  that  I  give  consideration  to
        whether those who failed are able to remain on the basis  of  their
        family/private life. No further submissions were made on this issue
        and little evidence has been advanced.  I  accept  that  the  three
        appellants who failed are a mother and her two adult siblings,  one
        of whom is intending to leave the family at the  first  opportunity
        to join her husband in the United States of America in any event.


   105. Even though there is no formal application under Article 8,  if  it
        is raised in an appeal I am required to give  proper  consideration
        to 276ADE and the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   As  stated  no
        evidence has been laid regarding the rules  it  is  considered  the
        remaining appellants are able to meet, and for what reason, and  so
        I have looked at the available evidence and considered  the  merits
        of the human rights claim in accordance with the approach  set  out
        by the Court of Appeal in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192,  the
        High Court in Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  and  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, as confirmed by  Shahzad  (Art
        8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).  These  judgments  have
        made it clear that the question of proportionality must  be  looked
        at in the context of the Immigration Rules with no need to go on to
        a specific assessment under Article 8 if it is clear from the facts
        that  there   are   no   particular   compelling   or   exceptional
        circumstances requiring that course to be taken. This approach  has
        been further confirmed by the Court of Appeal in  the  more  recent
        case of Haleemundeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.


   106. It has not been established on the  evidence  that  either  of  the
        three appellants, SNM, AM or HSM are able to succeed  under  276ADE
        on the basis of their private life.  They have failed  to  identify
        how they are able to meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  on
        the facts it does not appear that they are able so  to  do.  Having
        considered whether the  evidence  supports  the  existence  of  any
        particularly compelling or exceptional circumstances  requiring  me
        to consider article 8 is outside the  context  of  the  immigration
        rules, I find no such circumstances established.  For the  sake  of
        completeness, I find that even if  it  had  been  established  that
        family life recognised by article 8 existed within this family unit
        there will still be a finding  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
        proved that the decision will be proportionate when all  the  facts
        are  properly  taken  into  account  and  the  competing  interests
        balanced against each other, in light of  the  facts  as  found  in
        relation to this appeal.


Decision

   107. The First-tier Tribunal Judges who considered the appeals  of  this
        family unit have been found to have materially  erred  in  law  and
        their determinations set aside. I remake the decisions as  follows.
        The appeals of NM and KA are allowed. The appeals of  SNM,  AM  and
        HSM are dismissed.


   Anonymity.


   108. The anonymity order in force shall continue pursuant to rule 14  of
        the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29th May 2014












