
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05605/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 January 2014                               |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                   mr a L
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. In this appeal the appellant challenges the determination of First-tier
    Tribunal Andrew promulgated on 3  August  2012  dismissing  his  asylum
    appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  on  24
    August 2012 on the basis that the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
    evidence including the background evidence; failed to take  account  of
    the antiquity of the injuries claimed to have  been  inflicted  on  the
    appellant or the methods used by the Sri Lankan authorities; failed  to
    take account of  the  extensive  use  of  bribery  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities and their allies; made inconsistent findings at  paragraphs
    28(f), (g) and (j); and at paragraph 28(k) applied the  wrong  standard
    and burden of proof.  In addition at paragraph 28(m) the judge  made  a
    finding based at least in part on speculation.   The most serious  flaw
    in the determination is that the  newspaper  articles  referred  to  in
    paragraph 28(n) are not considered and weighed.

 3. On 28 January 2013, at the error of law hearing,  I  indicated  at  [8]
    that I considered the First-tier Tribunal's  reasoning  might  well  be
    inadequate.  By agreement, my decision on all matters, including  error
    of law, was reserved to allow for written submissions and such  further
    documents as either party was advised to produce.  After  seeing  those
    submissions, I listed the appeal for a further oral hearing on error of
    law and disposal.  By agreement at that hearing, I find that the First-
    tier Tribunal's reasoning is inadequate and that the determination must
    be remade afresh in the First-tier Tribunal, at the Birmingham  hearing
    centre or such other centre as may be directed.

    Directions

      1) The appeal will be heard in Birmingham on 28  April  2014,  with  a
         time estimate of one (1) day;

      2) There will be three witnesses;

      3) A Tamil interpreter is required.




    Signed                              Date




    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

