
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05343/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Heard on 22nd of January 2018                |On 24th January 2018          |
|Prepared on 22nd of January 2018             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                    [A K]
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A. Eaton of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 12th of February 1990.  He
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Bartlett
    sitting at  Taylor  House  on  17th  of  July  2017  who  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent  dated  10th  of
    March  2015.  That  decision  was  to  refuse  to  grant  the  Appellant
    international protection.


 2. The Appellant left Albania in 2012 and was encountered by British police
    on 8th of June 2014 on the A20  near  Folkestone.  He  was  served  with
    removal directions which were deferred after he submitted an application
    for judicial review. On 19th of June he claimed asylum.

The Appellant's Case

 3. The Appellant was not called as a witness at the hearing of  his  appeal
    relying instead on the written documents submitted  to  the  Judge.  The
    Appellant's claim was that his family were involved in a blood feud with
    a rival family, the [R] family. The Appellant was 8 years old  when  his
    father was murdered by the [R] family who wanted to take over  the  land
    owned by the Appellant's  family.  In  2010  when  walking  through  his
    village the Appellant was attacked and hit on the left side of his head.
    He woke up in hospital having lost consciousness. His  mother  told  him
    that his father had been killed in almost the same way as the  Appellant
    was attacked and that the Appellant was  lucky  to  survive.  The  rival
    family wanted to kill the Appellant as the  only  male  member  left  to
    liquidate as they wanted the land for  themselves  and  they  wanted  to
    expel her. His knowledge of these events came from his mother  who  told
    him that if he the Appellant returned to Albania he would be  killed  by
    the [R].


 4. There would be inadequate care for him upon return. The Appellant relied
    on a  number  of  medical  reports  which  confirmed  his  injuries  and
    described his mental difficulties. The Appellant  had  great  difficulty
    looking after himself and receiving appropriate services for his  mental
    and/or physical condition because of his unsettled immigration status in
    this country.


 5.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  had   suffered
    persecution but rather was that victim of a criminal  act.  It  was  not
    accepted that an active blood  feud  existed.  The  [R]  family  had  no
    influence over state authorities or throughout  Albania  and  there  was
    nothing to suggest they had an ongoing interest in the Appellant.  There
    was no evidence that the authorities in Albania would  be  unwilling  to
    assist the Appellant. There was a sufficiency of protection.

The Decision at First Instance

 6. The Judge accepted that the Appellant had been hit on the head by a hard
    metal object in 2010. This could have occurred through an  accident  but
    the Judge was prepared to accept, in light  of  the  reports,  that  the
    Appellant was injured as a result of  a  brutal  attack  upon  him.  The
    Appellant had suffered a brain tumour in Albania which had been operated
    upon but it was unclear if the problems the Appellant had arose from the
    attack or from the brain operation. The Judge accepted the conclusion of
    one of the doctors, a psychiatrist Dr Cullen,  who  concluded  that  the
    Appellant did not suffer from PTSD.


 7. The  Appellant  had  expressed  fear  about  returning  to  Albania  and
    experienced nightmares. The  Appellant  was  in  regular  almost  weekly
    contact with his mother in Albania but there was no evidence from her to
    support the Appellant's appeal. She had not provided a witness statement
    nor any documents from Albania such as the  ownership  documentation  of
    the land in dispute. The Appellant had been in the United Kingdom for  3
    years by the time of the hearing and the Respondent's refusal letter was
    dated 2 � years before the hearing. There had been ample time for  steps
    to be taken to obtain such evidence.


 8. The Appellant failed to identify more than the  most  basic  information
    about the blood feud.  There  was  little  beyond  identifying  the  [R]
    family, that his own family remained living in  the  village  after  the
    death of his father and that the  Appellant  remained  in  hiding  after
    primary school. There was no identification of who in the [R] family had
    carried out the crimes;  what  actual  threats  had  been  made  to  the
    Appellant or his family or how his mother had been able to remain on the
    family land by herself for years without the [R] family causing her  any
    harm. Although women were excluded from blood feuds, if the point of the
    feud was to obtain land, it would  seem  logical  that  the  Appellant's
    mother would not be immune from the adverse attention of the [R] family.




 9. The Judge commented at [27] that the Appellant had said his  mother  had
    sent him to the United  Kingdom  so  he  could  receive  better  medical
    treatment as there was nowhere else he would receive treatment  for  his
    physical problems. The  Judge  inferred  from  this  evidence  that  the
    Appellant was not truly in fear as a result of  a  blood  feud  but  his
    reasons for coming to the United Kingdom were  more  linked  to  medical
    treatment or care.


10. Although the Respondent had relied on a letter from the British  embassy
    in Tirana which appeared to suggest that the Appellant's father had  not
    been killed by members of the [R] family  nor  had  the  Appellant  been
    abused physically by them, the Judge placed little weight on that letter
    as it was no more than assertions. The Appellant's  case  was  that  his
    family had never approached the police and therefore they would not know
    about the incidents.


11. The Judge  directed  herself  in  accordance  with  the  Upper  Tribunal
    authority on blood feuds in Albania EH [2012] UKUT 348. No evidence  had
    been provided about the notoriety of  the  killing  of  the  Appellant's
    grandfather or father. The last act in connection with  the  blood  feud
    was the attack on the Appellant in 2010 and the last death with was that
    of his father in 1998. There was no evidence as to how  the  [R]  family
    had any means to locate the Appellant outside his village. The Appellant
    had given no reasons why he felt unsafe living in Kosovo for 2 years  to
    which he had travelled after leaving  Albania.  There  was  insufficient
    protection from the authorities in the north part of Albania  where  the
    Appellant came from partly because of corruption and partly because of a
    general disinterest.


12. The Judge rejected the submission that relocation would be unduly  harsh
    because the Appellant on his own evidence had relocated to Kosovo for  2
    years. There was no evidence why Kosovo was unsafe.  The  Appellant  was
    able to function and live there even without the help of his mother. The
    Appellant had lived in the United Kingdom with virtually  no  help  from
    the authorities apart from some medical support. He had relied  entirely
    on members of the Albanian community  for  his  accommodation.  The  [R]
    family did not  have  the  means  or  desire  to  pursue  the  Appellant
    throughout Albania or Kosovo. There were no details of any threats  that
    the Appellant had received in Kosovo or that the [R] family  had  chased
    him there. The Appellant  would  not  need  to  protect  himself  if  he
    relocated. He would be in proximity to his  mother  who  might  wish  to
    relocate to live with him to provide him with support.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed.

The Onward Appeal

13. The Appellant appealed against  this  decision  in  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who had appeared at first instance and who appeared  before  me.
    It was argued that the Judge had failed to consider the evidence  of  Dr
    Cullen alongside the evidence of a psychologist Dr Shuttleworth who  had
    carried out a forensic psychological examination of  the  Appellant.  Dr
    Shuttleworth had concluded that the Appellant had an extremely low level
    of overall verbal and non-verbal functioning. The Judge gave  no  reason
    why she preferred Dr Cullen's  speculative  suggestion  as  to  why  the
    Appellant was not able to engage with the doctors questions rather  than
    the clear evidence of Dr Shuttleworth regarding the basic  inability  of
    the Appellant to do so in a meaningful way. The Judge was  incorrect  to
    find that the Appellant had repeated in his evidence that the reason  he
    came to United Kingdom was for medical treatment.


14. It was perverse to conclude that the killings of the Appellant's  father
    and grandfather could not be categorised as a blood  feud  just  because
    the initial cause of the feud was a land dispute. The Judge appeared  to
    accept that the Appellant's father and grandfather were killed  as  part
    of the feud concluding that there was no further evidence regarding  the
    notoriety of the killings. It was perverse to find against the Appellant
    because the last incident was the attack in 2010. The Appellant had been
    in the United Kingdom since 2014  and  was  in  Kosovo  from  2012.  The
    Appellant was an only child.


15. The 2nd ground of appeal related to the issue  of  internal  relocation.
    The Appellant would be  entirely  dependent  upon  others  in  order  to
    internally relocate. The Appellant's appearance when he first arrived in
    the  United  Kingdom,  an  unkempt  individual  who  hardly   functioned
    suggested that before arriving in the United Kingdom he was not able  to
    care for himself. He had been a victim of  periodic  epileptic  seizures
    and needed both regular personal and medical assistance. The  Judge  had
    erred in suggesting the Appellant could relocate to Kosovo.  Kosovo  was
    an independent sovereign state in which the Appellant had  no  right  to
    reside. The Appellant had left there because he did not  feel  safe.  If
    the Appellant was sufficiently at risk such that internal flight  needed
    to be considered then the history and notoriety of the  blood  feud  was
    relevant for the consideration of internal flight.


16. The [R] could only take the Appellant's family  land  if  all  the  male
    members of his family were dead. It was perverse to  conclude  that  the
    [R] would not be interested in finding the Appellant if he were returned
    to Albania. Due to his injuries he would not have the  ability  to  take
    normal precautions to protect himself against the [R] family finding him
    in Albania.


17. The application for permission to  appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hollingworth on 8th of  November  2017.
    In granting permission to appeal he found it  arguable  that  the  lower
    burden of proof was satisfied in this case.  The  Appellant  would  have
    needed to have fallen into a higher grouping than 0.1% of the population
    in order to provide the extent of the details sought by the Judge as  to
    the details of the feud. It was arguable that the origin of the feud had
    not been fully related to the way in which blood  feuds  were  conducted
    regardless of origin. The Judge attached too much  significance  to  the
    absence of further evidence regarding the notoriety of the killings  and
    insufficient weight to the cumulative nature of the  factors  identified
    by or on behalf of the Appellant. The Judge had not fully considered the
    cumulative effect of the psychiatric and psychological examinations. The
    assessment as to internal relocation had thereby been affected.


18. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  28th
    of November 2017. The complaint that  the  two  medical  reports  of  Dr
    Cullen and Dr Shuttleworth were not considered in the round was not made
    out. The Judge has set out the key findings of all three doctors  called
    by the Appellant. The Judge  had  found  an  inconsistency  between  the
    Appellant's football injury which he had sustained in the United Kingdom
    (he dislocated his  elbow)  and  the  report  of  Dr  Shuttleworth  that
    attested to the Appellant's mental function score as co-relating  to  an
    Alzheimer's sufferer. The Judge had properly concluded that the  medical
    reports taken in the round did  not  provide  a  clear  picture  of  the
    Appellant's situation. The grounds of onward appeal amounted to  a  mere
    disagreement.

The Hearing Before Me

19. At the hearing before me to  determine  whether  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the determination  counsel  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    onward appeal. The Appellant had not been substantively  interviewed  by
    the Respondent because of  his  medical  condition.  The  Appellant  had
    passed the test for feigning memory. The Judge had not  considered  what
    Dr Shuttleworth said about the Appellant's very low  IQ.  There  was  no
    contradiction between Dr Cullen and Dr Shuttleworth. Their  reports  had
    not been put to the other doctor for comment. Dr Cullen's  finding  that
    the Appellant was feigning memory  loss  should  be  read  alongside  Dr
    Shuttleworth's report that it was not feigned. The Appellant had  wanted
    to come to United Kingdom for medical treatment. He told Dr Shuttleworth
    that he had come here because of the problems he had had with the  other
    family. The desire for medical treatment was not the main reason why the
    Appellant had come to the United Kingdom.


20. The reason why the blood feud had  started  was  irrelevant.  To  avenge
    honour was not the only definition of a blood feud. In any event it  was
    academic whether it was or was not a blood feud  as  there  had  been  a
    series of attacks on the Appellant's  family  and  no  reason  why  they
    should abate. The Appellant had been out of Albania since 2012.


21. The Appellant was  not  able  to  look  after  himself  to  be  able  to
    relocate. He did not recall what had happened in Kosovo. In response  to
    my question as to whether the doctors had been asked to consider why the
    Appellant might be unable to recall the events in Kosovo  (a  period  of
    two years) counsel replied that the doctors could only  deal  with  what
    the Appellant was able to recall. It was inconsistent for the  Judge  to
    find that the [R] family would not want to find the Appellant given what
    had happened to the Appellant's family in the past.  He  would  be  more
    easily found if he attempted to relocate to Tirana with his mother.  The
    Judge had made no findings on whether the authorities would be  able  to
    help the Appellant if he were in Tirana  as  opposed  to  the  north  of
    Albania.


22. In reply the Presenting Officer argued that there was no material  error
    of law in the determination. It  was  the  Respondent's  case  that  the
    Appellant had been the victim of a criminal act. That was  how  [20]  of
    the determination should be read. There was no acceptance by  the  Judge
    that the assault on the  Appellant  had  happened  for  the  reason  the
    Appellant claimed. What the Judge accepted was that  the  Appellant  had
    fears not the details of the actual incident.


23.  Much  weight  in  the  grounds  was  placed  on  the  contents  of   Dr
    Shuttleworth's report. The Appellant was unable to recall the details of
    his claim. At page 164 of the Appellant's bundle Dr Shuttleworth  stated
    that the Appellant had attended his surgery with a friend, a middle-aged
    woman whom he had met near his home at the time when he first  left  his
    detention hostel. Dr Shuttleworth  wondered  whether  this  lady  was  a
    friend of the Appellant's family but neither the Appellant nor the  lady
    gave any indication  that  this  was  the  case.  The  doctor  continued
    "certainly she acted as a very positive advocate  for  him  particularly
    emphasising the danger he would be in  if  he  returned  to  his  native
    country." The  Respondent's  submission  was  that  this  lady  was  not
    independent and thus what she told Dr Shuttleworth could  not  be  given
    significant weight as an indicator of future risk to the Appellant.


24. The Judge had gone through the medical  reports  and  was  entitled  put
    weight on Dr Cullen's report. The Appellant had  said  on  a  number  of
    occasions that he came to the United Kingdom for medical treatment.  The
    Judge pointed out inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence. There was
    a lack of effort by the Appellant in response to Dr Cullen's  questions.
    The Judge was not ignoring Dr Shuttleworth  but  reaching  a  conclusion
    open to her on the evidence. The Appellant was in  weekly  contact  with
    his mother yet nothing had been provided from  her.  The  Appellant  had
    only been able to give the most basic information about the blood  feud.
    The Appellant was not truly in fear as a result of  a  blood  feud.  The
    Appellant was merely repeating what his mother had told him to say.  The
    doctors were not in a position to decide whether what  they  were  being
    told by the Appellant was or was not the truth.


25. The Judge had decided the case in  the  alternative.  At  [31]  she  had
    found that even taking the Appellant's case at its highest he had failed
    to establish that his situation fell within a blood feud. The  Appellant
    was simply asking the Tribunal to accept his evidence at a bare minimum.
    The Judge was entitled to say, given the gap in  the  timeline  for  the
    period the Appellant spent in Kosovo that he would be able to  relocate.
    The Appellant was able to function. The determination considered all  of
    the evidence and the Appellant's case came down to a  mere  disagreement
    with the Judge's conclusions.


26. In conclusion, counsel reiterated that Dr Shuttleworth evidence had  not
    been considered properly. The evidence of whether an advocate  had  gone
    with the Appellant to the appointment with Dr Shuttleworth  was  neither
    here nor there. In  his  screening  interview  the  Appellant  had  said
    nothing about medical treatment. He did not know any details himself  he
    had been told everything by his mother. She was  not  asked  to  give  a
    witness statement and counsel had no instructions on why  that  was  so.
    The Appellant had received treatment in this country, it was not correct
    to say he had received no assistance from the authorities.

Findings

27. The Appellant suffered a serious head injury  in  or  about  2010  as  a
    result of which he now functions mentally  at  a  very  low  level.  His
    asylum claim was based on fear of a rival family in Albania  who  wanted
    to take over the Appellant's family land. The Appellant's  knowledge  of
    the background of this feud with  the  rival  family  was  very  limited
    confined in fact to what his mother had told him.  His  mother  was  not
    called to give evidence. Whilst I appreciate that there might have  been
    difficulties in securing a visa for the Appellant's mother  to  come  to
    the United Kingdom to give evidence in support of her son, there appears
    to have been no effort made whatsoever to even take as basic a  step  as
    to obtain a proof of evidence from her. No explanation was given  to  me
    why that basic step had not been taken.


28. The Judge was evidently unimpressed by that failure  particularly  given
    the ample time open to the Appellant and his representatives  to  obtain
    that evidence. She pointed out correctly that supporting evidence is not
    a requirement in an asylum claim  but  where  evidence  can  be  readily
    obtained it is a legitimate subject for comment that that  evidence  has
    not been obtained.


29. It was difficult for the Judge in this case to  assess  the  Appellant's
    evidence since there was so little of it that was first  hand  from  the
    Appellant. A more detailed account of what happened appears to have been
    given to the psychologist Dr Shuttleworth instructed by the  Appellant's
    solicitors and great reliance was placed on that account in  submissions
    to me that it supported the Appellant's claim that  there  was  a  blood
    feud. The difficulty with that argument  was,  as  pointed  out  in  the
    submissions on behalf of the Respondent, that when Dr  Shuttleworth  saw
    the Appellant he was accompanied by a lady who was acting as an advocate
    for him. She indeed appears to have been  the  source  of  much  of  the
    information then reported in Dr Shuttleworth's report.  It  is  somewhat
    inconsistent for the Appellant to argue that he is so brain-damaged that
    he cannot give the details of his account but that the  details  of  his
    account which appear in Dr Shuttleworth's report confirm the strength of
    his claim.


30. A further difficulty which the  Judge  had  was  to  reconcile  the  two
    medical reports between Dr Cullen on the one hand and Dr Shuttleworth on
    the other. Dr Cullen indicated that the Appellant displayed a persistent
    lack of effort at interview. Dr Shuttleworth's potential explanation for
    this was the very low mental functioning of the Appellant. It is  to  be
    deprecated that the Appellant's solicitors did not see fit to  refer  Dr
    Cullen's report to Dr Shuttleworth and vice versa. The Judge had to make
    her decision based on what she had  before  her.  Given  the  unresolved
    contradictions between the two doctors it is  not  surprising  that  the
    Judge at [23] found that the medical reports did  not  provide  a  clear
    picture of the Appellant situation. The Judge had looked at both reports
    in some detail quoting from them in her determination. It would be quite
    wrong to say that she did not.


31. The Judge was also concerned about the complete lack of evidence  as  to
    what had happened to the Appellant during the  two  years  that  he  had
    lived in Kosovo between 2012 and 2014. The Appellant said that he  could
    remember nothing about that only that he left because he felt unsafe. He
    could not say why he felt unsafe and there appears  to  be  no  evidence
    that he was targeted by anyone whilst in Kosovo. Whilst I appreciate the
    argument that the Appellant could not  be  expected  to  go  to  another
    sovereign state of which he is not a national the fact of the matter  is
    that the Appellant did go to Kosovo for two years (on what basis  we  do
    not know), that nothing appears to have happened to him there.  The  one
    person who might have been able to enlighten the court as  to  what  had
    happened in Kosovo was not asked to give any evidence. I refer of course
    to the Appellant's mother with whom the  Appellant  is  said  to  be  in
    weekly contact.


32. The Appellant's case is that he cannot be expected to  relocate  because
    he cannot look after himself due to his low functioning. That  he  lived
    in Kosovo for two years therefore needs some explanation. It was open to
    the Judge to draw an adverse conclusion against the  argument  that  the
    Appellant could not relocate because of that lack of  explanation  about
    what had happened in Kosovo. The Appellant also argues that his  unkempt
    appearance noted shortly after arrival in this country is evidence  that
    he cannot cope on his own. There are however other explanations  why  an
    illegal entrant who has travelled across Europe to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom, perhaps living rough on  the  way,  might  be  in  a  state  of
    disarray. That does not answer the  point  that  if  the  Appellant  was
    reunited with his mother he would be able to  cope  rather  better  than
    while travelling to enter the United Kingdom.


33. The Appellant submits that he is at risk upon return because of  a  feud
    with the rival family. The Judge did not consider that there was a blood
    feud. She specifically directed herself at [30] that the burden of proof
    was to the lower  standard.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal  Judge
    Hollingworth appears to take the view that because  of  the  Appellant's
    mental difficulties the lower burden of proof was satisfied.  I  do  not
    accept  that  reasoning.  That  the   Appellant   has   serious   mental
    difficulties is most regrettable and of itself should not  mean  that  a
    claim for international protection should be rejected.  Indeed,  in  the
    case of minors the immigration rules provide that more weight should  be
    placed on objective factors of risk than on the Appellant's  own  claims
    which  may  be  subject  to  difficulties  because  of  the  Appellant's
    disability. The tenor of the determination indicates that the Judge  was
    aware of these problems. I do not consider that there was any failure to
    treat the Appellant as a vulnerable party.


34. There were a number of problems with the evidence before the Judge.  The
    attack on the Appellant was 2010 and yet  he  had  managed  to  live  in
    Albania for a further two  years  after  that  without  further  adverse
    attention. By this stage the Appellant was 20 years old and if this  was
    a genuine blood feud a potential target. There was no evidence as to how
    the [R] family were likely to be able to find the Appellant. They appear
    not to have been able to find him in Kosovo.  There  was  no  supporting
    evidence of the notoriety of the feud. This was  important  because  the
    Appellant could have approached his  mother  to  find  documentation  to
    support the claim. This would have included as the  Judge  pointed  out,
    title documents but could also  have  included  news  reports  or  other
    documentary evidence. Yet nothing was provided.


35. Whilst it is correct that a blood feud  can  start  for  any  number  of
    reasons including a dispute  over  land,  it  was  open  to  the  Judge,
    particular given the lack of evidence from the  Appellant's  mother,  to
    find that if the dispute  was  over  land  and  the  Appellant's  mother
    remained living on the land with  seemingly  no  one  else  to  help  or
    protect her it was logical to assume that the [R] family would have made
    some effort by now to have removed the last obstacle to them gaining the
    land in question. However, there is no evidence  to  suggest  that  this
    happened. Again, it was a matter for the Judge to decide what weight  to
    place on that.


36. The argument that the Appellant could not internally relocate to  Tirana
    because he would have to travel with his mother and  would  then  become
    more recognisable I find has  no  merit.  It  is  mere  speculation.  It
    appears to assume that the [R]  family  have  spies  or  informants  all
    across Albania who would spot a disabled man in company with his  mother
    and would become instantly suspicious. There is no evidence even on  the
    Appellant's case that this somewhat fanciful scenario is at all likely.


37.  The  Judge's  finding  that  the  authorities  would  not  protect  the
    Appellant related to the north of Albania where blood feuds  occur.  The
    Judge accepted that Albania had  a  functioning  police  force  and  the
    position in the capital would potentially be quite different. The  Judge
    gave the Appellant the benefit of the doubt in relation  to  alternative
    dispute resolution methods of solving the feud with the [R]  family  (if
    such a feud existed) but her comments in relation to the lack  of  state
    protection referred to the situation in the north  of  Albania  and  not
    relocation  to  Tirana.  The  feud  has  never  been  reported  to   the
    authorities but there is no reason why if it existed  it  could  not  be
    reported to the authorities in Tirana.


38. The Judge carefully considered all of the evidence  before  arriving  at
    cogent conclusions which were open to her. She was not assisted  by  the
    conflict between the medical  reports,  she  was  not  assisted  by  the
    failure of the Appellant's mother to  give  evidence  and  she  was  not
    assisted by the unexplained gaps in the evidence (such as the two  years
    spent in Kosovo). The Judge's overall conclusion was that the  Appellant
    had come to the United Kingdom to seek medical treatment for his serious
    mental problems. Whether the Appellant said as much in  so  many  words,
    when interviewed by Dr Cullen the Appellant's concern  reported  at  3.4
    was that he did not  know  how  he  could  get  money  to  pay  for  his
    medication if he returned to Albania.


39. Dr Cullen had found it surprising that the Appellant was  able  to  tell
    him less about the claim than the Appellant had been able  to  tell  the
    Respondent in interview, see 5.1 of the report. The  Appellant  did  not
    seem aware of the reason for his asylum appeal but  said  he  remembered
    when he was prompted. The  Appellant  appeared  fit  to  be  interviewed
    although in fact no interview was carried out and the Appellant did  not
    give oral testimony.  If  the  Judge  was  to  be  asked  to  prefer  Dr
    Shuttleworth's report to Dr Cullen's, the latter should have been  given
    the opportunity to comment on the differences.


40. The Judge could only deal with this case on the basis  of  the  evidence
    that was before her. She arrived at conclusions  open  to  her  on  that
    evidence. The onward grounds of appeal are a mere disagreement with  the
    Judge's conclusions. They claim that certain of the Judge's  conclusions
    were perverse. That is a high threshold to cross and  these  grounds  do
    not approach that threshold. There is no indication in the determination
    of any material error of  law  and  I  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I  make  no  anonymity
    order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

Signed this 22nd of January 2018

.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 22nd of January 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

