


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: AA/05079/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at North Shields
Determination Promulgated
On 30 April 2015                                                        On
11 May 2015
Prepared on 30 April 2015



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    A. D.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Egypt who claimed to have  entered
           the United Kingdom  illegally  on  21  November  2013,  when  he
           claimed asylum the following day. That application  was  refused
           on 4 July 2014, and in consequence a removal decision  was  made
           in relation to him.
        2. The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal and his appeal was  heard
           on 21 August 2014,  and  dismissed  by  determination  of  Judge
           Manchester, promulgated on 1 September 2014.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was refused by Judge Pooler on 18 September
           2014 because the grounds failed to identify any  material  error
           of law in the Judge's determination, and  the  findings  he  had
           made were well open to him on the evidence.
        4. The Appellant renewed his application for permission  to  appeal
           to the Upper  Tribunal  but  identified  no  grounds,  asserting
           merely that he wished "to exercise his right of  appeal".   That
           application was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey  on  7
           January 2015, although the text of his decision makes  it  plain
           that he intended to refuse it;
                 The grounds fail to identify any  arguable  errors  in  the
                 First Tier Tribunal findings of fact and on  the  basis  of
                 those findings the Appellant did not fall within  any  risk
                 category identified in any available country information on
                 Egypt and in  such  circumstances  these  grounds  must  be
                 rejected.
        5. The Respondent  filed  a  Rule  24  response  to  the  grant  of
           permission on 21 January 2015 in which she pointed out that  the
           grant appeared  to  be  a  slip,  or  typographical  error,  and
           requested the matter  be  placed  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
           Storey for correction. For whatever reason that did  not  occur.
           Thus the matter comes before me.


      Adjournment?


        6. The Appellant did not attend when his appeal was called  on  for
           hearing. He has offered no explanation for that failure, and has
           made no request for an adjournment of the hearing.
        7.  The   Appellant   gave   his   address   for   service   as   [
                ] in his application for permission to appeal to the  Upper
           Tribunal lodged on 10 October 2014. He has offered no substitute
           address subsequently. I am satisfied that Notice of Hearing  was
           served by the Upper Tribunal by first class post sent on 3 March
           2015 at that address. It  was  not  returned  through  the  dead
           letter system.
        8. In the circumstances I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  was
           served with Notice of the Hearing at the last  address  he  gave
           for service. I have considered whether there is any  basis  upon
           which the Upper Tribunal should adjourn the hearing of  its  own
           motion, but in the circumstances I decline to do  so,  since  to
           take such a step would appear to serve  no  useful  purpose.  It
           follows that I should proceed to dispose of the  appeal  in  the
           absence of the Appellant.






      Error of Law?


        9. It is plain that  neither  the  application  for  permission  to
           appeal  lodged  with  the  First   Tier   Tribunal,   nor   that
           subsequently lodged with the Upper Tribunal,  contained  grounds
           that identified any arguable error of law in the approach  taken
           by Judge Manchester to the evidence before him.
       10. Having read the determination for myself, I  am  satisfied  that
           the analysis undertaken of it by both Judge  Pooler,  and  Upper
           Tribunal Judge Storey, was entirely correct.  The  determination
           discloses no arguable error of law  in  the  approach  taken  by
           Judge Manchester to the evidence that was placed before him. Not
           only is there nothing  wrong  with  his  reasoning,  but  it  is
           perfectly clearly set out in the course of the determination; MK
           (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641.



   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      1 September 2014 contains no error of law in the decision  to  dismiss
      the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to  be  set  aside
      and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



   Signed





      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

      Dated 30 April 2015



   Direction  regarding  anonymity  -  Rule  14  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008


   Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise the Appellant is  granted
   anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report  of  these  proceedings
   shall directly or indirectly identify her. This direction applies both to
   the Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
   direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt of court.





   Signed






      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

      Dated 30 April 2015
