
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05472/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 18th August 2016                  |on 7th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                satpal singh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Ruddy, of Jain Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant identifies himself as a citizen of Afghanistan.  His date
    of birth is recorded as 1st January 1979.  He  has  not  asked  for  an
    anonymity order.

 2. The appellant first sought asylum in the UK in 2002 to 2003.  His claim
    to be Afghan was rejected by the respondent and by a judge upon appeal.
     He did not keep in  touch  with  the  respondent  thereafter  and  was
    recorded  as  having  absconded.   He  claims  to  have   returned   to
    Afghanistan.  In July 2009 he  sought  asylum  in  Belgium,  which  was
    refused and his appeal dismissed.  He says that when due to be  removed
    from Belgium to Afghanistan in October 2013, he arranged for  an  agent
    to bring him and his family to the UK where  he  again  sought  asylum.
    The respondent refused that claim for reasons  explained  in  a  letter
    dated 10th March 2015.

 3. The appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Dennis
    dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 19th  November  2015,
    accepting the appellant to be a Sikh but  rejecting  his  claim  to  be
    Afghan.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   His
    grounds run to twelve paragraphs over nine pages, seeking  to  identify
    various  errors  of  fact  and  failures  to  give  the  appellant  the
    opportunity to respond to adverse points.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew refused permission to  appeal  to  the
    UT, observing that there might be some  discrepancies  in  the  judge's
    recording of the evidence but nothing which might amount to a  material
    error of law.

 6. The appellant applied again to the Upper  Tribunal,  relying  upon  the
    previous grounds and adding a further four pages.

 7. UT Judge Perkins granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    observing at the same time that the appellant:

         "... must be careful to show (if such be the  case)  that  the  FtT
         misunderstood the evidence rather than read it in a  way  that  the
         appellant does not favour.  It may be the case will fall apart when
         the  contentions  ...  can  be  scrutinised  with  the  benefit  of
         assistance from both parties."

 8. Mr Ruddy based his submissions on the first set of grounds.  He  relied
    firstly on ground 1, which contends that the judge had no  evidence  to
    justify his suggestion that the family shop  in  Jalalabad  might  have
    been manned by the appellant's older brother as well as by his  father,
    when there was no notice to the appellant that it might be thought that
    his older brother was  in  Afghanistan.   If  he  had  been  given  the
    opportunity, he would have clarified that his brother left  Afghanistan
    in 2001.

 9. Ground 2 criticises the judge for failing to give fair  notice  of  his
    point that the identity document of the appellant's daughter  gave  her
    occupation as "shopkeeper".  The ground says  that  had  the  appellant
    been asked, he would have advised the  judge  that  it  was  common  in
    Afghanistan for the occupation section of a child's document to contain
    the occupation of the father.

10. Ground 3 criticises the judge for  saying  that  an  incident  occurred
    "four or five months" before the family left  Afghanistan  whereas  the
    evidence in his statement was  that  it  occurred  four  or  five  days
    before.  Mr Ruddy said that this error might be significant on its  own
    to undermine  the  determination,  as  the  timeline  of  the  family's
    departure was a key aspect of their claim.

11. A second point raised in  ground  3  argues  that  although  the  judge
    thought that the person who threatened the appellant at the family shop
    did not identify himself, it was clear  from  a  fair  reading  of  the
    appellant's account that this  person  was  acting  on  behalf  of  the
    Taliban, and not as the judge thought at paragraph 32 on behalf  of  an
    "unnamed group".

12. Ground 4 criticises the judge for finding a discrepancy over the period
    the appellant was given to surrender himself to the Taliban, which  was
    clearly ten days.

13. I observed in course of submissions that the judge's real point was not
    a  discrepancy  in  the  length  of  the  period  of  notice,  but  the
    implausibility of anyone being given a  date  and  place  to  surrender
    freely for execution.

14. Mr Ruddy submitted that while the rest of the detailed points contained
    in the grounds might not separately be enough to show  material  error,
    the foregoing principal points, taken with the  rest,  were  sufficient
    for the decision to be set aside.

15. Mrs Pettersen submitted as follows.  The reference  to  "four  or  five
    months" rather than to "four or five days" was plainly only a  slip  of
    the pen, because the judge had not gone on to take any point  based  on
    delay in departure from Afghanistan.  He gave  the  matter  no  adverse
    significance.  The same applied to Ground 1, which was no more  than  a
    passing observation.  Ground 3 was misconceived, because the  judge  at
    paragraph 10 was simply recording the evidence to the effect  that  the
    Taliban was behind the threat.  It was not  an  adverse  finding.   The
    appellant had been on notice throughout that  his  credibility  was  in
    issue, and that he had to make his case.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the evidence after the hearing.  Nothing had occurred  to  him
    which required re-listing of the case for further submissions to ensure
    a fair hearing.  For example, the judge was criticised  for  saying  at
    paragraph 33 that the appellant's reason for not going to  the  police,
    being lack of useful information to provide to them,  was  not  a  good
    one, because the police could have been told where and when  a  meeting
    had been arranged and did not need the name of a suspect.  That  was  a
    sensible observation open to the judge.  It did not require  a  further
    opportunity to be given to the appellant to comment, and in  any  event
    he had not suggested that he had any further explanation to offer.

16. I reserved my determination.

17. I do not find any point in the  grounds  which  rises  above  selective
    disagreement on the facts.  I find no individual point of  much  force.
    As a whole, I do not consider the  grounds  to  undermine  the  judge's
    decision.

18. The decision should be read fairly and as a whole, and in context.  The
    appellant has repeatedly failed over many years to establish his  claim
    to be Afghan.  It was rejected in previous appeal proceedings  both  in
    the UK and in Belgium.  His notable ignorance of  Afghanistan  when  he
    made his original claim is specified at paragraph 24 of  the  decision.
    Although he says his family were shopkeepers he knows neither Dari  nor
    Pashtu and he incorrectly said that there were no coins in  circulation
    in Afghanistan.  The judge was entitled to find that these  significant
    failures were not accounted for in the appellant's  evidence  and  that
    improved knowledge subsequently did not remedy the deficiencies.  As to
    events arising after he (allegedly) returned to Afghanistan, the  judge
    was entitled to say at paragraph 31, "The idea that  you  would  invite
    someone ten days hence to meet at a place where they promised to  shoot
    you is frankly risible".

19. There is nothing in the grounds which persuades  me  that  the  judge's
    decision, read fairly and as a whole, falls in  any  way  short  of  an
    adequate explanation to the appellant of why  the  credibility  of  his
    claim has been rejected.

20. The decision in the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           1 September 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
