
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05883/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28th January 2015                 |On 18th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MAINTAINED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Head, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In this document I will refer to the parties in  the  style  in  which
      they appeared before for the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan, born 2 April 1995.  He
      arrived in the United Kingdom in February 2010 and claimed asylum that
      same month.  The claim was refused in July 2010, but  he  was  granted
      discretionary leave until September 2010.   A  subsequent  application
      for further leave to remain was refused in November 2010 and an appeal
      against that decision was dismissed in  January  2011.   There  was  a
      question over the appellant's  age.   In  June  2011,  a  further  age
      assessment was undertaken and as a result further leave to remain on a
      discretionary basis was granted until October 2012.  On  28  September
      2012, the appellant made an application for further  leave  to  remain
      which  was  refused  in  April  2014.   The  appellant  appealed  that
      decision.

   3. That appeal came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Cresswell
      sitting at Newport on 23 October 2014.  Both parties were  represented
      (the appellant by Mrs  Head)  and  an  oral  hearing  was  held.   The
      appellant and a witness gave evidence.

   4. In a determination dated 27 October 2014,  Judge  Cresswell  dismissed
      the appellant's appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds,
      but allowed the appeal (via Article 8) on human rights grounds.

   5. The respondent sought leave to appeal Judge  Cresswell's  decision  in
      allowing the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  Judge Cresswell's  decision
      and findings in respect of asylum and humanitarian  protection  remain
      unchallenged.

   6. The grounds seeking leave allege the making of a misdirection  of  law
      on a material matter, in that the  judge  failed  to  properly  direct
      himself with regard to the effect of Section 117B of  the  Nationality
      Immigration & Asylum  Act  2002.  In  particular  that  he  failed  to
      correctly apply the public interest considerations.  Paragraph  40  of
      the  judge's  determination  is  quoted  wherein  he  states   "...the
      appellant's claim scores badly...".   The  second  allegation  alleges
      perverse or irrational  finding,  again  quoting  from  paragraph  40,
      suggesting the appellant had scored badly, but then finding  that  his
      removal would be disproportionate.

   7. The application  for  leave  came  before  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Saffer, who in granting leave set out in the first three paragraphs of
      his reasoning general aspects of dealing with such an application  and
      in the concluding paragraph merely said that he was satisfied that  it
      was arguable that conflicting findings had been made.

   8. Thus the matter came before me sitting in the Upper Tribunal.

   9. In his submission Mr Richards relied upon the two grounds set  out  in
      the leave application.  He again quoted from the judge's paragraph  40
      with regard to the use of the words "scores badly" and suggested  this
      was irrational and inadequately argued when the judge had  found  that
      the appellant succeeded under Article 8.  This amounted to a  material
      error of law.

  10. Mrs Head relied upon a Rule 24 reply, which I noted had contended that
      Judge Cresswell had not committed any material error of law and that a
      judge's findings were entirely open to him.  The judge had clearly set
      out Section 117B of 2002 Act and  had  conducted  a  proper  balancing
      exercise.  Mrs Head went onto argue there was  no  material  error  of
      law, in that the judge had considered all the evidence.  She ended  by
      saying that although the respondent may not agree with  the  decision,
      there was no error.

  11. Mr Richards had no further response to make.

  12. At the end of the hearing I indicated that I found no material of  law
      and that the respondent's appeal was  accordingly  dismissed.   I  now
      give my reasons.

  13. The issues before  me  are  fairly  restricted.   Beyond  the  overall
      question of whether the determination of Judge Cresswell  contained  a
      material error of law, the  material  issues  are  whether  the  judge
      properly  took  into  account  the  provisions  of  Section  117B   in
      conducting  a  balancing  act  and/or  whether  his  conclusions  were
      perverse and irrational by reason of the wording used in paragraphs 40
      and 41 of the determination.

  14. The determination of Judge Cresswell runs  to  23  pages.   It  is  an
      impressive piece of work and clearly  shows  that  the  judge  engaged
      quite fully with the issues before him.   The  matters  of  contention
      before the Upper Tribunal relate  to  the  final  paragraphs  of  that
      determination from paragraph 31 onwards.  Those paragraphs set out  in
      great detail the requirements of legislation (the 2002 Act) and  upper
      court guidance and requirements.  The various aspects of  Section  117
      of the 2002 Act are recited.  The judge properly considers whether  he
      could embark upon a stand alone consideration of Article 8 or  whether
      the matter had been disposed of by way of the complete code set out in
      the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  concludes  that  he  can  look  at
      Article 8 because of the exceptional circumstances of the  appellant's
      case and he  then  guides  himself  through  the  five  step  approach
      recommended by the then House of Lords in the  case  of  Razgar.   The
      judge then clearly undertakes a balancing  act,  which  results  in  a
      decision in the appellant's favour.

  15. I find that the judge properly dealt with  the  consideration  of  the
      effect of Section  117B  in  assessing  proportionality,  he  did  not
      misdirect himself.  As set out in the Rule 24 response, the judge made
      findings that were open to him upon the evidence that was before him.

  16. As to conflict and irrationality I  note  that  paragraph  40  of  the
      determination does  say  that  the  appellant's  claim  scored  badly.
      However at paragraph 41, the judge goes onto look at  the  aspects  in
      the appellant's favour before reaching  his  conclusion.   Putting  it
      bluntly, a participant can score badly  yet  still  win  the  contest.
      This is clearly what has happened here and the arguments  advanced  by
      the respondent have no merit.

  17. I find no material error of law contained in the determination and the
      respondent's appeal is accordingly dismissed.  As indicated above  the
      judge's  decision  in  respect  of  human  rights   and   humanitarian
      protection have not been challenged and therefore all aspects of Judge
      Cresswell's decision must stand.


Decision

  18. The appeal of the respondent is dismissed.

  19. An anonymity direction has been made in the past.  No application  was
      made before me and that direction accordingly continues.



Signed        Date: 28th January 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

