
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05212/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                              Pooventhirarajah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by Wimbledon
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The substance of the submissions made by Ms Jagarajah before me was
         directed to the procedural fairness of  the  hearing  conducted  by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk  on  16  September  2015  and  whose
         determination was promulgated on 28 September 2015.

      2. The appellant instructed HK  Solicitors  to  act  for  him  in  the
         conduct of his asylum appeal. The firm settled grounds of appeal to
         the Tribunal on 25 March 2015 which challenged the decision made by
         the Secretary of State to reject his asylum claim on the basis that
         the appellant's account of having joined the  LTTE  was  vague  and
         unclear. The Secretary of State also rejected the appellant's claim
         to have been arrested. However, in  paragraph  28  of  the  refusal
         letter, the respondent noted the appellant's claim that he had been
         detained for a single day during the course of which  he  had  been
         attacked by security officers resulting in a broken  arm  or  wrist
         and of being beaten on the back. On  the  basis  of  the  objective
         information, the Secretary of  State  accepted  that  there  was  a
         pattern of torture against detainees in  Sri  Lanka  but  that  the
         Secretary of State maintained  his  rejection  of  the  appellant's
         claim involvement with the LTTE and hence his claim  to  have  been
         arrested, detained and beaten.

      3. On 14 April 2015, HK Solicitors  wrote  to  the  Tribunal  stating,
         amongst other things, that the appellant had  been  examined  by  a
         scarring consultant  who  had  produced  a  report  confirming  the
         causation of his scars. The Tribunal was asked to adjourn the  Case
         Management Review  hearing  in  order  to  await  funding  and  the
         evidence from the appellant's father  as  well  as  to  enable  the
         production of a psychiatric report on  the  appellant.    The  Case
         Management Review was adjourned  to  6  May  2015  at  which  point
         directions were given, including a direction that the case be  sent
         down the hearing.

      4. In due course, the matter was set down for hearing on 16  September
         2015.

      5. Five days before the hearing, on  Friday  11  September  2015,  the
         appellant wrote two letters.  The  first  letter  was  a  complaint
         about his solicitors' conduct to the Legal Ombudsman.   The  second
         was faxed to the Tribunal at 15 hrs  39  on  Friday,  11  September
         2015. It was entitled 'Complaint against the  HK  Solicitors'.  The
         letter stated:

             "... I regret to inform the court that I  contacted  my  above
             solicitors and asked them to arrange a Tamil  interpreter  for
             me to prepare the witness  statement.  I  was  handled  by  an
             Accredited Solicitor who worked in this firm, handled my  case
             earlier. She left the firm in May 2015 and  informed  me  that
             another Solicitor will take over my matter.

             Since  then  I  am  unable  to  communicate  with  them.  They
             repeatedly tell me that they can do my case. To date they have
             not communicated with me in preparing  my  witness  statement.
             When I went two weeks ago I was given a witness  statement.  I
             asked him what this is. My statement has  not  been  read  and
             explained in Tamil. I am very unhappy with my Solicitors.

             I was not given a copy of the scarring report.  The  Solicitor
             who has given me the attached witness statement  said  he  did
             not know anything about my medical report.

             I am fully aware  that  the  Solicitor  who  handled  my  case
             initially obtained report from Dr Andres  Martin  and  I  have
             seen this Doctor in Royal Free Hospital at A and E Department.

             I humbly request that my case be adjourned ...

             I really worry that I should have instructed another Solicitor
             at least one month ago. Until the last minute I believe that a
             Tamil interpreter will be arranged for the preparation  of  my
             case. However they failed to book a Tamil interpreter  despite
             of my  several  request.  Without  communication  I  was  very
             disappointed with them and could not do my case effectively.

             I have found a solicitor in Tooting Bec who is  franchised  in
             asylum and immigration. I have been advised them that  if  the
             First-tier Tribunal adjourned the hearing, they will  be  able
             to submit all the reports  and  complete  bundle  within  four
             weeks."

      6. The letter was sent by facsimile and date-stamped  as  received  by
         the Tribunal on 14 September 2015, the following Monday, presumably
         because it was too late to be processed on  the  preceding  Friday,
         the day of receipt.  It went before a Judge on  14  September  2015
         who refused the application to adjourn in these terms:

             "Application refused. There has been ample time to prepare."

      7. When the appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Birk  on  16
         September 2015, the appellant was represented by  counsel  who  was
         clearly instructed by HK Solicitors. A Tamil interpreter  had  been
         arranged.   Miss  Bachu  had  been  instructed  to  apply  for   an
         adjournment on the basis that there was a scarring report which had
         not been  served  and  the  appellant  had  not  gone  through  his
         statement in Tamil. His counsel,  on  instructions,  indicated  the
         appellant's wish to transfer his instructions to another  solicitor
         whom he had contacted but the appellant had not formally  withdrawn
         his instructions from HK Solicitors. The appellant had  signed  his
         statement on the previous Tuesday but he had only been  told  about
         it in English. He had seen a scarring report two  or  three  months
         before. He had tried to find alternative solicitors a week before.

      8. The Judge refused the adjournment. She  noted  the  fact  that  the
         hearing was adjourned on 15 April 2015 in order for  the  appellant
         to obtain a psychological report. She thought  there  had  been  no
         mention of scarring in his asylum claim to date although  this  was
         not accurate as the  scarring  report  had  been  mentioned  in  HK
         Solicitors' letter of 14 April 2015  in  which  his  representative
         confirmed such a report was to hand. Directions of  15  April  2015
         referred to serving expert reports, in the plural.

      9. I have seen the report of Dr Andres Martin dated 16 April 2015  two
         days after the letter from HK solicitors and one day after the Case
         Management Review was due to take place on 15 April 2015 which  was
         adjourned for the purpose of obtaining the psychiatric report.

     10. The report of Dr Martin noted several linear scars  on  the  middle
         and left side of the forehead, a  transverse  scar  from  the  left
         corner of the mouth and transverse scars on the whole length of the
         back as well as a scar on the left upper arm. The scars on his face
         were caused by shrapnel injuries; those on the back  and  left  arm
         were, according to Dr Martin, described by  the  appellant  as  the
         result of his being beaten  during  his  detention  in  2006.   The
         latter were typical of scars caused by an intentional beating.

     11. The report was not before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  when  she
         made her decision. According to the Judge, the  appellant  did  not
         mention in his asylum interview that he sustained any scarring.  In
         paragraph 23 of the determination the Judge concluded:

             "I find that his injuries were no worse than he has  mentioned
             and I take into account that he was only detained for a day."

     12. Thus, the Judge accepted the  appellant  had  been  beaten  by  the
         authorities as he claimed but that his injuries were no worse  than
         his account given in interview which made no mention of scarring.

     13. The Judge concluded in paragraph 28:

             "I also find that it is not credible at all that  taking  into
             account the extremely low level of  being  involved  with  the
             LTTE which ended in 2003, his one day detention  when  he  was
             legally released and his very low level involvement  in  Tamil
             groups in the UK that they would  be  seriously  and  actively
             interested in him. There is no  suggestion  by  the  appellant
             that he is on a 'wanted' or 'stop' list or that there are  any
             court proceedings, any charges or arrest warrants for him."

     14. Applying the Country Guidance afforded in    GJ and  others  (post-
         civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  she
         concluded that the appellant did not fall  into  any  of  the  risk
         categories set out, namely, a person  who  had  been  targeted  and
         perceived as a threat to Sri  Lanka  by  reason  of  his  having  a
         significant role in  post-conflict  separatism.   On  the  material
         before her, that conclusion was plainly open to her.

     15. It is clear that the scarring report should have been placed before
         the Tribunal by the appellant's former solicitors,  HK  Solicitors.
         Although  there  is  a  general  rule  that  where  allegations  of
         misconduct are made against a solicitor, the  solicitor  should  be
         given an opportunity to answer. I am,  however,  satisfied  in  the
         circumstances of this case that there was an unequivocal  assertion
         by the appellant's former solicitors that they had a  copy  of  the
         scarring report before them or would have had it by April 2015  and
         that they failed to file and serve it as directed.

     16. The appellant did not, therefore, have the benefit of the  scarring
         report at the hearing. However, the Judge knew that such  a  report
         was in existence. He clearly accepted the appellant's account that,
         in the course of a single day's detention, his arm was  broken  and
         that he was beaten. Whilst he did not find that the  appellant  had
         established he was scarred, this would only have been of assistance
         if scarring was, in itself, a  material  factor  in  advancing  his
         claim.

     17. It is clear from GJ and others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)  that
         scarring is no longer a significant element in the assessment of  a
         claim.  The italicised words make this clear:

             (1)  This determination replaces all existing country guidance
                  on Sri Lanka.

             (2)  The focus of the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
                  changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.   The  LTTE
                  in Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there  have  been
                  no terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.

             (3)  The government's present objective is to  identify  Tamil
                  activists in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil
                  separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state
                  enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution
                  in 1983, which prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
                  integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing  both
                  (a) the resurgence  of  the  LTTE  or  any  similar  Tamil
                  separatist organisation and (b) the revival of  the  civil
                  war within Sri Lanka.

             (4)  If a person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
                  services there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or
                  harm requiring international protection.

             (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for
                  a person at real risk from  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,
                  since the government now controls the whole of  Sri  Lanka
                  and Tamils are required to return to a named address after
                  passing through the airport.

             (6)  There are no detention facilities at the  airport.   Only
                  those whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained
                  from the airport.  Any risk for  those  in  whom  the  Sri
                  Lankan authorities are or become interested exists not  at
                  the airport, but after arrival in their home  area,  where
                  their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
                  a few days.

             (7)  The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
                  persecution or  serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,
                  whether in detention or otherwise, are:

                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                      to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state
                      because  they  are,  or  are  perceived  to  have   a
                      significant role in relation to  post-conflict  Tamil
                      separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal  of
                      hostilities within Sri Lanka.

                  (b)  Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                      human rights activists, who,  in  either  case,  have
                      criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular
                      its human rights record, or who are  associated  with
                      publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

                  (c)  Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                      Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the
                      Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces or  the  Sri
                      Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes.   Among
                      those who may have witnessed war  crimes  during  the
                      conflict, particularly in the No-Fire  Zones  in  May
                      2009,  only  those  who   have   already   identified
                      themselves by giving such evidence would be known  to
                      the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore  only  they
                      are at real risk of adverse attention or  persecution
                      on  return  as  potential  or   actual   war   crimes
                      witnesses.

                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                      list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of
                      those against whom there is an extant court order  or
                      arrest warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on  a
                      "stop" list will be stopped at the airport and handed
                      over to the appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
                      pursuance of such order or warrant.

             (8)   The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based   on
                  sophisticated intelligence, both as to  activities  within
                  Sri Lanka and in the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities
                  know that many  Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as
                  economic migrants and also that everyone in  the  Northern
                  Province had some  level  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE
                  during the civil war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
                  individual's past history will be  relevant  only  to  the
                  extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan  authorities
                  as indicating a present risk to  the  unitary  Sri  Lankan
                  state or the Sri Lankan Government.

             (9)  The authorities maintain a computerised  intelligence-led
                  "watch" list. A person whose name  appears  on  a  "watch"
                  list is not  reasonably  likely  to  be  detained  at  the
                  airport but will be monitored  by  the  security  services
                  after his or her  return.  If  that  monitoring  does  not
                  indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to
                  destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  revive  the
                  internal armed conflict, the  individual  in  question  is
                  not, in general, reasonably likely to be detained  by  the
                  security forces.  That will be a question of fact in  each
                  case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out  by
                  such an individual.

     18. The Judge correctly followed this guidance.

     19. For these reasons, I do not consider that the Judge acted  unfairly
         in refusing to adjourn the hearing.  Sight of the  scarring  report
         would have made no material difference to the outcome.

     20. Ms Jegarajah opened her submissions by saying that Miss  Bachu,  at
         the hearing before the Judge, had no instructions to  act  for  the
         appellant.  That submission is  misconceived.   The  appellant  had
         indicated that he wished to change solicitors but had not done  so.
         Given the refusal of the application to adjourn that had been  made
         on 14 September 2015, it was important that HK Solicitors continued
         to act for the appellant at the hearing.   Counsel  was  instructed
         and it cannot  reasonably  be  asserted  that  Miss  Bachu  had  no
         authority to act.  She properly applied  for  an  adjournment  and,
         when that was refused, continued to advance  the  appellant's  case
         and successfully argued that the appellant's account was  credible.
         She managed, therefore, to persuade the Judge that  the  respondent
         was wrong in approaching the case on the basis that  the  applicant
         had never joined the LTTE, had never  been  arrested  detained  and
         beaten.  Miss Bachu had done all that could  reasonably  have  been
         expected of her.  That did not mean  that  she  could  successfully
         persuade the  Judge  that  a  single  arrest  and  a  single  day's
         detention (with mistreatment) followed  by  an  official  ('legal')
         release established the relevant criteria  to  make  out  a  viable
         asylum claim.  Given the appellant's account, that was  asking  the
         impossible.

     21. Nor can the Judge be  properly  criticised.   Whilst  refusing  the
         adjournment, he ensured  that  the  appellant  was  not  materially
         prejudiced because he accepted  the  appellant's  account  at  face
         value.  It is true that there was no evidence of scarring but  that
         was no  longer  material  to  his  decision  since  the  Tribunal's
         approach in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees).

     22. Miss Jegarajah also sought to argue that the appellant was not able
         to advance his claim as  fully  as  he  wanted  by  reason  of  his
         inability to produce a statement that had been read over to him  in
         Tamil.  That submission can be swiftly disposed of.  In paragraph 3
         of the determination, it is apparent  that  the  Judge  acted  with
         scrupulous fairness in  refusing  to  allow  the  appellant  to  be
         prejudiced by anything in the statement with  which  the  appellant
         might  disagree.   The  appellant  was  given  the  opportunity  of
         advancing his claim just as he saw fit in  oral  evidence  and  was
         provided with sufficient time to give instructions. An  interpreter
         was present  and,  in  any  event,  the  appellant  had  a  working
         knowledge of English as he has studied here. Although  this  ground
         is not raised in the grounds of appeal, it is not arguable.

DECISION

    The  Judge  made  no  error  on  a  point  of  law  and  the   original
    determination of the appeal shall stand.


                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                              5 January 2016
