


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05955/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |  Decision Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2016                            |  On 4 February 2016         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between
                                M.M.A.H.A.S.
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai (Wilsons Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola (Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of a citizen of Iraq born 1 January 1973,  arising
       from the decision of the Secretary of State of 26 March 2015 to issue
       removal directions against him under section 10  of  the  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 1999. The matter having been dismissed by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal, the appeal now proceeds with permission in  the  Upper
       Tribunal.


    2. Given the stance properly and  pragmatically  taken  by  the  parties
       before me, my decision can be brief.


    3. The Appellant claimed asylum on 26 February  2014  having  previously
       been present lawfully. His claim was refused because his account  was
       considered vague and speculative, and inconsistent  as  to  his  life
       before coming to the United Kingdom as between the asylum  claim  and
       the application he had made for a visa to come here.


    4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal,  primarily  because  it
       did not accept the veracity of his account, which it thought  "vague,
       confused and full of inconsistencies". Before hearing the matter, the
       Judge refused an adjournment application,  sought  by  the  Appellant
       because of his lack of legal representation, on the grounds  that  he
       had had sufficient time to find lawyers and had not established  that
       he would qualify for public funding of his case.


    5. Grounds of appeal contended, inter alia, that the adjournment refusal
       was inconsistent with the governing  requirements  of  fairness  that
       should animate the procedures and decision making of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


    6. The advocates before me agreed that the refusal  of  the  adjournment
       had been unfair, essentially for the reasons set out in  the  grounds
       of appeal.


  Findings and reasons


    7. As set out in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418  (IAC),
       the relevant test when reviewing  a  decision  impugned  for  alleged
       unfairness is one of fairness rather than rationality.


    8. In my view, the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  in
       failing to address relevant considerations. It failed to take account
       of the fact that the Appellant had provided  a  letter  from  Wilsons
       Solicitors stating that they would represent him  if  an  adjournment
       was granted (whether or not via  the  legal  aid  scheme),  that  the
       refusal of public funding that had blighted his ability  to  instruct
       lawyers was for reasons out of  his  control,  and  that  there  were
       important documents available to him that required translation before
       his case could be fully put. Those bore critically on  the  issue  of
       whether it was fair to proceed with a case in  which  the  First-tier
       Tribunal's primary  duty  was  to  afford  anxious  scrutiny  to  the
       material before it.


    9. It is readily apparent that the  Appellant's  case  might  well  have
       fared better  with  professional  representation:  the  matters  that
       concerned it, as to the clarity and consistency  of  the  claim,  are
       patently ones which might have been  presented  very  different  with
       capable lawyers on board. So the error of law is a material one which
       fatally flaws the decision below.


          Decision:

    The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law. Given that the Appellant  has  effectively  been
    deprived of a fair hearing, it is appropriate to remit  the  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be considered afresh.



ANONYMITY ORDER

As the Appellant's claim to be  a  Convention  refugee  remains  unresolved,
unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



[pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 15 January 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes



