

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05182/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Sheldon Court                      |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 30th July 2013                           |On : 7th  August 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge McKee


                                   Between

                             faith kadyamarunga

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Jag Singh of the Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal has had a long and convoluted history.  In  June  2009  Mrs
    Kadyamarunga's asylum claim was rejected, and a decision was  taken  to
    remove her as an overstayer.  An appeal to the Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal came  before  Judge  Hawden-Beal  that  same  month,  and  was
    dismissed.  An application for reconsideration was  refused  in  August
    2009 by Senior Immigration Judge Chalkley, but  an  application  for  a
    'statutory review' succeeded.  In  January  2010  Mr  C.M.G.  Ockelton,
    sitting as a deputy judge  of  the  High  Court,  ordered  the  AIT  to
    reconsider its decision on the appeal, because he considered  paragraph
    15 of the renewed grounds to be arguable.  The appeal duly came  before
    what was now the Upper Tribunal in March 2010,  when  Designated  Judge
    O'Malley found that Judge Hawden-Beal had not made  an  error  of  law.
    Permission was now sought to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal.   After
    being refused 'on the papers' both by a Senior Immigration Judge and by
    Lord Justice  Gross,  the  application  was  granted  by  Lord  Justice
    Jackson, but was then struck out by Deputy Master  Meacher  because  of
    failure by the solicitors to file Appeal Questionnaires.  The striking-
    out order was set aside, however, and eventually - in  June  2011  -  a
    Consent Order was drawn up.   The  determination  of  Designated  Judge
    O'Malley was  quashed,  and  the  matter  was  remitted  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

2.    After all these vicissitudes, what was the Upper Tribunal to  do  with
    the appeal?  On 9th August 2012 the case came before Judge  Eshun,  who
    agreed with Mr J. Howard of Blakemores that the respondent  should  not
    withdraw her decision and reconsider the appellant's case in the  light
    of RT (Zimbabwe) [2012] UKSC 3, but that the Upper Tribunal sitting  in
    Manchester (sic : no doubt Birmingham was intended) should  now  decide
    whether Judge Hawden-Beal had erred in  law,  as  had  been  considered
    arguable by Mr Ockelton in January 2010.

3.   When the case came before me today, there was no appearance  by  or  on
    behalf of the appellant.  Notice of today's hearing was sent  by  first
    class post both to the  appellant  and  to  Blakemores  on  25th  June.
    Blakemores has actually gone out of business,  and  we  have  not  been
    notified of any alternative representation.  But I  am  satisfied  that
    there has been good service on the appellant herself.  The  notice  was
    sent to the same address as all previous correspondence  for  the  last
    four years, and it has not been returned  undelivered.   In  accordance
    with rule 38 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008,  I  considered
    it in the interests of justice to  proceed  with  the  hearing  in  the
    absence of a party, and I  heard  submissions  from  Mr  Singh  on  the
    question whether Judge Hawden-Beal had made an error of law.

4.   Mr Singh reminded me that paragraph 15 of  the  Grounds  for  Statutory
    Review,  which  had  caused  Mr  Ockelton  to  order   reconsideration,
    complained that the judge had not properly considered  "the  period  of
    time that the Appellant has spent in the UK and what effect  that  will
    have upon her ability to demonstrate loyalty upon return to  Zimbabwe."
    Mr Singh then took me to the first-instance  determination  itself,  in
    which there are references at numerous points  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has been in this country since 2003.  I agree with  him  that
    the judge had the appellant's long absence from Zimbabwe well in  mind.
    But what of Mrs Kadyamarunga's ability to demonstrate  loyalty  to  the
    ZANU-PF regime?   This,  in  my  view,  is  sufficiently  addressed  at
    paragraph 93 of the judge's determination, where she is satisfied  that
    "with a mother and sister still in Harare, the appellant will  be  able
    to obtain sufficient information from them to be  able  to  demonstrate
    loyalty to the Zanu PF regime."  At the time  when  this  determination
    was promulgated, the current country guidance was RN (Zimbabwe),  which
    famously advised that it was no longer just activists and  high-profile
    opponents who were at risk on return, but  anyone  who  was  unable  to
    demonstrate loyalty to the Mugabe regime if challenged to do so by  War
    Veterans, Green Bombers and other ZANU-PF thugs.  The country  guidance
    did not say that returnees who did not entertain  any  loyalty  towards
    the regime should not be expected to pretend that they did.  That  came
    much later, with the Supreme Court judgment in RT (Zimbabwe).  As  held
    in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, it is not  an  error  of  law  for  an
    immigration judge to fail to apply country guidance which  was  not  in
    existence when she promulgated her determination.

5.   I agree with Mr Singh that Judge Hawden-Beal gave a  number  of  cogent
    reasons for concluding that the appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  on
    return  ~  see,  for  example,  paragraphs  91   and   94-96   of   her
    determination.  I am unable to identify an error of law  in  any  other
    part of the determination, having already found that the judge did  not
    err in respect of the appellant's length of  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It follows that her determination must stand.

6.   Four years have now elapsed since that determination  was  promulgated,
    and it may be that Mrs Kadyamarunga's current  circumstances  are  such
    that she would wish to make further representations to the Secretary of
    State.  But the protracted litigation subsequent  to  the  'immigration
    decision' of 8th June 2009 must surely now have come to an end.


     DECISION

     The appeal is dismissed.


Richard McKee
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                              30th July 2013



