
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-v2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05351/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 24th June 2014, 10th October,     |On 5th February 2016                 |
|2014,                                |                                     |
|19th August, 2015, 14th October,     |                                     |
|2015,                                |                                     |
|23rd November 2015 and on 25th       |                                     |
|January, 2016                        |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                   mrs p k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A M Ahluwalia, Solicitor's Clerk from Jein
Solicitors
                    (Hearing on 24th June, 2014)
                    Ms J Rothwell of Counsel
                    (Hearings on 10th October, 2014, 19th August, 2015, 14th
                    October, 2015, 23rd November 2015 and  25th January,
                    2016)

For the Respondent:    Ms S L Ong, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (Hearing on 24th June, 2014)
                    Mr T Melvin, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (Hearings on 10th October, 2014, 19th August, 2015, 14th
                    October, 2015, 23rd November, 2015 and  on 25th January
                    2016)


                        Direction Regarding Anonymity
    Rule 45(4)(1) Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant was born on 22nd September, 1983 and is a citizen of  Sri
    Lanka.  She appeals the decision of the respondent, taken on 10th  May,
    2012, to give directions for  her  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom,
    following the refusal of her claim for recognition as a refugee.

Immigration history

2.   The appellant first sought leave to enter the United Kingdom  in  2008,
    as a student, but her application was refused.  A  similar  application
    was granted on 29th August, 2009, when she was  granted  a  visa  valid
    until 28th May, 2012.  She entered the United  Kingdom  first  on  18th
    January, 2010.

3.   The appellant returned to Sri Lanka on 13th January, 2011, in order  to
    marry and then she returned to the  United  Kingdom  on  1st  February,
    2011.  She claimed asylum on 12th April, 2012.

Basis of the appellant's claim

4.   When refusing the appellant's claim for asylum, the respondent wrote  a
    "Reasons for Refusal" Letter addressed to the appellant and dated  10th
    May, 2012.  At paragraph 9 of the letter, the Secretary of  State  sets
    out her understanding of the appellant's claim.  While not encompassing
    the whole of the appellant's claim, (it does not of  course  deal  with
    the appellant's sur place activities), I believe it will be helpful  if
    I set it out in full:-

         "9.  In these documents you claim that:

             (a)  You are a Sri Lankan of Tamil ethnicity (SIQ1.7).

             (b)  You first  became  involved  with  the  LTTE  (Liberation
                  Tigers of Tamil Eelam) in 1995  (AIRQ10).   You  supported
                  them because they were fighting for Tamils (AIRQ11).   You
                  would attend meetings (AIRQ12),  put  up  notices,  go  on
                  processions and protests (AIRQ13).

             (c)  You have never fought in support  of  the  LTTE  (AIRQ14,
                  15).

             (d)  You attended protests at the University of Jaffna:

                  (i)  On 30th September 2005 (AIRQ33).

                  (ii) On 24th November 2005 and you made a speech  (AIRQ26,
                      27, 19).

                  (iii)    On 5th July 2006 (AIRQ14).

                  (iv) On 19th August 2008 (AIRQ19, 20).

                  (v)  On 12th February 2009 (AIRQ22, 23).

             (e)  You did not  organise  these  events  (AIRQ23,  32,  36),
                  however you did travel to other areas to invite people  to
                  attend the celebration on 30th September 2005 (AIRQ37).

             (f)  In 2004 your husband completed 4-5 months of  basic  LTTE
                  training (AIRQ183-185).

             (g)  In 2005 you were called for an enquiry  by  the  Criminal
                  Investigation Department  (CID)  (AIRQ51),  but  you  were
                  released immediately (AIRQ52) with  the  held  of  the  GS
                  (Grama Sevaka) AIRQ47, 48, 49).

             (h)  In 2005 your brother was arrested for  working  with  the
                  LTTE and was released on  reporting  conditions  (AIRQ133,
                  134).  He was not ill-treated during detention (AIRQ189).

             (i)  In December your husband was taken  for  questioning  and
                  released (AIRq180).  He was not arrested again after  2005
                  (AIRQ198)  although  he   was   involved   in   University
                  activities (AIRQ201).

             (j)  In December 2005 there was propaganda at your  University
                  and people arrived and were shot by the  army.   You  have
                  not claimed to have been part of this event (AIRQ78, 79).

             (k)  You were arrested in February 2006 (AIRQ77) when the army
                  came to your university (AIRQ78) following an incident  on
                  20th December 2005 (AIRQ79, 80,  81).  You  were  held  in
                  detention for two days (AIRQ86).  Although  you  were  not
                  required to sign anything (AIRQ87) you were beaten on your
                  legs (AIRQ88)  and  questioned  (AIR89).   There  were  no
                  conditions attached to your release but you were told that
                  if you were arrested again they would  shoot  your  family
                  (AIRQ91).

             (l)  You were sexually abused during your detention (AIRQ52).

                  Alternatively, they said if you had sex  with  them  they
                  would release you (AIRQ88) however, the Grama  Sevaka  and
                  another  person  got  involved  and  you   were   released
                  (AIRQ293).

             (m)  On 13th June 2007 the army came to your  family  home  to
                  arrest your brother and  hit  your  father.   Your  father
                  subsequently died of a heart  attack  (AIRQ76,  112,  113,
                  114, 129).

             (n)  You do not know why they wanted to take your brother  for
                  questioning at this time (AIRQ138).   They  did  not  come
                  again to arrest him and  he  continued  to  report  weekly
                  (AIRQ138, 139 and 140).

             (o)  On 13th August, 2007 your uncle was  shot  dead  (AIRQ76,
                  99).  You believe that this was because he was  living  in
                  an army controlled area and had  been  accommodating  LTTE
                  members (AIRQ103).

             (p)  In 2008 you were with  your  friend  when  she  was  shot
                  (AIRQ93), however you believe that  they  were  aiming  to
                  kill you (AIRQ94, 95) because of the threats they made  on
                  your life in 2006 (AIRQ96).

             (q)  In 2008 the army took your ID card and tore it up because
                  your hair was in plaits (AIRQ153, 159).  You had to  apply
                  for a new one (AIRQ153).  You were not beaten (AIRQ160).

             (r)  On 7th October 2009 your brother (P) was shot by  mistake
                  (SIQ6.6, AIR162, 163 and 164).  He had not  been  involved
                  with the LTTE (AIRQ166).   You  were  not  expecting  your
                  brother to be shot (AIRQ310).

             (s)  You started marking arrangements to come  to  the  UK  in
                  August 2008 (AIRQ217).  Your mother wanted  you  to  leave
                  Sri Lanka after your brother [P] died (AIRQ216).

             (t)  Your brother (PK) left Sri Lanka after your other brother
                  (P) was killed in 2009 (AIRQ21, 209).

             (u)  You left Sri Lanka alone on your own passport with a visa
                  to the UK on  18th  January  2010,  arriving  at  Heathrow
                  Airport on the same day.

             (v)  You returned to Sri Lanka alone in 2011  to  get  married
                  (SIQ2.1).   You  were  married  on   20th   January   2011
                  (AIRQ240). You left for Colombo on the same day (AIRQ247).

             (w)  You left Sri Lanka alone on your own passport with a Visa
                  to the UK on 1st February 2011 arriving at Gatwick Airport
                  on the same day.

             (x)  Your  house  in  Sri  Lanka  was  first  visited  by  the
                  authorities in February 2011 and they came between 4 and 5
                  times (AIRQ257,Q258).  Your husband was required to report
                  which he did (AIRQ259) but he went missing  in  June  2011
                  (AIRQ260).   You  believe  he  was  detained  by  the  CID
                  (AIRQ299).

             (y)  His  abduction  has  not  been  reported  to  the  police
                  (AIRQ285, 286).

             (z)  In September 2011 the CID came to your mother's house and
                  made enquiries about you (SIQ5.2)."

Appeal history

5.   The history of the appellant's appeal is by no means entirely clear  to
    me.  I believe that following the Secretary  of  State's  refusal,  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and her appeal was  heard
    first by First-tier Tribunal Judge A W Khan in July 2012.  Again, it is
    not entirely clear, but I believe that following  promulgation  of  the
    determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Khan,   the   appellant
    challenged the judge's determination in the Upper  Tribunal  and  at  a
    hearing on 4th March, 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Hall,  sitting
    as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal, set aside the determination of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Khan.  I believe then  that  the  matter  was
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

6.   On 12th March, 2014, the appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett.  Judge Grimmett found that  the  appellant's  evidence  about
    events prior to her leaving Sri Lanka in early 2010, was  very  largely
    consistent and detailed.   It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    involved  in  putting  up  notices  and  attending  demonstrations   at
    university and the judge found that she was  satisfied  that  both  the
    appellant and her brother were involved in demonstrations, that she had
    been consistent about.  The judge noted that the appellant had  claimed
    that her brother had been working for the LTTE in 2005 prior to  Jaffna
    coming under the control  of  the  army  and  that  the  appellant  had
    produced a photograph of her brother with the political leader  of  the
    LTTE, Tamilchevan, which was not being disputed by the respondent.

7.   Judge Grimmett was also satisfied that the appellant's father had  died
    following an incident when the authorities came looking for  her  elder
    brother.  The description the appellant gave of the event was, recorded
    Judge Grimmett, "very detailed and her explanation for why the army did
    not actually take her brother with them on that day, namely  that  they
    were all screaming has the ring of  truth  about  it."  Judge  Grimmett
    accepted that the appellant was a supporter of the LTTE on a low  level
    and that her brother carried out some similar  activities  to  her  and
    that both of them and their family were known to the authorities over a
    lengthy period prior to her departure.

8.   Judge Grimmett  also  found  that  the  applicant  had  been  detained,
    because  the  evidence  she  gave  about  the  circumstances  of   both
    detentions was very detailed.  She was not satisfied that there was any
    inconsistency and  noted  that  the  appellant  had  not  attempted  to
    embellish the 2005 incident.  Judge Grimmett  noted  that  the  medical
    evidence supported the appellant's claim to have been  beaten  on  both
    legs, because the scaring was consistent with it.   She  found  herself
    satisfied that the appellant was detained and ill-treated in 2006.

9.   The judge was also  satisfied  that  that  the  appellant's  uncle  was
    killed by the army as a result  of  LTTE  activities.   Judge  Grimmett
    said:-

         "The appellant does not say that the army came looking for him [her
         uncle] at her home or that his wife or children were ever hurt as a
         result of her uncle's activities.  She does say however that  after
         her uncle was killed his son took a stick and hit the army and they
         tried to shoot him.   That  information  was  volunteered  by  [the
         appellant] and once again seems to me to be a comment  unlikely  to
         be made up by her on the spur of the moment were  the  account  not
         true and if the uncle's son was willing to seek retribution in such
         a way it is likely in my view that he believed his father had  been
         killed by the army."

10.  Judge Grimmett said that she," was therefore satisfied  that  the  army
    were aware of the whole family, particularly bearing in mind  that  the
    appellant says at Q105 that the army were  occupying  their  house  and
    they had to move out".  However Judge Grimmett went on to make  further
    findings and as a result dismissed the appellant's appeal.

11.  Dissatisfied with the determination, the appellant sought and  obtained
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal was sought suggested that the judge erred  in  law
    in failing to take account of material evidence in failing to  consider
    the  implications  of  the  appellant's  continued  support  of   Tamil
    separatism.

Hearing on 24th June, 2014

12.  The matter came for hearing before me first on 24 June, 2014.   It  was
    suggested on behalf of the appellant  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider page 51 of the appellant's bundle, being a letter from  a  Sri
    Lankan MP.  The judge had said at paragraph  30  of  her  determination
    that there was no recent evidence of any interest in  the  family,  but
    failed to consider what the member  of  parliament  had  said  in  that
    letter.  Neither had there been any consideration of  the  letter  from
    the member of parliament at pages 77 and 78 of the  appellant's  second
    bundle, thus making Judge Grimmett's findings that the appellant was of
    no further interest flawed.

13.  There was no consideration as to whether or not she might have been  on
    a watch list, since she had been arrested within a week of her  return.
    It was also suggested that there had been a failure to  appreciate  key
    elements of her claim, namely that students from Jaffna University  had
    been and are viewed by the Sir Lankan authorities as  those  who  stand
    for Tamil nationalism.  The background evidence and the letter from  Mr
    Kajendrem, General Secretary, Tamil National People's Front and  former
    MP, dated 15th March, 2012 and background evidence about him and Jaffna
    University confirmed that students at Jaffna University were viewed  as
    Tamil nationalists and  LTTE  members.   To  suggest  simply  that  the
    appellant had attended "a few demos" shows a  misunderstanding  of  the
    evidence, it was suggested.

14.  Judge Grimmett found inconsistencies in the evidence  as  to  what  had
    happened to the appellant's husband after the appellant's return to the
    United Kingdom.  However, the grounds pointed out that  the  judge  had
    not taken into account a letter from the appellant's  mother  contained
    within the bundle.

15.  For the respondent, Ms Ong accepted that the  determination  could  not
    stand.  The appellant's representative told me that the  matter  should
    he heard afresh again, but indicated that there were no  findings  that
    should be preserved.  He told me that  the  matter  would  need  to  be
    adjourned so that it could be heard afresh during the course of a whole
    day.

Preserved Findings

16.  It is appropriate for me to point out at  this  stage  that  I  believe
    that the findings made by Ms Grimmett to which I have made reference at
    paragraphs 6  and  10  above  should  be  preserved,  contrary  to  the
    submission of Mr A M Ahluwalia .  They are not infected by  the  errors
    and are findings in the appellant's favour.



The Hearing on 10th October, 2014

17.  Mr Melvin told me that at 9:30 this morning he had  received  a  bundle
    of documents on behalf of the appellant consisting of  271  pages.   He
    explained that he had not had the opportunity of properly  reading  and
    digesting this bundle.  He could not be confident that even if  I  were
    to adjourn the matter for two hours that he would  have  been  able  to
    read the bundle in that time.  He invited me to adjourn  to  a  further
    date.

18.  Ms Rothwell  was  in  no  position  to  oppose  the  application.   She
    indicated that she had only yesterday received the bundle and only this
    morning received the latest statement from the appellant.  There was no
    one present from the appellant's solicitors to explain why  the  bundle
    had not been served earlier.

Hearing on 19th August, 2015

19.  The matter next came for hearing before me on 19th  August,  2015.   On
    that occasion Ms Rothwell had been put in an impossible position.   She
    had just received a lengthy psychiatric report which appeared  to  have
    been completed some weeks earlier but had only just been  delivered  to
    her.  Neither Mr Melvin nor I had been given copies of this report.

20.   Ms  Rothwell  explained  that  the  appellant  had   been   undergoing
    counselling and the  report  was  from  a  psychologist  who  had  been
    treating the appellant.  She could not explain why the document had not
    been served earlier but agreed that the appellant  had  not  been  best
    served by her solicitors.

21.   I  expressed  concern  that  the  appellant  was  a  privately  funded
    appellant who appeared to have been let down not once,  but  twice,  by
    incompetent solicitors.  Ms Rothwell indicated that she would offer  to
    take over the matter on a pro bono basis if necessary.

22.  I directed that properly indexed and paginated  bundles  with  relevant
    materials be served and filed at least ten days  before  the  adjourned
    hearing and that one properly signed statement be prepared for each  of
    the witnesses.  The matter was adjourned.

Hearing on 14th October, 2015

23.  When the matter came for hearing before me again on 14th  October,  the
    directions had been ignored.  Again, the  appellant  appeared  to  have
    been let down by her solicitors.

24.  Statements which had  been  in  the  appellant's  bundle  unsigned  now
    appeared to be signed, but did not bear any endorsement by a  qualified
    interpreter to confirm that they had been read back to the appellant in
    her own language and that the appellant had confirmed  that  she  fully
    understood and agreed with the contents.

25.  I explained to the appellant that ordinarily it would be  possible  for
    her to adopt, as part of her evidence before me,  her  written  witness
    statements.  I went on to explain, however, that she should only  adopt
    the statements if she was entirely satisfied that what she had said  in
    each of them was completely true and accurate.  The reason for this was
    that if she adopted the statement as part  of  her  evidence  and  then
    later, in cross-examination, she contradicted something that  was  said
    in her statement, that may cause me to believe that she was not telling
    the truth.  The appellant said that she could not remember what she had
    said in any of the statements.

26.  I indicated to  Ms  Rothwell  that  in  the  circumstances  I  was  not
    prepared to allow the witness to adopt her  statement  because  of  the
    danger of her subsequently contradicting something that  she  may  have
    said in the statement.  That may cause me to make an adverse finding of
    credibility.

Appellant's oral evidence

Evidence-in-Chief

27.  I ensured that the interpreter and the appellant both  understood  each
    other.  I told the appellant that she should listen  carefully  to  the
    questions and tell me  if  she  failed  to  understand  anything.   She
    confirmed her full names, date of birth and address.

28.  In evidence-in-chief the appellant said that on 12th April,  2012,  she
    had a short screening interview which she signed.   She  had  told  the
    truth during that interview and wished to rely on  the  record  of  it.
    She had another  interview  on  2nd  May,  2012  and  she  signed  that
    interview.  She told the truth at that interview as well, but she  said
    she could not remember anything.

29.  The appellant started to explain that  she  could  not  return  to  her
    village because her family had been  harassed.   Her  mother  is  still
    having to report to the police station.  [At this stage  the  appellant
    became extremely distressed and the matter was adjourned briefly].

30.  On resuming the hearing Ms  Rothwell  suggested  that  the  appellant's
    aunt should  give  evidence  first,  because  she  had  travelled  from
    Coventry and the appellant was particularly anxious to avoid  the  aunt
    having to make a second trip.  The appellant confirmed that she was fit
    enough to carry on.  I asked her why she needed protection.  In  answer
    to questions put to her by Ms Rothwell the appellant told me that while
    she was in Sri Lanka she had been arrested on two occasions.  She said,
    "...they blamed us and accused us of working against the Government".

31.  The appellant told me that she was first arrested  in  2005.   She  had
    been arranging a Pongu Tamil programme at Jaffna University with  Tamil
    people from the Tamil area.  She invited her village school people  and
    university people to the event.  Pongu  Tamil  Day  is  a  protest  day
    against the Government when Tamil people gather to protest.

32.  The appellant confirmed that she had been a student at the  university.
     She had been there between 2004 to 2008 or 2009.  The  appellant  said
    she could not remember.  She became involved in  Pongu  Tamil,  because
    she was interested in their rights and she invited people from her home
    district to attend the event.   All  the  university  students  invited
    local people.  It was a particularly big event in 2005  although  there
    were smaller events at the university.  It was the 2005 event that  was
    the big one.  The appellant's brother [PK] and university friends  from
    her village helped to arrange it.

33.  The appellant told me that she thought she was  arrested  in  September
    2005, some four or five days after Pongu Tamil.  She  was  arrested  at
    home by the army in uniform and by CID  officers.   She  thought  there
    were two or three people.  They took her to their office by truck.  She
    said that she was threatened and accused of supporting the  LTTE.   The
    soldiers spoke Sinhalese.  They asked her to sign  a  piece  of  paper.
    The appellant asked what was written on the paper  and  they  and  they
    abused her by using bad language, so she signed  the  piece  of  paper.
    The abuse she suffered was all verbal abuse.  She was held for four  or
    five hours and then was allowed to go after  the  intervention  of  the
    Grama Sevaka ("GS").  The GS was employed  by  the  Government  in  the
    area.  The area was controlled by the Government and so the GS  had  an
    office and people approached him if they had any needs, for example  if
    they needed a passport he would give  a  character  letter.   He  is  a
    Tamil.

34.  After four or five hours the GS came to the place where  she  had  been
    held by the army and promised the army commander that she would not  do
    anything against the Government and asked him to release her.  He  knew
    that she was being held there, because her parents had  approached  him
    on her behalf.

35.  The appellant had been at home when she was arrested with  her  parents
    and brothers and so they had witnessed it.

36.  Following her release, the appellant went back to university  as  usual
    and attended lectures.  She became involved in organising  Black  Tiger
    events.  Black Tigers are suicide Tamil Tigers.  A remembrance day  was
    held for the suicide Tigers.

37.  The appellant  said  that  she  next  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in 2006.  At the end of 2005, a popular protest  had  taken
    place.  The Jaffna MP and lecturers from University attended.  Everyone
    carried banners, but the army started firing.  One of the lecturers was
    admitted to hospital along with two or three  students  as  well.   The
    appellant said that she was at the front  of  the  demonstration.   The
    girls were all put at the front.  The authorities attended at her  home
    and arrested her.  This was in February 2006, some two  to  two  and  a
    half months after the demonstration had taken place.

38.  One of the officers told her that the army had details about her.   She
    was arrested and taken to a big army camp.  This was not the same  army
    camp that she had been to previously.

39.  The appellant became very distressed and told me that she did not  want
    to say what had happened to her in the camp.

40.  In answer to sympathetic  questioning  put  by  Counsel  the  appellant
    explained that she was blindfolded when she was taken from her home and
    she was loaded into a van.  She was aware that she had been  taken  out
    of the van and was then forced to sit, still  blindfolded.   Her  hands
    were tied behind her.  Someone pulled her  hair  and  dragged  her  and
    another was holding her arms.  She was placed in  a  room  while  still
    being blindfolded for a while.  Later she saw four or five people.  She
    was sitting on a chair  and  these  people  were  discussing  something
    between themselves.  One of them  had  grabbed  hold  of  her  breasts,
    others started pulling her clothes off.   They  started  touching  her.
    One of her legs was free and she moved her legs but it was beaten  with
    a stick.  She felt a burning irritation.  She was hit  on  one  of  her
    cheeks.  The men kept asking her whether she was  supporting  the  LTTE
    and they kept hitting her.  They did this all night  long.   Eventually
    she was left alone but  could  not  cope  with  the  pain.   Eventually
    because she was so tired she fell asleep.

41.  The men had undressed her.  They had sexually touched her.  They  tried
    to have sex with her but she was passing urine.  She  woke  up  in  the
    same room where she had passed urine.  She heard the door open and  she
    was covered with piles of cloth.

42.  The soldiers did not hurt her again.  They said that there  was  a  big
    officer coming.  They threatened her again and said that  if  she  ever
    did anything again she would be shot.   They  spoke  in  Sinhalese  and
    left.  Later she was untied and told to  dress.   She  was  blindfolded
    again and then taken to another place.  When she was unblindfolded  she
    saw her mother, father and GS who had come to make enquiries about  her
    and she was released.  She then went home.

43.  Throughout that  part  of  her  evidence  the  appellant  was  terribly
    distressed in the way in which  Dr  Shaw  in  her  report  (see  below)
    suggested she might be.

44.  The appellant said that for some two weeks or so  she  did  not  go  to
    university.  Eventually she did.  She confirmed that she had  not  been
    arrested since that time.

45.  Her younger brother, PK, is  in  France.   He  was  involved  in  Pongu
    Tamil.  He is a refugee in France.  The appellant said  that  she  does
    not like to communicate with him.  She has an older brother  who  lives
    in Coventry.  One of her younger brothers was  shot  dead  and  another
    brother lives with her mother in Sri Lanka.  One day, when her  younger
    brother was riding his motorcycle, he was shot dead.  This was in 2009.
     The army shot him.  The family had been told that the  army  had  shot
    her brother by people who saw the incident.  The army had actually been
    aiming at the brother who now lives in France.  He went  to  France  in
    2009.  The army thought that he was a member of the LTTE.

46.  The brother living in Sri Lanka  suffers  with  depression.   The  army
    keep making enquiries at the family home and he is scared.   He  thinks
    that the army will come and shoot him.

47.  The appellant's father is dead.  He died in 2007 when the army came  to
    arrest the appellant's brother who now lives in France.  Her father who
    only had one leg, was sitting in his wheelchair and  pleading  for  the
    soldiers not to arrest his son.  One of the  soldiers  hit  her  father
    with a gun and knocked him to the ground where he then suffered a heart
    attack.

48.  The army used to come to make enquiries but not  that  often.   It  was
    whenever they wanted.  Once in 2005  her  brother  had  helped  Tsunami
    victims by fundraising.  He was asked by the army if he was  supporting
    the LTTE.  He had been  photographed  as  part  of  a  group  giving  a
    birthday party to the leader of the LTTE.   This  photograph  had  been
    published in a newspaper and the army had found it.  The gift which had
    been presented was presented by all the student leaders in  the  Jaffna
    area.

49.  The appellant thought that there were many other times  when  the  army
    had come to her home, but she could not remember.  In  2007,  following
    her father's death, her uncle was shot dead by the army.  He was S.  He
    was shot by the CID.  He  had  supported  the  LTTE  and  allowed  LTTE
    members to stay at his property.  His widow still lives in  Sri  Lanka.
    When David Cameron, the Prime Minister visited Sri Lanka  to  attend  a
    United Nations Conference the appellant's mother and aunt  presented  a
    petition.  The appellant gave me the name of her aunt.   Last  year  an
    uncle's brother and sister were both arrested by the army.  This was in
    March 2014.  Her uncle was married to the appellant's mother's  sister.



50.  The appellant's mother was asked for a  statement  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  She was asked to attend the police station and confirm in
    a statement that the appellant was not in Sri Lanka, but was living  in
    the United Kingdom and acting against the army.  Her mother  was  asked
    to confirm that own her sister and brother-in-law's  children  were  in
    the United Kingdom and that the appellant had joined them.

51.  I then adjourned  for  lunch.   Following  the  lunch  adjournment  the
    appellant continued with her evidence.   She  confirmed  that  she  was
    married and had been married on 20th January, 2011.  She first came  to
    the United Kingdom in January 2010 in order to study.   When  she  left
    Sri Lanka she was frightened to live there and following her  brother's
    death she had tried to obtain a student visa to leave.

52.  The appellant  studied  at  CLT  College  in  Bow  Road.   She  studied
    English.  She returned to Sri Lanka in 2011 in order to marry.  It  was
    a love marriage.  She met her husband at the University  of  Jaffna  in
    2004.  He had been involved in Pongu Tamil.  He is SJ.   The  appellant
    went back to Sri Lanka to marry him because she had fallen too much  in
    love with him and he had received other marriage proposals.  Her family
    knew that she loved him but they  were  opposed  to  her  marrying  him
    because he also had problems with the army  with  one  of  his  friends
    having been  shot  dead  and  another  having  been  forced  to  go  to
    Switzerland.  SJ and the student who  had  been  shot  dead  were  room
    mates.

53.  Her husband's family did not approve of his marriage  to  her,  because
    of her problems with the Sri Lankan Army.  She went back to  Sri  Lanka
    to marry him because she loved him.

54.  On her return  she  had  no  difficulties  at  the  airport.   The  CID
    officers attended at her home during the course of the wedding ceremony
    about a week after the appellant's return.  They told her  mother,  who
    was at home at the time, that they wanted her  to  hand  the  appellant
    over to them.   The  appellant  was  actually  attending  the  marriage
    certification and her mother had  returned  home  to  prepare  for  the
    wedding reception party.  Her mother phoned the appellant and told  her
    not to go to the house.  Instead the appellant returned to Colombo with
    her husband.  She had no problems in Colombo and  stayed,  "in  a  safe
    place".  When she left to come back to the United Kingdom she used  her
    own passports and again had no difficulties at the airport.

55.  The appellant said that she advised her husband to stay in Colombo  for
    a further two weeks.  She believes that he is now living in India.   He
    went back to his village and was asked about the  appellant  and  taken
    for interview.  He was made to report and one  day  when  reporting  he
    disappeared.  This was in June 2011.  He was  reporting  from  February
    2011 until June 2011.

56.  The appellant said that she assumed that SJ  had  been  arrested.   His
    parents and the appellant's parents tried to locate him.  In  2012  the
    appellant's mother wrote a letter to the appellant's aunt  saying  that
    her husband had been in a camp.  He had been located by an agent.  Land
    was sold and money was sent to  the  appellant's  mother  so  that  the
    appellant could secure his release.  The appellant believes that he  is
    now living in India.  The appellant's mother had explained this to  the
    lady the appellant lives with and  with  whom  the  appellant's  mother
    regularly speaks.  The agent said that he would take  her  husband  and
    take him to a safe place.  The appellant has not spoken to her  husband
    at all.  She has now been told that he is in India, but she has no idea
    where.  She has not had any contact with his parents.

57.  The photographs at pages 82 to 90 of her bundle show  her  taking  part
    in demonstrations in the  United  Kingdom,  93  and  94  are  different
    pictures, and she could not remember where 95 was taken.  99 relates to
    the UK student branch of the Jaffna University  which  has  contributed
    funds to poor children in the Jaffna area.

58.  The appellant confirmed that she had seen Dr Martin in  June  2012  and
    that during her interview she had told him the truth.  She was referred
    to page 147 and confirmed that she  had  caused  her  pregnancy  to  be
    terminated.  She said that she  could  not  carry  the  baby  with  her
    husband still having problems.  The author of the letter at page 54 was
    a neighbour of her parents.

59.  If the appellant were to return to Sri Lanka now she believes that  she
    would be murdered.

The Hearing on 23rd November 2014

Cross-Examination by Mr Melvin

60.  In answer  to  questions  put  to  her  by  Mr  Melvin,  the  appellant
    confirmed that since 2006 she has not been detained by the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  She added that she had reduced her involvement with  LTTE
    after her friend died and after she had decided to come to  the  United
    Kingdom.

61.  When she returned to Jaffna University after the  last  detention,  she
    discovered that other girls had been arrested, but she did not discover
    what  had  happened  to  them.   Many  people  were  detained  by   the
    authorities and ill-treated, but, she added, most were shot.

62.  In 2010 and 2011, the appellant  did  not  employ  an  agent  to  bribe
    airport staff when she flew.  She asked a Sinhalese speaking  Tamil  to
    help her leave in 2011.  He is a friend who lives in Colombia.  He came
    to the airport with her, but he did not pay a bribe.

63.  The appellant confirmed that as far as she is  aware,  her  mother  has
    not been given any court papers or summonses relating to the appellant,
    but the appellant confirmed that she has not instructed a lawyer in Sri
    Lanka to make enquiries and check whether she is  the  subject  of  any
    court proceedings.  The appellant explained that she does not speak  to
    her mother, because her mother is suffering  already,  because  of  the
    appellant.  Her mother believes that her telephone  is  tapped  by  the
    authorities.  The appellant added that she does not want to  cause  any
    further difficulties for her mother.  If neighbours were to go  to  the
    army it might well cause problems for her mother.

64.   During  Prime  Minister  Cameron's  visit  to  Sri  Lanka  her  mother
    presented a petition to the Prime Minister  and  was  threatened.   Her
    mother mentions this in the letter.

65.  When SJ's mother was arrested a complaint was made to the  authorities.
     The appellant  does  not  know  whether  SJ's  family  have  made  any
    complaint about his disappearance.  The appellant said that she has not
    made any complaint because she is also concerned about her brother  who
    still lives in Sri Lanka.

66.  SJ made his application for a visa to join the appellant as  a  student
    in 2011.  He  started  reporting  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  in
    February 2011.  At that time he had a passport.  He had applied  for  a
    passport in January or  February.   His  application  for  a  visa  was
    refused.

67.  The appellant denied that the account she was giving  was  false.   She
    said that she waited another  year  before  claiming  asylum.   SJ  was
    arrested in March 2010.  The appellant said she became fed up, by which
    I understood her to mean that she became  depressed.   She  again  said
    that she had not claimed asylum earlier because she was  fed  up.   She
    spoke to her aunt but did not listen to the advice her aunt gave her to
    claim asylum.

68.  SJ did  not  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance.   The
    appellant said that she only had five months left on her visa and could
    not therefore appeal.

69.  The last time she spoke to SJ was  before  he  was  arrested  in  2011.
    Family members (the appellant's and SJ's) paid large sums to secure his
    release.

70.  When asked where her husband was, the appellant said that she  is  told
    that he is in India but she really does not know.  She  said  that  she
    was not able to look after herself.  She thought it possible  that  her
    husband might well be under the control  of  an  agent.   Her  landlady
    (being the lady with whom she currently lives and to  whom  her  mother
    telephones) said that after JK had settled down he would call for  her.
    She said she did not know his status, assuming he  is  in  India.   She
    knows nothing at all about him.

71.  The appellant confirmed that she is not a member of any Tamil group  in
    the United Kingdom but she does act as a volunteer  for  Tamil  Heroes'
    Day.  In November each year a Tamil Heroes' Day is celebrated  and  the
    appellant assists the British Tamil Forum.  She was asked  if  she  had
    any corroborative evidence and said that she did not.

72.  The appellant confirmed that she had not give any media  interview  and
    had not written anything for publication in the press.  She has  signed
    a petition for people in Sri Lanka.  She does not use the internet.

73.  The appellant confirms that she has seen Dr Swan.   The  appellant  has
    read Dr Swan's report.  In the report Dr Swan says that the appellant's
    husband is still missing.  The appellant explained that she had told Dr
    Swan that she did not know where her husband was.   Dr  Swan  makes  no
    mention of the fact that I helped to secure his release.

74.  The appellant told me that she had been told that her  husband  was  in
    India in 2012.

75.  The appellant agreed that she had been admitted to hospital last  year.
     She  was  in  hospital  for  two  days.   She  was  suffering  from  a
    temperature and a rash on  her  upper  arm.   Recently,  the  appellant
    attended hospital for numbness.

76.  In 2014 the appellant was hospitalised after drinking bleach.

77.  Mr Melvin referred the appellant to the letter dated 30th  April,  2014
    written by Selvarajah  Kajendren,  general  secretary,  Tamil  National
    People's Front.  The appellant confirmed  that  this  letter  does  not
    mention  the  disappearance  of  the  appellant's  husband,  SJ.    The
    appellant agreed but said she did not know  why.   I  believe  that  it
    might be because it appears that the letter was written in response  to
    a request by SJ ( see the last paragraph on the first page).

78.  Mr Melvin asked the  appellant  where  she  obtained  the  "receipt  in
    respect  of  persons  arrested  under  emergency  Regulations  or   the
    Prevention of Terrorism Act".  She explained that this related  to  the
    brother of her uncle, S.  She obtained it from her aunt.

79.  Mr Melvin asked where and when the photographs which appeared  at  page
    82 of the appellant's bundle had been taken.  The  appellant  explained
    that they had been taken in 2012 in Whitehall.  The photographs at page
    91 in the bundle were taken during the course of a long march in London
    in 2013 and appear on the Tamil Guardian website and the photograph  of
    the appellant appearing  on  page  93  was  taken  in  Whitehall.   The
    photographs in 94 were taken during Tamil Heroes' Day and  that  at  96
    was taken somewhere in London.

80.  The appellant confirmed  that  she  made  small  contributions  to  the
    University of Jaffna student funds.  Her family have no links to anyone
    in the leadership of the LTTE.

81.  At that stage and before re-examination by Ms  Rothwell,  I  agreed  to
    hear the oral evidence of the appellant's aunt to save  her  having  to
    reappear at a later date.  Ms Rothwell was content  to  re-examine  the
    appellant at an adjourned hearing.

Oral Evidence of MS

Evidence in Chief

82.  MS confirmed that she  was  born  on  11th  June,  1970  and  lived  in
    Coventry.  She explained that the appellant is the  witness's  sister's
    daughter.  The witness  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2000.   The
    appellant stayed with her after her arrival until 2003.  The  appellant
    is married.  Her husband is JS.   The  appellant  was  married  in  Sri
    Lanka.  The witness does not know where  the  appellant's  husband  is.
    The witness explained that she had heard from her sister that he was in
    jail or in custody.  She had once been told that JK had  been  released
    but she did not know where he is.

83.  The witness told me that her sister, the appellant's aunt, had  paid  a
    bribe through an agent to secure SJ's release.  The witness  said  that
    she sent some money but she had no idea where  the  appellant  obtained
    the rest from.  The witness said that she had sent around  2,000  lakh.
    Her sister wrote a letter to her which is at page 37  (the  translation
    is at page 36 of the bundle).  In the  letter  the  appellant's  mother
    told her sister that an agent was demanding 10 lakhs to  free  SJ  from
    custody.  The appellant's mother says  in  her  letter  that  she  made
    enquiries with the help of a lawyer but the army  denied  holding  him,
    saying that there was no such person.  The lawyer had advised her  that
    the army were hiding the appellant's husband and that the agent  wanted
    7 lakhs as a deposit and while she had arranged  to  sell  land  for  3
    lakhs she asked the witness for the balance.  The letter concludes that
    payment of money will save the life of SJ and ensure the  marital  life
    of the appellant.

84.  In the letter the appellant's mother explains to the witness  that  she
    could not describe this during a  telephone  conversation  because  her
    lines are tapped by the army.  It asked that if she wishes to call  the
    appellant's mother she telephones the neighbour next-door.

85.  The witness explained that she had sent money to her sister  through  a
    friend.  She was asked later for more money to secure his release.

86.  The appellant now lives in London.  The witness confirmed that she  was
    very worried about  the  appellant  and  her  state  of  health.   Once
    recently she tried to commit suicide by drinking bleach.

87.  The appellant has in the past been ill at a time when  she  was  taking
    medication.  The lady with whom the appellant lives knows that  she  is
    on medication.

Cross-Examination by Mr Melvin

88.  The witness  confirmed  that  the  appellant  had  lived  with  her  in
    Coventry.  The witness said that the  appellant  was  a  student.   She
    stopped living with the witness after the witness herself  had  started
    work.  As a result the witness told me that she had asked a  friend  to
    accommodate the appellant in London.  This is the lady  with  whom  the
    appellant now lives.  Previously the appellant had commuted to  college
    in London from Coventry three days per week.

89.  The witness agreed that she had  visited  Sri  Lanka  last  year.   She
    visited family members.  She did not visit her sister, the  appellant's
    mother, because she was there only to visit her husband's relatives.

90.  The witness rarely speaks to her sister  because  she  is  so  nervous.
    She complains that her telephone lines are tapped.  The last  time  the
    appellant spoke to the neighbour was six or seven months  ago  and  she
    asked if her sister was alright.  The witness explained  that  she  did
    not have time to wait for the next-door neighbour to go and ask.

91.  The witness had  paid  around  �3,000  to  secure  SJ's  release.   The
    witness told me that she knew nothing about his whereabouts  only  that
    she had been told he had been released.   A  friend  of  the  witnesses
    explained that she had found SJ living in a temple in  India  in  Tamil
    Nadu.  The witness explained she did not know exactly where he lived.

92.  The witness's friend had not wanted to tell the witness anything  about
    the appellant's husband because it  would  only  cause  problems.   She
    thought that the friend had seen SJ in Tiruchy.

93.  The witness explained that her  friend  had  bumped  into  someone  who
    looked very similar to the  appellant's  husband.   She  had  told  the
    witness that she had only ever seen him in a photograph  in  Sri  Lanka
    but it looked very similar to him.  She did not approach him.

94.  Her sister's neighbour is called Sandia.

95.  The witness again confirmed that during her visit to Sri Lanka she  did
    not go to Jaffna.

96.  The matter was adjourned until 23rd November.

Hearing on 23rd November

97.  In ensured that the appellant  and  interpreter  both  understood  each
    other.  I told them that if either of them had  any  difficulties  they
    should tell me.

98.  I explained to the representatives that I  was  proposing  to  read  my
    Record of Proceedings from the hearing on 19th August.  I asked them if
    they could please make notes so that when I have completed  reading  my
    Record  of  Proceedings  they  could  tell  me  whether  they  had  any
    alterations, corrections or amendments to propose.

99.  I read aloud my Record of proceedings whereupon Ms  Rothwell  indicated
    several very minor  alterations  and  amendments.   Mr  Melvin  had  no
    objections to any of them.  They  both  told  me  they  were  happy  to
    proceed.

Further oral evidence of the appellant

Re-Examination of the Appellant

100. Counsel referred  the  appellant  to  documents  contained  within  her
    bundle.  At page 47 was a letter written by Sivagnanam  Shritharan  MP.
    It was  an  undated  letter  which  had  been  written  concerning  the
    appellant's mother-in-law.  It explains that the appellant's father-in-
    law contacted the Member of Parliament on 3rd September, 2012  when  he
    became aware that his wife, the  appellant's  mother-in-law,  had  been
    taken into custody by the Sri Lankan authorities.

101. The Member of Parliament spoke to the officer in charge of  the  police
    station at Nelliady and  was  questioned  as  to  the  whereabouts  and
    activities of her son, SJ who was described as having escaped from  the
    Sri Lankan authority's detention.

102. The letter from the Member of Parliament said that the  police  officer
    he spoke to had told him that the appellant's mother-in-law's  son  and
    the appellant  were  both  LTTE  members.   The  Member  of  Parliament
    intervened in the unlawful detention of the  appellant's  mother-in-law
    and on 6th September, 2012 she was released on condition that she  sign
    on at the police station every other week.  The  Member  of  Parliament
    reported that he had been told by the  appellant's  father-in-law  that
    during her period of detention, his wife was interrogated  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities both  as  to  the  whereabouts  of  the  appellant's
    husband and as to the whereabouts of the appellant.

103. The witness confirmed that the document at page  57  was  an  affidavit
    made by the widow of S.

104.  I  pointed  out  to  Ms  Rothwell  that  there  was  nothing  in  this
    "affidavit" to indicate that the deponent  could  read  and  understand
    English or had been read back the affidavit in  her  own  language  and
    that she was happy  with  its  contents.   I  warned  Counsel  that  it
    appeared to be a document on which I would not be able  to  place  very
    much weight.

105. Ms Rothwell then referred the appellant to the document at page  61  of
    the bundle and said that this was the birth certificate of a sister  of
    S who herself had been arrested.  The document at page 66 was the birth
    certificate of the brother of S and the document at  page  77  was  the
    "receipt in respect of persons arrested under Emergency Regulations  of
    the Prevention of Terrorism Act" which related to S.

106. The appellant confirmed that she was arrested in 2006  and  that  after
    the death of her friend, Sumathi, the appellant feared  that  her  life
    was at risk.  Sumathi had been shot by the army while the two  of  them
    had been standing near  a  bus  stop.   The  appellant  said  that  she
    believed that the Sri Lankan Army  had  actually  meant  to  shoot  the
    appellant.

107. The appellant agreed that there was no recent  documentation  from  her
    mother which would assist the Tribunal. She explained that she had  not
    wanted  to  ask  her  mother  and  cause  her  to  worry.   Her  mother
    occasionally  speaks  to  the  appellant's  landlady.   The   appellant
    explained that her mother suffers because of the appellant.

108.  The  appellant's  husband  applied  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom
    confidentially.  He had been reporting to the army camp but because his
    life was at risk in Sri Lanka he  had  asked  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He did it without anybody knowing.

109.  The  appellant  explained  that  she  had  obtained  the  letter  from
    Selvarajah Kajendren via her aunt, the widow of S.

Submissions

110. Mr Melvin drew my attention to the fact  that  he  had  prepared  brief
    written submissions.  I told him that I had already read them and found
    them very helpful.  He told me that  all  the  documents  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant were challenged.  It was not  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State that the appellant was credible but even if, looking
    at her claim at its very highest, she still does not  come  within  the
    risk categories identified by the Tribunal in CJ and Others (Post-civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

111. Mr Melvin suggested that the appellant  does  not  have  a  significant
    role in the diaspora; CG makes it perfectly clear  that  much  more  is
    required before someone falls within a risk category.

112. Even taking at its  very  highest  the  appellant  cannot  quality  for
    recognition as a refugee.  She would need  to  demonstrate  significant
    involvement in the United Kingdom.  The majority of Tamils  have  links
    with the LTTE and this is made clear in country guidance.  There  needs
    to be something additional to demonstrate that an appellant  has  close
    links.  Even a photograph  of  the  appellant's  husband  presenting  a
    present to the leader of the LTTE would be insufficient to cause her to
    be at risk.

113. So far as the documentation is concerned, he drew my attention  to  the
    fact that the witness statement at page 13  was  not  signed.   (I  had
    already warned Ms Rothwell  that  I  would  not  place  any  weight  on
    unsigned statements in the appellant's bundle because it was not  clear
    who had prepared them and it was certainly not clear whether the person
    to whom the statements related had ever  seen  them  and  approved  the
    contents.)

114. Again Mr Melvin drew my attention to the unsigned  statement  at  pages
    14 to 22 and told me I should place no weight on it.

115. In respect of the document from the  general  secretary  of  the  Tamil
    National Peoples' Front, apart from being 3� years old  it  was  issued
    before the appellant made her claim but made no mention at all  of  her
    husband's arrest or abduction.  He invited me to  treat  that  document
    with caution.  So far as the letter  from  the  Sri  Lankan  member  of
    parliament is concerned (page 47 of the bundle) it is quite clear  that
    the author of the letter is writing not from  his  own  experience  but
    from what he had been told by the appellant's father-in-law  about  his
    wife's situation.  There was no additional evidence and we do not  know
    what happened.  The appellant can shed little light as to  her  husband
    or his family.  She has offered no explanation as to why she is not  in
    contact with his family.

116. The appellant's aunt gave evidence and  confirmed  the  arrest  of  the
    appellant's husband in June 2011.  She said that she had sent money  to
    Sri Lanka to help secure his release but she was vague in her evidence.
     She was vague about the appellant's  husband  being  in  India.   Even
    though the appellant would have been desperate  for  information  about
    her husband, the appellant's aunt had not even visited the  appellant's
    mother when she returned to Sri Lanka.   She  does  not  speak  to  the
    appellant's mother regularly on the telephone and on the last  occasion
    she spoke she could not wait for the next-door  neighbour  to  get  her
    sister to the phone.

117. Referring me to a letter at page 81  of  the  bundle,  being  a  letter
    dated 18th  June,  2012  from  the  Faculty  of  Management  Studies  &
    Commerce, Students Union, University of Jaffna, Mr Melvin told me  that
    the Secretary of State does not accept that money  has  been  given  to
    this organisation.  No witnesses have been called and there is  nothing
    to corroborate the payment of money and little weight should be  placed
    on this evidence also.

118. Mr Melvin then referred me to the letter  written  by  the  appellant's
    mother to the appellant's aunt, an English translation of which appears
    at page 36 in the appellant's bundle.  This appears to have been  dated
    4th July 2012 (the date appears 4th July, 2012).  This and  the  letter
    at page 42 being a letter written by  the  appellant's  mother  to  the
    appellant and dated 10th December,  2013  (the  date  appears  as  10th
    December, 2013) are letters  written  by  the  appellant's  mother,  Mr
    Melvin suggested, simply to bolster the appellant's  claim.   They  are
    intended to evidence family harassment but the only evidence of it  are
    the letters; there is a clear lack of any evidence from either  of  the
    appellant's brothers.  The appellant worked in her  brother's  shop  in
    2010.  The brother has not given any evidence to show that  the  family
    cannot be harassed and given the decision in TK  Burundi  there  is  no
    reason why he could not have given evidence.

119. At page 48 of the appellant's bundle is a  copy  of  a  letter  of  the
    Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka dealing with harassment  complaint
    in respect of the  appellant's  mother  and  father-in-law.   But  that
    should be treated with little weight.  There  is  nothing  to  indicate
    precisely what the complaint was about or its outcome and  no  evidence
    from the appellant or her family of making any such  complaint.   There
    is no evidence of any recent  harassment  by  the  authorities  of  the
    appellant's husband or family.

120. The letter at page 49 was issued at  the  request  of  the  appellant's
    mother and makes no  mention  at  all  of  the  appellant's  abduction.
    Again, it was  written  to  bolster  the  appellant's  claim.   It  was
    dictated by the mother and not written by the Justice of the Peace from
    his own knowledge.

121. At page 79 of the bundle  was  an  English  translation  of  a  receipt
    apparently issued by the police confirming the arrest of an  individual
    for terrorist offences and there is no evidence of the circumstances of
    the arrest or the charges that might have been brought in isolation, it
    lacks credibility.  The appellant has been extremely vague  about  when
    and where photographs of her have been taken.  There is no evidence  to
    show that the appellant had any prominent or significant  role  in  the
    LTTE.  The affidavit appearing at page 54 and 55 is written in  English
    and nothing to show that  the  deponent  read  and  understood  English
    before she swore the affidavit or that it was read to her  in  her  own
    language and that she was happy with its contents.  As it is it is  not
    first-hand evidence.  It is vague.  There was no mention of the  family
    member being arrested.  None  of  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant demonstrate that she is at any real risk on her return to Sri
    Lanka.

122. As to her personal credibility, she was  twice  allowed  to  leave  Sri
    Lanka using her own passport.  She claimed that she was not assisted at
    the airport but if the authorities had really been remotely  interested
    in her then she would not have been allowed to leave.

123. The appellant's claim was made some nine months after  the  appellant's
    husband was abducted and a long time after her own leave  had  expired.
    That casts doubt on her credibility.  Similarly when  she  returned  to
    the United Kingdom she was interviewed  at  length  by  an  Immigration
    Officer.  That, Mr Melvin suggested would have been the opportunity for
    her to claim asylum.  Her passport  was  retained  whilst  checks  were
    made.

124. The  appellant's  husband  was  placed  on  reporting  restrictions  in
    February 2011, but, according to the appellant, he travelled to Colombo
    in April 2011, to obtain a visa.  It  is  unlikely  that  on  reporting
    restrictions he could have been able  to  travel  to  Colombo.   It  is
    simply not credible.

125. The appellant's evidence as to her husband is vague at  its  best.   He
    is thought to be in India but the evidence is vague.  There  is  little
    evidence about the appellant's husband  being  abducted,  there  is  no
    evidence of any complaints having been made and nothing from the  Human
    Rights Commission.  The whole concept of  the  husband's  detention  is
    lacking in any direct or corroborative evidence.

126. During the appellant's asylum interview  she  indicated  in  answer  to
    questions 3.19 and 3.20 that she could not relocate  to  Colombo.   Her
    husband was released  in  2012  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
    authorities were subsequently interested in him.  Given his release  on
    payment of a bribe he clearly was of no further interest.  No  document
    showing that the appellant is being sought by the authorities has  been
    produced by her.  There are no arrest warrants or summonses and if they
    existed then copies would have been made available to  lawyers  in  Sri
    Lanka on her behalf.  The appellant has a brother in  Coventry  and  no
    reason why he could not have been brought to give evidence  in  support
    of the appellant.  The appellant's  mother  apparently  speaks  to  the
    appellant's landlady but again there is no evidence from the landlady.

127. As to the appellant's sur place claim, again, her  evidence  is  vague.
    He suggested that I should not accept that she  organises  any  events.
    No-one has attended to support the appellant's claims of assisting with
    the Heroes' Day.  There is no corroborative evidence that the appellant
    assists any organisation in the United  Kingdom  and  no  evidence  for
    example that she has ever written an internet blog  or  taken  part  in
    fundraising or any evidence to show that she would be at any risk.   So
    far as the medical evidence is concerned,  Dr  Martin  merely  suggests
    that the injuries are consistent with the appellant's account  but  the
    scarring cannot be dated objectively beyond a period of six months  and
    so while the injuries may be consistent with  the  appellant's  account
    that does not mean that they were  caused  in  the  way  the  appellant
    describes.  So far as Dr Swan is concerned  she  is  not  a  doctor  or
    consultant or psychiatrist.  She is not qualified to make diagnosis  of
    PTSD or a risk of suicide.  There is no record of Dr Swan  ever  having
    previously given expert evidence to the Upper Tribunal or to  a  court.
    She does not hold a medical degree and ordinarily one would  expect  to
    see a list of the documents on which she relied in order to base  their
    opinion.  There is no evidence that in preparing  the  report  she  was
    aware of any such documents such as interview  records  or  statements.
    It appears that Dr Swan was not told that the appellant's husband is in
    India.  That  appears  to  be  evidence  which  has  been  deliberately
    withheld.  The expert assesses a low risk of  suicide  but  the  report
    itself cannot be trusted.  Evidence has been withheld from the  expert.



128. The government of Sri Lanka is concerned  with  future  threats  rather
    than past involvement with the LTTE and so any involvement  would  need
    to be demonstrated to a significant extent.  There is no evidence  that
    there is any outstanding  arrest  warrant  or  summons.   There  is  no
    evidence of the presence of the appellant's name on a  watch  list  and
    she says she has no links to any  members  of  the  LTTE.   It  is  not
    accepted that she was an activist.  The appeal should be dismissed.

129. When Mr Melvin completed his submissions  I  enquired  of  Ms  Rothwell
    what her view was in relation  to  the  allegation  that  the  clinical
    psychologist who had prepared an extensive report was not qualified  to
    make a diagnosis of PTSD.

130. Ms Rothwell pointed out that the  author  of  the  report  is  actually
    currently treating the appellant.  She had been referred to the  doctor
    having been diagnosed with PTSD.  Ms Rothwell suggested that if I  were
    to grant a short adjournment she would be  in  a  position  to  provide
    evidence that the appellant was suffering from PTSD which would satisfy
    Mr Melvin.  She agreed to serve such evidence on Mr Melvin as  well  as
    the Tribunal in advance of the adjourned hearing.





Hearing on 25th January, 2016

131. I advised the parties that I had received from Miss Rothwell a copy  of
    a letter dated 14th January, 2016 from Dr  Alison  Hauenstein-Swan  and
    the  letter  of  13th  January,  2015  from  Dr  F  Jabbar,  consultant
    psychiatrist to the appellant's general medical practitioner.

132.  Miss  Rothwell  pointed  out  that  the  letter  from  the  consultant
    psychiatrist  addressed  to  the  appellant's  doctor  referred  to   a
    diagnosis having been made of PTSD.  She could not assist me by telling
    me whether it was that psychiatrist's diagnosis or not.

133. Both representatives agreed that they had no objection  to  my  looking
    at and taking into account the  2014  US  State  Department  Report  on
    Country Practices in Sri Lanka.  I explained that there was little  up-
    to-date information before me other than press reports  and  a  Medical
    Foundation Report.

134. Before I invited Miss Rothwell to  make  her  submissions  I  indicated
    that on going through the papers I was not able to find the  date  when
    the appellant terminated her pregnancy.  Miss  Rothwell  told  me  that
    this was on 16th March, 2011 before the appellant's  husband  had  been
    detained (which was in June 2011) and before he was  refused  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom.

135. The appellant was recalled briefly to give further evidence.

Further Evidence of the Appellant

136. In answer to questions put to her by Miss Rothwell the  appellant  told
    me that she took a tablet to terminate her pregnancy.  She  decided  to
    terminate her pregnancy because her husband had been arrested  and  was
    required to report to the Sri Lankan authorities. At the time  she  was
    staying with and relying on her aunt for support.  She was  crying  and
    not eating and her aunt asked her, "How can you look  after  your  baby
    when you are in this state?" and she decided that she was too upset  to
    have a child.

137. There was no re-examination.

Submission on behalf of the appellant

138. I then heard submissions from Miss Rothwell.  She reminded me that  the
    burden of proof in asylum claims is low,  much  lower,  she  suggested,
    than the civil standard.  She invited me to  consider  the  appellant's
    asylum interview and she asked me to note  that  it  was  very  largely
    consistent with the evidence  that  the  appellant  had  given  to  the
    Tribunal.  The appellant has not embellished her account  as  suggested
    by the Secretary of State.

139. Counsel urged me to find the appellant to be  an  honest  and  credible
    witness whose word can be relied upon.

140. She referred me briefly to Dr Martin's medical report and  subsequently
    to the report of Dr Shaw.  Dr Martin's report corroborated large  parts
    of the appellant's account but now, with the  findings  made  by  Judge
    Grimmett, Dr Martin's report was largely academic.

141. Miss Rothwell reminded me of the submissions of  Mr  Melvin  concerning
    the diagnosis of PTSD.  The report of Dr Swan of April 2015 is a report
    which should be given careful consideration.  Dr Swan is very clearly a
    highly specialised clinical psychologist working  for  an  organisation
    devoted to psycho-trauma and its treatment.   Whilst  Dr  Swan  is  not
    herself qualified to diagnose PTSD,  the  appellant  was  very  clearly
    referred by her GP to the psycho-trauma unit and Dr  Swan  is  familiar
    with treating people with PTSD.

142. Counsel asked me to bear in mind that the letter of 13th January,  2015
    was a letter sent  to  the  appellant's  own  doctor  by  a  consultant
    psychiatrist and in the heading of that letter  reference  is  made  to
    "Diagnosis: post traumatic stress disorder  ICD-10  F53.1".   The  fact
    that Dr Jabbar,  consultant  psychiatrist  would  write  that  about  a
    patient in a letter to the patient's medical practitioner does  suggest
    that she has been properly diagnosed by  a  psychiatrist  as  suffering
    from PTSD.

143. Miss Rothwell also drew my attention to a letter at  page  144  of  the
    appellant's  bundle  which  is  a  letter  from  a  consultant  liaison
    psychiatrist, Dr Krisanu Ray  addressed  to  the  Forum  Health  Centre
    referring  to  the  appellant  and  asking  if  her   general   medical
    practitioner could prescribe Mirtazapine 15 mg and Promethazine  50  mg
    for the appellant. In that letter Dr Ray tells her GP,

         "I am satisfied when I reviewed her today that she was not suicidal
         or psychotic but likely suffers from depression and post  traumatic
         stress disorder.  She has a number of psycho-socio problems and has
         been referred to the local CMHT for urgent follow up."

144. That letter was written in April 2014.   Whilst  there  may  not  be  a
    medical report containing a proper  diagnosis  of  PTSD,  the  evidence
    before me, she suggested, suggested that there was  a  real  likelihood
    that the appellant is suffering  from  depression  and  post  traumatic
    stress disorder.  She asked me to give weight  to  the  reports  of  Dr
    Swan.

145. She reminded me that Mr Melvin had urged me to find that the  documents
    the appellant had supplied could not be relied upon.  She asked  me  to
    take account of the letter at page 47 of the appellant's bundle from Mr
    Shritharan which deals with the arrest and detention of the appellant's
    mother-in-law.  That was a genuine letter.  As far as the appellant was
    aware, all these letters that she had submitted were genuine.

146. Miss Rothwell also asked me to bear in mind that the war ended  in  the
    spring of 2009 and yet many of the events  which  occurred  took  place
    after May 2009.

147. So far as the appellant's United Kingdom activities are concerned,  the
    objective evidence suggests that the authorities in Sri Lanka are  very
    likely to have identified the appellant as one who regularly takes part
    in demonstrations supporting the Tamil cause.

148. Miss Rothwell asked me  to  find  that  in  the  alternative  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of Article 3 breach.

149. Mr Melvin handed to me and relied on SS (Sri  Lanka)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    155 and  on  KH  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1345 as well as  GS  (India)  and  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40.  He drew
    my attention to the  fact  that  leading  questions  were  put  to  the
    psychologist by the appellant's solicitors and little weight should  be
    placed on her report because she is simply  not  qualified  to  make  a
    diagnosis of PTSD.  There are no detailed medical reports from  anybody
    else who is qualified to undertake  a  diagnosis.   The  letter  of  13
    January 2015 should have been disclosed earlier but there is nothing to
    indicate that the diagnosis was  made  by  the  author  of  the  letter
    himself.  The medication appears to be for depression.

150. Dr Swan seems to believe that the appellant's problems  relate  to  the
    lack of her immigration status.  He suggested that very limited  weight
    should be placed on the report and pointed out that the  appellant  had
    no mental health issues prior to receiving the second  refusal  of  her
    asylum claim.  As to Dr Swan's report, there  is  no  evidence  of  her
    having been given a  copy  of  the  earlier  determinations  after  the
    dismissal of the appellant's  appeal.   He  suggested  that  there  was
    simply no merit in the appeal.  The appellant was  not  credible.   The
    medical evidence was unreliable and the appeal should be dismissed.

151. Responding briefly Miss Rothwell told me that the letter written by  Dr
    Swan of 13th January, 2015 was written to the appellant's  own  general
    medical practitioner and no one had been earlier aware of it.   It  was
    not a case of  having  obtained  and  simply  chosen  not  to  disclose
    evidence.  As soon as the letter came to light it was disclosed.

152. I reserved my determination.

Determination

The Law

153.     In asylum appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant  to  show
    that returning her to Sri Lanka will expose  her  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution for one of the five grounds recognised by the 1951  Refugee
    Convention or to a breach of his protected human rights.  The  question
    of whether a person has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason has to be looked at in the round in the light of  all
    the relevant circumstances and judged against the situation as  at  the
    time of the appeal.  In human rights appeals, if it is established that
    there will be an interference with the appellant's human rights and the
    relevant Article permits, then it is for the  respondent  to  establish
    that the interference is justified.

154. The standard of  proof  in  asylum  appeals  as  regards  to  both  the
    likelihood of persecution and the  establishment  of  past  and  future
    risks, is a real risk.  In Kacaj v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (01/TH/0634*) it was held by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal
    that the standard of proof in human rights appeals is the same as  that
    in asylum appeals.

Background country situation

155. The most recent background country information  I  have  been  supplied
    with appears to  be  the  28th  August  2014  Country  Information  and
    Guidance, which I am familiar with.  Section 2 gives a reasonably clear
    view of recent events in Sri Lanka with end of the civil war in  spring
    2009.

156. One thing is clear from the report; many human rights abuses  committed
    during the conflict still remain to be  full  and  carefully  examined.
    ("Many international and  national  observers  criticised  the  Lessons
    Learnt  and  Reconciliation  Committee  report,  for   not   adequately
    addressing accountability for crimes committed by  the  government  and
    LTTE during the final months of the conflict and  for  exonerating  the
    government wrongdoing")( Paragraph 2.1.6).

157. I noted paragraph 2.2.5 of the report and the fact that the  Prevention
    of Terrorism Act is still in regular use and that  "Torture  and  other
    ill-treatment of persons in custody  by  security  forces  has  been  a
    widespread problem both during  and  since  the  armed  conflict."  [My
    emphasis]  Indeed, the British  High  Commission  reported  in  similar
    terms (see Paragraph 2.28).

158. I noted in particular paragraphs 2.3.4 and  2.3.5  and  the  report  of
    embassy staff  in  London  monitoring  protestors  and  questioning  on
    arrival at the airport of Tamils returning from abroad since the end of
    the conflict.

159. From the 2014 US State Department Report I noted in particular:

          a. There were reports that the government or its agents committed
             arbitrary or unlawful killings.  Reliable statistics  on  such
             killings were difficult to obtain  because  past  complainants
             were killed,  and  many  families  feared  reprisals  if  they
             complained.

             While the overall number of  reported  extrajudicial  killings
             did not appear to increase from the  previous  year,  killings
             and assaults on  civilians  by  government  officials  were  a
             problem.

             Throughout the year numerous  reports  emerged  regarding  the
             killing of suspects under questionable circumstances while  in
             police custody.  According to  a  government  official,  there
             have been 68 such police custodial deaths in the country since
             the start of 2012.  In  October  a  media  account  listed  12
             individuals killed while in police  custody  in  11  incidents
             since July 2013.  On March  11,  Paalan-kada  Heen  Malli,  an
             alleged underworld figure, died in police  custody  after  his
             arrest in the killing of a Ratnapura businessman.  On May  18,
             Tharuka Nilan died in police custody after his arrest for  the
             killing of a  Kurunegala  police  officer.   On  September  5,
             police shot and killed suspected drug dealer Lalitha  Kushalya
             (alias Kudu Lalitha) when he briefly escaped from custody near
             an Athugiriya hospital.  On  September  28,  police  shot  and
             killed Hiran Darshana (alias Kalu Chooty), who was wanted  for
             crimes, including three murders,  after  he  tried  to  escape
             police  custody.   Police  accounts  of  the  deaths  of  such
             suspects  often  included  similar  details--particularly   of
             suspects leading police to a supposed weapons cache,  followed
             by gunfire or a grenade explosion  resulting  in  a  suspect's
             death--leading observers to question their credibility.

          b.   There   were   no   official   statistics   regarding   such
             disappearances, and citizens' considerable fear  of  reporting
             such  incidents  made  reliable  accounting  difficult.    One
             incomplete study of open-source media reports  from  March  to
             October 2013 found at least  17  individuals  abducted  in  12
             events, most of them in Colombo or  the  Northern  or  Eastern
             provinces.  Among  the  individuals  allegedly  abducted  were
             businessmen, political party activists, and one entire family.
              The victims of the alleged abductions were disproportionately
             Tamils.

             In another report released in May 2013, Amnesty  International
             (AI) stated that more than 20 alleged enforced  disappearances
             occurred in 2012.  Among the victims were political activists,
             businesspersons, and suspected criminals, leading observers to
             suspect the involvement of the government or government-allied
             forces in several cases.

          c. The law makes torture a  punishable  offense  and  mandates  a
             sentence of not less than seven years' and not  more  than  10
             years' imprisonment.  There were  credible  reports,  however,
             that police and security forces tortured, raped, and  sexually
             abused citizens.  The Prevention of Terrorism Act (PTA) allows
             courts to admit as evidence confessions extracted by  torture.



             In  the  east  and  north,  military  intelligence  and  other
             security   personnel,   sometimes   allegedly   working   with
             paramilitaries,  were  responsible  for  the  documented   and
             undocumented  detention   of   civilians   accused   of   LTTE
             connections.  Observers reported that interrogation  sometimes
             included mistreatment or torture following  detention.   There
             were  reports  that  authorities  released  detainees  with  a
             warning not  to  reveal  information  about  their  arrest  or
             detention, under the threat of rearrest or death.

             Human rights groups claimed that some security forces believed
             specific circumstances allowed torture.  Several  former  LTTE
             combatants  released  from  rehabilitation  centres   reported
             torture or mistreatment as well as sexual abuse by  government
             officials while in rehabilitation  centres.   In  2012  police
             endorsed the incorporation of a full human  rights  curriculum
             and lesson  plan  developed  by  the  OHCHR  into  the  police
             training curriculum, but authorities never enacted  the  plan.
             The HRCSL provided periodic training to police on human rights
             issues, but observers could not  verify  the  quality  of  the
             training and extent of coverage.

          d. There were also reports  that  police  harassed  and  extorted
             money or sexual  favours  from  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual,  and
             transgender (LGBT) individuals  with  impunity  and  assaulted
             gays and lesbians (see section 6).

             There were a number of credible  reports  of  sexual  violence
             against women in which the  alleged  perpetrators  were  armed
             forces personnel, police officers, army deserters, or  members
             of militant groups.  A number of women did not lodge  official
             complaints due to fear of retaliation (see section 6).

         Human  rights  activists  reported  police   and   security   force
             participation in acts of  violence  against  women  and  young
             girls, although sources also suggested  that  sexual  violence
             against men in detention was prevalent.

          e. "Section 4. Corruption and Lack of Transparency in  Government



             The  law  provides  criminal  penalties  for   corruption   by
             officials, but  the  government  did  not  implement  the  law
             effectively, and officials in all three branches of government
             frequently engaged in corrupt practices with impunity.

             Corruption:  There were continued high levels of  bribery  and
             corruption complaints against public  officials,  particularly
             divisional  secretariats,   police   personnel,   and   school
             principals and teachers.

160. In the appellant's bundle I noted the  extract  of  13th  August,  2015
    from Colombo Mirror which carried a report of doctors' forensic reports
    entitled "Tainted Piece: Torture in Sri Lanka  since  May  2009".    It
    claimed that torture had been part  of  the  "modus  operandi"  of  the
    military, police and intelligence services in Sri  Lanka  for  decades.
    He had urged the United Nations and wider  international  community  to
    take "urgent action to protect the people from torture in Sri Lanka and
    end impunity  for  perpetrators".   I  also  read  the  Reuters  report
    entitled "Sri Lanka's Torture of  Tamils  Persist  Despite  War's  End:
    Charity" dated August 13th, 2015 referring to the  publication  of  the
    same report and a report from Colombo Mirror of 28th July, 2015 with  a
    report of the publication of that report.

161. Also in the bundle was a copy of the Sri Lankan Campaign for Peace  and
    Justice Report, "The past is present 'post-Rajapaska torture and sexual
    violence  in  Sri  Lanka'"  also   relating   to   the   same   report.
    Unfortunately I found it to be of little assistance when compared with,
    for example, the US State Department Report.

Medical evidence

162. Within the appellant's bundle is the clinical psychologist's report  by
    Dr Swan; numerous NHS reports; letters; records  and  notes,  which  on
    their own are not terribly helpful; a medical report by Dr A  I  Martin
    and some copy letters which  were  largely  meaningless.   I  also,  of
    course, had copies of Dr Swan's letter of 14th January,  2016  and  the
    letter  written  by  the  clinical  psychiatrist,  Dr  Jabbar,  to  the
    appellant's general medical practitioner, dated 13th January, 2015.

163. I have considered all this evidence thoroughly.  I make no comments  on
    the report of Dr Martin, because his report  is  largely  a  matter  of
    record following the findings of Judge Grimmett.

164. It is  clear  to  me  that  this  appellant  has  been  referred  to  a
    specialised psycho-trauma clinic, because somebody  believes  that  the
    appellant is suffering from post traumatic stress disorder.  I  do  not
    have a copy of the diagnosis, but the evidence  before  me,  including,
    but not limited to, the letter of 13th January, 2015  from  Dr  Jabbar,
    leads me to believe that the appellant has been properly diagnosed by a
    psychiatrist as suffering from post traumatic stress  disorder.   I  do
    not believe that Dr Jabbar would  have  addressed  his  letter  to  the
    appellant's general medical practitioner in the manner in which he had,
    unless he was satisfied that the appellant  was  suffering  from  PTSD,
    either as a result of his own diagnosis or by having read a psychiatric
    report and diagnosis from a colleague.  It  is  clear  also,  that  the
    appellant is suffering from depression.

165. I take  the  point  emphasised  by  Mr  Melvin.   There  is  no  proper
    diagnosis of the type that one would ordinarily expect to  see,  but  I
    believe that on the evidence before me, I am entitled  to  accept  that
    this appellant has been properly diagnosed with PTSD by a psychiatrist.



166. I believe that the appellant, in giving evidence to  me  both  on  25th
    January and earlier, exhibited the symptoms referred to in  the  report
    and more recent letter from Dr Swan.   Mr  Melvin  suggested  that  the
    appellant had given her evidence without difficulty.  With  respect  to
    Mr Melvin, the appellant was very clearly extremely distressed both  on
    25th January, and earlier when she  gave  her  evidence-in-chief.   She
    appeared to me to be behaving in precisely the way  in  which  Dr  Swan
    predicted at paragraphs 7.3 and 13.1 of her report of 21st April,  2015
    and paragraph 5 of her letter of 14th January, 2016.  The appellant did
    not demonstrate a "shut down response" but was  very  clearly  severely
    distressed.

167. As invited  by  Mr  Melvin,  I  have  considered  SS  (Sri  Lanka),  HK
    (Afghanistan) and GS (India), but I  have  concluded  on  the  evidence
    before me that I am entitled to reach the conclusion I have.

168. Mr Melvin accepted that the  appellant  was  receiving  medication  for
    depression.  Had I  been  satisfied  that  this  appellant  was  merely
    suffering from depression, and not PTSD, my decision  would  have  been
    the same.

169. It was  against  this  depressing  background  that  I  considered  the
    evidence I had heard in order to put it into context.





Findings of Fact

170. In making my findings of fact I confirm that I have carefully  examined
    all the evidence in the bundles before me and the  background  evidence
    and considered it in the round.  It would be tedious to have  to  refer
    to all the documentation and the reason a document is not  specifically
    referred to is not because it has not been considered.  I  have  placed
    no weight at all on unsigned  statements  and  very  little  weight  on
    letters other than those from medical practitioners.

171. I reminded myself of  evidence  heard  by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett which she found to be credible:

           - It was accepted that the appellant was involved in putting  up
             notices and attending demonstrations  at  university  and  the
             judge found that she was satisfied that both the appellant and
             her brother were involved in demonstrations, that she had been
             consistent  about.   .........  and  that  the  appellant  had
             produced a photograph of her brother with the political leader
             of the LTTE, Tamilchevan, which was not being disputed by  the
             respondent." (See paragraph 6 above)

           - Judge Grimmett was also satisfied that the appellant's  father
             had died following  an  incident  when  the  authorities  came
             looking for her elder brother.  The description the  appellant
             gave of the event was, recorded Judge Grimmett, "very detailed
             and her explanation for why the army did not actually take her
             brother with them on that  day,  namely  that  they  were  all
             screaming has the ring of  truth  about  it."  Judge  Grimmett
             accepted that the appellant was a supporter of the LTTE  on  a
             low level and  that  her  brother  carried  out  some  similar
             activities to her and that both of them and their family  were
             known to the authorities over a lengthy period  prior  to  her
             departure. (See paragraph 7 above)

           -  Judge  Grimmett  also  found  that  the  applicant  had  been
             detained,  because   the   evidence   she   gave   about   the
             circumstances of both detentions was very detailed.   She  was
             not satisfied that there was any inconsistency and noted  that
             the  appellant  had  not  attempted  to  embellish  the   2005
             incident.  Judge Grimmett  noted  that  the  medical  evidence
             supported the appellant's claim to have been  beaten  on  both
             legs, because the scaring was consistent with it.   She  found
             herself satisfied that the appellant  was  detained  and  ill-
             treated in 2006." (See paragraph 8 above)

           - The judge was also satisfied that that the  appellant's  uncle
             was killed by the army as a result of LTTE activities.   Judge
             Grimmett said:-

                  "The appellant does not say that the army came looking for
                  him [her uncle] at her home or that his wife  or  children
                  were ever hurt as a result of her uncle's activities.  She
                  does say however that after her uncle was killed  his  son
                  took a stick and hit the army and they tried to shoot him.
                   That information was volunteered by [the  appellant]  and
                  once again seems to me to be a comment unlikely to be made
                  up by her on the spur of the moment were the  account  not
                  true  and  if  the  uncle's  son  was  willing   to   seek
                  retribution in such a way it is likely in my view that  he
                  believed his father had been killed  by  the  army."  (See
                  paragraph 9 above)"

           - Judge Grimmett said that she," was  therefore  satisfied  that
             the army were aware of the whole family, particularly  bearing
             in mind that the appellant says at Q105  that  the  army  were
             occupying their house  and  they  had  to  move  out"".   (See
             paragraph 8 above)

Appellant's credibility

172. Had Judge Grimmett not made those findings, then I would have done  so.
    I found the appellant to be a  largely  credible  witness  despite  the
    inconsistencies highlighted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett.

My further findings of fact

173. I make the following further findings of fact:

          a. The appellant and her husband were  both  students  at  Jaffna
             University, and I  believe  that  to  be  significant  because
             students at Jaffna University  were,  at  the  relevant  time,
             viewed by the Sri Lankan  authorities  as  amongst  those  who
             stand for Tamil nationalism,  that  much  is  clear  from  the
             letter from Mr Kejendrem, General  Secretary,  Tamil  National
             People's Front and former Member  of  Parliament,  dated  15th
             March 2012.

          b. For the sake of completeness,  I  find  that  the  appellant's
             account of having been involved in Pongu Tamil Day in 2005  to
             be true.

          c. I have no doubt that other students at Jaffna University  were
             aware of the appellant's political sympathies,  those  of  her
             brother and of the man she married.  Likewise, I believe  that
             there is a real likelihood that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
             were also aware of her and her  brother's  sympathies.   Given
             that the authorities viewed students at Jaffna University with
             suspicion, I have no doubt that they had informants and  spies
             operating within the University.

          d. Again, for the avoidance of doubt, I accept  the  account  she
             gave me  of  her  arrest,  the  treatment  to  which  she  was
             subjected and her subsequent release from  detention  in  both
             2005 and in  2006.  The  respondent  accepted  that  while  at
             university the appellant attended student protests in  support
             of the LTTE (see paragraph 29 of the  respondent's  letter  of
             10th May 2012).

          e. I am prepared to believe the appellant's account  of  how  her
             friend was shot by soldiers in mistake for the appellant.

          f. I believe that the Sri Lankan authorities have  made  frequent
             calls at the appellant's house and have asked the  appellant's
             mother for a statement as to the appellant's whereabouts.

          g. I am prepared to accept that the  appellant  returned  to  Sri
             Lanka in 2011 to marry the man  she  met  at  University,  SJ,
             indeed, the respondent also accepted this (see paragraph 48 of
             the 10th May 2012 letter).  I also accept  that  CID  officers
             went to the appellant's home looking for the appellant  during
             her wedding and spoke to her mother who was attending  to  the
             reception arrangements.  I accept that, warned by her  mother,
             the appellant and SJ went to Colombo and  later  was  able  to
             leave Sri Lanka using her own passport.  I  accept  also  that
             the authorities have been back to see the  appellant's  mother
             and that they required her to make a statement implicating the
             appellant in diaspora activities in the United Kingdom.

          h. I accept that SJ eventually went back to his village  and  was
             taken for interview and asked about the appellant.  He was put
             on  reporting  conditions  and  sometime  in  June   2011   he
             disappeared.

          i. I  also  accept  that  with  the  aid  of  money  raised,  the
             appellant's mother was able to secure the release of  SJ  from
             an army camp.  Likewise I accept that his whereabouts are  now
             unknown.

          j. I do not believe that SJ is  in  India.   I  accept  that  the
             appellant's aunt was told that he may  have  been  seen  by  a
             friend, and I accept that the aunt and probably the  appellant
             believed that, but I suspect that the friend was trying to  be
             kind and give the appellant and her aunt  hope.   The  chances
             that the appellant's aunt's friend should bump into a man  she
             does not  know  and  has  never  before  met,  in  India,  and
             recognise him as SJ  is,  I  believe,  neither  plausible  nor
             credible.

          k. No one can possibly  understand  how  the  appellant  felt  on
             learning that she was pregnant after the disappearance of  her
             husband.  I accept that she felt that she had no choice but to
             terminate the pregnancy.  I  also  accept  that  in  2014  the
             appellant was hospitalised after drinking bleach.

          l. Whilst in the United Kingdom the appellant has taken  part  in
             demonstrations and marches sympathetic  to  the  Tamil  cause.
             She has made small  donations  to  the  University  of  Jaffna
             student funds.

          m. I found the appellant's aunt to be a credible witness.   I  do
             not think that she had been told the truth by the  friend  who
             though she saw SJ in India, but that is no reflection  on  the
             aunt's credibility.

174.  I  accept  that  the  appellant  has  twice  left  Sri  Lanka  without
    challenge.  I do not believe that in this appeal, that fact  undermines
    the appellant's credibility. We cannot know what  perceptions  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities may have of this appellant.  They may very well have
    wanted her to go home in order that her movements could  be  monitored.
    Likewise, when she last left, she left behind her husband.  He may very
    well have been detained in an attempt by the Sri Lankan authorities  to
    tempt the appellant back to Sri Lanka.   We  do  not  know  and  it  is
    pointless to speculate.

175. I also accept that it might be  thought  that  the  delay  in  claiming
    asylum undermines the appellant's claim.  It  is  always  necessary  to
    consider all the appellant's circumstances at the time  of  the  delay.
    This appellant had been in the United Kingdom with leave.   That  leave
    expired and  her  husband  was  put  on  reporting  restrictions.   She
    terminated her pregnancy.  Her husband then failed to obtain a visa  to
    come to the United Kingdom and was detained.   At  the  time  she  must
    have been going through utter turmoil.  In her particular circumstances
    I do not believe that the delay in claiming asylum does  undermine  her
    claim.

Country Guidance.

176. Mr Melvin drew my attention to the current  Country  Guidance  decision
    of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    319 (IAC).  At Paragraph 356 of GJ the Upper Tribunal say this:

         "356.    Having considered and reviewed all the evidence, including
         the latest UNHCR guidance, we  consider  that  the  change  in  the
         GOSL's approach is so significant that it is preferable to  reframe
         the risk analysis for the present political situation in Sri Lanka.
         We give the following country guidance:

                (1)    This  determination  replaces  all  existing  country
                guidance on Sri Lanka.

                (2)    The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has
                changed since the civil war ended in May 2009. The  LTTE  in
                Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and  there  have  been  no
                terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.

                (3)    The government's present  objective  is  to  identify
                Tamil activists in the diaspora who are  working  for  Tamil
                separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan  state
                enshrined in Amendment 6(1) to the Sri  Lankan  Constitution
                in 1983,  which  prohibits  the  'violation  of  territorial
                integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its focus is on preventing both (a)
                the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar  Tamil  separatist
                organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri
                Lanka.

                (4)    If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security
                services there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm
                requiring international protection.

                (5)    Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka
                for a person at real risk from the Sri  Lankan  authorities,
                since the government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and
                Tamils are required to  return  to  a  named  address  after
                passing through the airport.

                (6)    There are no detention  facilities  at  the  airport.
                Only those whose names appear  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
                detained from the airport. Any risk for those  in  whom  the
                Sri Lankan authorities are or become interested  exists  not
                at the airport, but after arrival in their home area,  where
                their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within a
                few days.

                (7)    The current categories of persons  at  real  risk  of
                persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether
                in detention or otherwise, are:

                    (a)    Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a
                    threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state
                    because they are, or are perceived to have a significant
                    role  in  relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
                    within the diaspora  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities
                    within Sri Lanka.

                    (b)    Journalists (whether in print or other media)  or
                    human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either  case,  have
                    criticised the Sri Lankan government, in particular  its
                    human  rights  record,  or  who  are   associated   with
                    publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.

                    (c)     Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the
                    Lessons   Learned    and    Reconciliation    Commission
                    implicating the Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces
                    or the Sri Lankan authorities  in  alleged  war  crimes.
                    Among those who may have witnessed war crimes during the
                    conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009,
                    only those who have  already  identified  themselves  by
                    giving such evidence would be known to  the  Sri  Lankan
                    authorities and therefore only they are at real risk  of
                    adverse attention or persecution on return as  potential
                    or actual war crimes witnesses.

                    (d)    A person whose name  appears  on  a  computerised
                    "stop" list accessible at the airport, comprising a list
                    of those against whom there is an extant court order  or
                    arrest warrant. Individuals  whose  name  appears  on  a
                    "stop" list will be stopped at the  airport  and  handed
                    over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
                    pursuance of such order or warrant.

                (8)    The Sri Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based  on
                sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri
                Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri Lankan  authorities  know
                that many Sri Lankan Tamils  travelled  abroad  as  economic
                migrants and also that everyone in the Northern Province had
                some level of involvement with the  LTTE  during  the  civil
                war.  In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an  individual's  past
                history will be relevant only  to  the  extent  that  it  is
                perceived by the Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
                present risk to the unitary Sri  Lankan  state  or  the  Sri
                Lankan Government.

                (9)    The authorities maintain a computerised intelligence-
                led "watch" list. A person whose name appears on  a  "watch"
                list is not reasonably likely to be detained at the  airport
                but will be monitored by the security services after his  or
                her return. If that monitoring does not indicate that such a
                person is  a  Tamil  activist  working  to  destabilise  the
                unitary Sri  Lankan  state  or  revive  the  internal  armed
                conflict, the individual in question  is  not,  in  general,
                reasonably likely to be detained  by  the  security  forces.
                That will be a question of fact in each case,  dependent  on
                any diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

                (10)   Consideration must always be given to whether, in the
                light of an  individual's  activities  and  responsibilities
                during the civil war,  the  exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
                (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article  12(2)  of
                the Qualification Directive). Regard should be  had  to  the
                categories  for  exclusion  set  out  in  the   "Eligibility
                Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection  Needs
                of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR on  21
                December 2012.

Conclusions

177. What puts many people at risk of persecution  is  not  what  they  have
    done or are doing, but what  they  are  perceived  as  having  done  or
    perceived as having prepared to do.  It is impossible  to  put  oneself
    into the shoes of the potential persecutor and  envisage  the  outcome,
    because the potential persecutor will often not  act  rationally.   One
    cannot know what perceptions the Sri Lankan  authorities  may  have  of
    this appellant and her family members.

178. My consideration of the evidence, including  the  background  evidence,
    leads me to believe, however, that there is a real likelihood that  she
    will be perceived as being in the category identified in paragraph  356
    (3).  Her whole family are known to the  authorities.  Her  mother  was
    spoken to by the authorities and asked to make a  statement  about  the
    appellant. One younger brother, PK, fled the country and now lives as a
    refugee in France.  Another brother has been recognised  as  a  refugee
    and lives in  Coventry.   One  brother  was  shot  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, as was an uncle. An Aunt was detained by  the  authorities
    and the appellant's mother in law was  detained  and  is  currently  on
    reporting restrictions. We know, and I believe that  there  is  a  real
    likelihood that the Sri Lankan authorities will  also  know,  that  the
    appellant's maternal aunt is married to another refugee living  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant has another brother living in Sri  Lanka
    who suffers from depression.  He lives at home with his mother in  fear
    of the authorities.  His situation means that he is much less likely to
    attract the adverse attention  of  the  authorities.   The  appellant's
    husband, PJ, was of interest to the authorities and was also a  student
    with Tamil  sympathies  studying  at  Jaffna  University.   It  is  not
    unreasonable to assume that as far as the Sri  Lankan  authorities  are
    concerned, he has disappeared.

179. I believe that the appellant  does  fall  squarely  into  the  category
    identified in paragraph 356 (7) a of GJ and  Others  (Post  civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 000319 (IAC).  I believe  that  she
    is perceived by the authorities in Sri Lanka to have, or to have had, a
    significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil  separatism  within
    the diaspora, even though, to those who have seen and  heard  her  give
    evidence, she appears to be a terribly depressed individual  completely
    incapable of playing any, let alone any significant, role  in  relation
    to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora, likely to excite
    the interest of the Sri Lankan authorities.  I believe that there is  a
    very serious likelihood that if returned to Sri  Lanka,  the  appellant
    will be at risk of further detention and questioning and that  at  that
    stage she will be at a real and serious risk of serious harm

180. For all these reasons I find that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  be
    recognised as a refugee and  I  allow  her  appeal  under  the  Refugee
    Convention.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed accordingly. No fee is paid or payable  and  therefore
there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

