
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05866/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                TAHIRA ILYAS
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent notified the Appellant of her decision to refuse  to
         grant asylum or ancillary protection on 20 March 2015.  Her  appeal
         against that decision was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Butler ("the Judge") following a hearing on 15 July 2015.  This  is
         an appeal against that decision.

      2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson  granted  permission  to
         appeal (24 August 2015) on the ground that

             "... it is arguable that the Judge has misdirected himself  in
             not addressing why  the  Appellant  was  not  able  to  freely
             practice her Ahmadi faith in light of HJ (Iran) principles [HJ
             (Iran) v SSHD; HT  (Cameroon)  v  SSHD  [2010]  UKSC  31]  and
             finding inconsistencies on matters such as how  she  practised
             her faith which arguably could be material to the outcome."

The Judge's decision

      3. The relevant evidence can be summarised in this way.

      4. The Appellant is an Ahmadi  [53  of  the  Judge's  decision]  whose
         husband was killed in 2010 during an attack on the Mosque.  It  was
         accepted by Mr Nath and Mr Janjua  that  these  finding  should  be
         preserved.

      5. The Appellant claims [5 and 16-18] to have  received  threats  then
         and [30] subsequently, [20 and 22] was  precluded  from  practising
         her faith openly, [26] did not claim asylum on a visit in  2011  as
         she hoped matters would improve, [23] delayed claiming asylum by  4
         days when she arrived in 2012 as she had high blood pressure and  a
         severe headache and wanted to  take  legal  advice,  and  [24]  had
         practised her faith openly since being here. The sale of her  house
         the day she arrived here [30] was unconnected to her claim. Her son
         and sister have both been granted refugee status here [19].

      6. The Judge found that  [54]  she  did  not  practise  her  faith  in
         Pakistan as there was an inconsistency in her evidence that she did
         not practise her faith openly due to a lack  of  religious  freedom
         and her statement that she attended her own Mosque. The Judge notes
         that [54] there are discrepancies between her evidence and that  of
         the Ahmadi Muslim Association over  whether  she  practices  it  in
         public or private. Therefore [55] little weight was attached to the
         Ahmadi Muslim Association letter.

      7. The Judge [56] did  not  find  it  credible  she  would  return  to
         Pakistan in 2011 if she had been threatened prior to that.

      8. The Judge found [57] that the sale of her house the day she arrived
         suggested she had no intention of returning to Pakistan.

      9. The Judge found [58] that the claim she was unwell when she arrived
         in 2012 lacked credibility and the fact her son was at the  airport
         to collect her  on  arrival  indicated  she  had  no  intention  of
         applying for asylum when she arrived.

The hearing before me

     10. I raised  with  the  representatives  at  the  outset  whether  the
         decision could stand, apart from anything else, given the  possible
         lack of consideration as to whether, given  her  claim  to  be  the
         widow  (and  consequently  family  member)  of  a  prominent  local
         preacher and community leader who had been murdered in the  Mosque,
         the Judge should have considered whether her possible membership of
         a particular social group had adequately been considered separately
         to  her  claim  based  on  her  own  religious  activity.  That  is
         particularly so where it was claimed that her son  and  sister  had
         been granted refugee status  here.  To  me  this  was  a  "Robinson
         obvious" point (Robinson v SSHD and IAT [1997] EWCA  Civ  3090  [37
         and 39]).

     11. Mr Nath accepted that this was a valid concern. He  submitted  that
         the inconsistencies identified by the  Judge  and  the  Appellant's
         actions in not applying in 2011 or when she arrived  in  2012  were
         relevant and that HJ (Iran) was implicitly  considered  without  it
         being spelt out. He submitted that there may be errors but they are
         not material. He submitted it was not an easy matter  to  consider.
         He noted that there were 2 or 3 years between her  husband's  death
         and her application.

     12. Mr Janjua relied on the application.

Discussion

     13. The Judge is correct to say  that  the  delay  in  claiming  asylum
         adversely affects her credibility. The Judge was entitled  to  find
         that the lack of evidence of her medical  problems  undermined  her
         claim that this was a reason for her delaying  claiming  asylum.  I
         agree with Mr Nath that these are relevant.

     14. The Judge was entitled to find that the house sale  indicated  that
         she did not intend to return to Pakistan. I do not see how this  is
         relevant as if she was fleeing persecution she may well not  intend
         to return to Pakistan.

     15. I do  not  agree  with  Mr  Nath  that  HJ  (Iran)  was  implicitly
         considered without it being spelt out, or that the  matters  I  set
         out below [16 and 17] are not material or cannot be core matters of
         relevance requiring a specific finding and an  assessment  of  what
         impact they may have on either her own religious  activity  or  her
         membership of a particular social group either of which could found
         a valid asylum claim.

     16. The Judge made no finding on whether the Appellant's husband was  a
         prominent member of the local Ahmadi Mosque or a  regular  preacher
         and the President of the community in the area. The Judge  made  no
         finding on whether the Appellant's son or sister had  been  granted
         refugee status here.  The Judge made no finding on what the  impact
         her being the wife and family  member  of  a  (possibly)  prominent
         local leader who was killed in a Mosque may have on her ability  or
         desire to practise her faith openly.

     17. In relation to the apparent discrepancy between  her  evidence  and
         that of the Ahmadi Community Association it was unclear to me  that
         the Judge considered how her attendance  at  the  Mosque  could  be
         perceived by onlookers with an adverse interest in  her  family  as
         anything other than open practise of her  faith  whatever  she  did
         when she was there. It is not readily apparent that the Judge  gave
         consideration to why she would  not  support  her  husband  in  his
         endeavours (if he had the local prominence claimed) or why she, who
         was accepted as being an Ahmadi, would not be  perceived  by  those
         with an adverse interest in him as practicing her  faith,  whatever
         she did publicly, if he was so active and prominent.

     18. In my judgement there was therefore a material error of law in  the
         decision and I set aside  the  decision.  As  I  have  stated,  the
         preserved findings are those referred to  in  the  Judges  decision
         [53].

     19. I therefore determined that, given the lack of  core  findings  and
         consideration of a potentially relevant ground for granting refugee
         status, it was in the interest of justice to;

          1) Remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  remake  the
             decision,

          2) To list the matter before a Judge other than Judge Butler, and

          3) Relist the matter on  the  1st  available  date  with  a  time
             estimate of 3 hours and an Urdu interpreter being required.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal on the  terms  identified
    in paragraph 19 above.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 October 2015

