
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05109/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2015                           |On 20 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                 JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     o a
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 1 January  1996.   He
    first came to the United Kingdom on 2 August 2009 aged 13.  He  claimed
    asylum the following day and his application for leave  to  remain  was
    refused on 23 November 2009 but he was granted discretionary  leave  to
    remain in the UK until 22 November 2012.  Before that leave expired the
    appellant applied for an extension and received a decision dated 7 July
    2014 refusing to vary his leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom  following  a  refusal  to  grant  him   asylum,   humanitarian
    protection and protection under the European  Convention.   A  decision
    was  made  further  to  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 (removal person with statutorily  extended  leave)
    to remove the appellant from the UK.   A  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    dated 3 July 2014 was issued.

 2. Essentially the appellant claimed that his father was  a  commander  in
    the Taliban and later left to join  the  government  and  three  months
    after he joined the government the  Taliban  came  to  the  appellant's
    house, called his father outside and  shot  and  killed  him.   It  was
    stated that this was inconsistent with the appellant's claim  that  his
    father had worked for the government for about a  year  after  joining.
    When the appellant  was  asked  to  explain  this  discrepancy  on  two
    occasions he failed to give a satisfactory explanation.  In his  asylum
    interview the appellant stated "one year the Taliban came one night and
    shot him" (AIR, question 77).  It was considered that there was a large
    discrepancy between three months and one year.

 3. When asked during his asylum interview what date his father was  killed
    he initially stated it was three months prior  to  his  departure  from
    Afghanistan (question 64) and then changed his account and  stated  the
    Taliban killed his father approximately five years ago  (AIR,  question
    64-65).

 4. Consideration has been given to his age and level of education  but  it
    was considered reasonable to expect him to be consistent about when his
    father was killed and when he went into hiding from  the  Taliban.   It
    was concluded that the information in his witness statement, paragraphs
    5 to 8 indicated that he went into hiding and  left  Afghanistan  in  a
    much shorter time period than the five year gap  he  described  in  his
    asylum interview (AIR, question 64-65).   The  inconsistencies  damaged
    his credibility.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Afako made  an  adverse  credibility  finding
    against the appellant and dismissed the appeal on both asylum and human
    rights grounds.

 6. An application for permission to appeal on which Miss Heller relied  at
    the hearing submitted that the judge fell into a material error of  law
    in finding that the appellant had family members in  Afghanistan.   The
    judge gave no reasoning and cited no support  from  objective  evidence
    for the assertion that the respondent was "under  constraints"  due  to
    the lack of personnel to trace the appellant's family.  The  respondent
    had failed to provide any evidence about what action had been taken  by
    the FCO and the outcome or  whether  it  was  undertaken  in  a  timely
    fashion.  The respondent took no  steps  to  carry  out  tracing  until
    February 2014.  The appellant asserted  that  the  respondent  had  not
    complied with the duty to trace pursuant to KA (Afghanistan) & Others v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ  1014.   In
    accordance with KA the respondent's failure to  comply  with  his  duty
    potentially deprived the appellant of the best evidence that his family
    could not be traced and  therefore  he  had  no  family  protection  in
    Afghanistan.  EU (Afghanistan and Others) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 32 considered AK and established  there
    should be a causative link between the breach of the Secretary of State
    and the appellant's claim for protection.  The causative link here  was
    shown that the failure was relevant to an assessment of risk on return.



 7. In the second ground of complaint the judge erred in failing to give  a
    reasoned decision on the risk to the appellant on return to Afghanistan
    as a young single male and failed to consider the private  guidance  at
    paragraph 18 of KA (Afghanistan)  "apparent  or  assumed  age  is  more
    important than chronological age" given the  kinds  of  risk  in  issue
    which included the false recruitment  or  the  sexual  exploitation  of
    young vulnerable males.  The case law in JS (former unaccompanied child
    - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 reiterates the  point
    that Section 55 of the Borders, Immigration and Citizenship Act 1999 no
    longer arose but when making the assessment whether removal would  lead
    to a breach of Article 8 all relevant  factors  should  be  taken  into
    account including age, background,  length  of  residence  in  the  UK,
    family and general circumstances including any particular vulnerability
    and whether an appellant will have family or  other  adult  support  on
    return to his home country appropriate to his particular needs.

 8. The judge stated that he was satisfied that the appellant  was  not  an
    orphan without family members in Afghanistan and that the appellant had
    sufficient skills to navigate successfully any  process  of  return  to
    Kabul.

 9. Further the judge failed to consider the findings in AK (Article 15(c))
    Afghanistan [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC).  In other words the judge failed  to
    apply the relevant guidance to its assessment of the risk of return  to
    Afghanistan of young unaccompanied males which constituted  a  material
    error of law.

10. The judge had erred in making credibility findings between paragraph 17
    and 20 and had not correctly applied the relevant guidance in assessing
    the credibility of young witnesses  or  relevant  guidance  in  how  to
    approach factual evidence in asylum claims.  As stated by Owen J in  AA
    (unattended children) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00016 the standard  of
    proof is low and the principle should be  applied  more  generously  to
    children who should liberally be given the benefit of the doubt.   This
    was consistent with the Joint Presidential Guidance Note  Number  2  of
    2010.  The judge had not taken into account the fact that the appellant
    gave a detailed and internally consistent account of his experiences in
    Afghanistan as well as giving credible responses to  the  Secretary  of
    State's reasons for refusal letter  in  his  witness  statement  of  19
    August 2014.  The judge has not noted or given reasons as to why he did
    not accept the appellant's explanation at paragraphs 1  and  2  of  his
    witness statement about his lack of knowledge  of  the  length  of  his
    father's involvement with the Taliban.

11. The judge failed to  apply  the  relevant  criteria  in  assessing  the
    appellant's evidence to which is a material error of law.

12. The judge also erred finally in her  approach  to  Article  8  and  the
    assessment of proportionality affected by erroneous findings  that  the
    appellant had family members in Afghanistan to return to.  This  was  a
    vulnerable young man who had  been  entirely  alone  having  spent  the
    previous five years of his life in a foreign  country  and  would  lack
    protection of extended family network.

13. In her submissions at the hearing Miss Heller stated that the appellant
    had given responses to the reasons for refusal letter  that  the  judge
    had not engaged with those despite the fact that the  judge  relied  on
    the discrepancies.  The appellant was at the top end  of  the  spectrum
    with respect to KA.  The appellant had given his last  address  clearly
    in his SEF and at the start of his asylum interview.  There has been no
    attempt by the appellant to conceal his home address and there  was  no
    evidence before the Tribunal save for the reasons  for  refusal  letter
    that there had been any action on the part  of  the  respondent.   This
    appellant was a victim of the failure of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    comply with the tracing duty and there is a causal  link  between  that
    failure and his increased risk on return as he has no family to support
    him.

14. He was a single young male and only 13 when he came  to  the  UK.   The
    importance of a family link was set out in the grounds of appeal.

15.  Mr  Melvin  strenuously  resisted  the  application.   The  judge  had
    adequately  assessed  credibility  and  had  made  references  to   the
    appellant's age when assessing his interviews at paragraphs 16  and  17
    of the determination.  The current case law demonstrated that an  adult
    could be returned to Kabul and there were numerous  packages  available
    on return for integration.  This was clear from AK, the case  law.   AK
    demonstrated that the appellant could be returned to Kabul.  There  was
    no causal link to show that the appellant could  be  recruited  by  the
    Taliban or that the conditions  in  the  country  were  relevant.   The
    Taliban had little influence in Kabul.  There was  a  backdrop  of  the
    adverse credibility findings in relation to whether the  appellant  had
    family in Afghanistan and the judge was entitled to make this  finding.
    The judge had found that the appellant had  been  living  independently
    for two years before the hearing and was able to take care of  himself.
    They first refusal letter was not challenged and the judge  had  looked
    at the evidence of an 18 year old male  whose  case  presented  nothing
    exceptional.

Conclusions

16. It is not entirely clear who was present with the appellant at the date
    of his first screening interview  on  3  August  2009.   He  stated  at
    question 11.2 "I have no one back home and my father  was  a  commander
    and he was killed". Following that screening  interview,  there  was  a
    London Borough of Croydon age assessment report which stated "based  on
    OA physical appearance, demeanour and  social  history,  assessors  and
    duty manager joint decision is that  OA  is  age  13.   OA  brought  no
    documentation to UK."  The appellant when interviewed  stated  that  he
    left Afghanistan three months before his arrival.  The  age  assessment
    took place on  6  August  2009  which  would  appear  to  postdate  the
    screening interview.  The SEF form was completed on 3 September 2009.

17. One of the issues which is essential to this appeal is the  credibility
    of the appellant both in terms of his claim for asylum and his  ability
    to be able to return to Kabul bearing in mind his age.

18. Although the judge at paragraph 16 and 17 makes reference to  the  fact
    that the appellant was very young the judge makes no reference  to  the
    guidelines as referred to above and on an analysis of paragraph  17  it
    does not appear that the judge has in fact applied those guidelines  in
    practice.  The judge states "as for discrepancies I consider  that  the
    respondent was right to observe that the appellant had  had  given  two
    versions of the length of his father's involvement with the Taliban: he
    gave the period of one year and then also three months.

19. The appellant stated that in his witness statement at paragraph 4  that
    "after about three months of leaving the Taliban the  Taliban  came  to
    our house and called my father outside.  They killed him  in  front  of
    our house."  At question 75 of his asylum interview he  was  asked  the
    question "do you know approximately how many years ago this  happened?"
    and he stated when he left the Taliban.  At question 76 asked  when  he
    left the Taliban to join the government, he  replied   "it  happened  a
    long time ago.  He worked for the government for  about  a  year  after
    joining.  After that the Taliban found out and came to our house".   It
    was then put to the appellant again in interview "in your statement you
    said that the Taliban found out  about  your  father  working  for  the
    government three months after he left the Taliban.  Now you  have  said
    he worked for the government for about a year after joining.   Can  you
    please explain this discrepancy?".  It would appear  from  the  witness
    statement that the appellant claimed  the  father  was  murdered  after
    about three months, and, in his asylum interview that he worked for the
    government for about a year which could not be possible but equally the
    appellant stated "it  happened  a  long  time  ago".   In  his  witness
    statement dated 19 August 2014 the appellant addressed the question  of
    how long his father had worked for the government before he was  killed
    and he stated that as a child his father did not tell him who he worked
    for or for how long.

20. The difficulty would  appear  that  the  appellant  in  fact  gave  two
    different responses which were contradictory and  then  in  fact  at  a
    later date stated that he had no idea.  Nonetheless the judge  did  not
    appear to acknowledge this or even address  any  explanation.   I  note
    from the interview is  that  there  were  some  difficulties  with  the
    interpretation.  At [Q63]the interpreter stated:

         "My father was killed three  months  prior  to  my  departure  from
         Afghanistan.  4 or 5 years (interpreter - I  did  not  get  clearly
         what he said - interpreter asks applicant to repeat).  I  was  very
         young.  The Taliban would come to our house to  our  village.   The
         Taliban would come to our house.  My maternal uncle would hide me."



    and when asked to clarify exactly when his father  was  killed  he  had
    stated "about 5 years ago".

21. The judge albeit that he recorded at [16] that the appellant  was  very
    young merely stated "even making allowance  for  the  appellant's  age,
    this is something that he  should  have  been  in  a  position  to  get
    straight" with reference to the length of time that his  father  worked
    for the government.

22. In essence the credibility assessment seems to hinge on one  particular
    discrepancy, albeit that the  judge  states  "as  to  his  capacity  to
    provide detail I note from the contents of his interview and  statement
    that he was able to provide considerable detail regarding the situation
    in Jalalabad and  of  the  journey  that  brought  him  to  the  United
    Kingdom".

23. I turn to the question of tracing the family and the  judge  stated  at
    paragraph 26 that he accepted there was a nexus between  the  issue  of
    tracing and the protection issue and it  could  only  be  concluded  as
    there had been no further information received from the  FCO  regarding
    the appellant's family from a request made by the respondent  that  the
    Tribunal was left "without  additional  material  with  regard  to  the
    appellant's claim about his family".  Bearing in mind the issues that I
    have raised with regards to the findings  and  credibility  it  appears
    that it was on this finding of credibility that the judge had based his
    conclusion at [35], "I have already found that  he  continues  to  have
    family  members  in  that  country".   The  fact  is  the  respondent's
    enquiries through the FCO have not yielded results.

24. I find that the key to  this  is  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    evidence which was taken when he was 13  years  old.   The  credibility
    findings go to the heart of this appeal.  This is not a case where  the
    appellant was not co-operative in providing the address and details  to
    the Secretary of State and, as pointed out in the skeleton argument  of
    Miss Heller, it is submitted that the  nexus  between  the  failure  to
    trace and the appellant's  asylum  claim  is  that  he  may  have  been
    corroborating his account in its material  particulars  i.e.  villagers
    who knew of or were witnesses to his father's murder and the  Taliban's
    attempt to take young men from the village to join them.

25. There was also the question of the assessment under Article  8  whereby
    the Secretary of State had not complied with the duty under Section 55.
     It is clear that this duty was not undertaken in 2009 when  that  duty
    may have had a relevance.

26. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Notice of Decision

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 12th February 2015

Judge Rimington
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

