

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: AA/05236/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 18th November 2014                        |On 8th January 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              Mohammad Aralikci
                       ( no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:         Ms Mughal, Counsel instructed by Montague
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Turkey date of birth 12th December 1994.
     He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  Griffith)  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to remove him from the United Kingdom. That decision  followed
    rejection of the Appellant's claim to international protection.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that  he  faced  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Turkey for  reasons  of  his  imputed  political
    opinion and ethnicity (Kurdish). He  claimed  that  the  gendarmes  and
    police in his local area accused him of helping the PKK and that he was
    put under pressure to become an informer. He was detained but  released
    by the court on the condition that he report. He  did  not  do  so  and
    instead left Turkey unlawfully.

 3. The Respondent rejected  the  claim  for  want  of  credibility.  In  a
    determination dated the 10th September 2014 the First-tier Tribunal did
    the same. Judge Griffiths took into account that the Appellant was only
    17 when he was first interviewed and 19 when he  gave  his  substantive
    interview, but nevertheless found the account  to  contain  substantial
    discrepancies and inconsistencies with the country background material.
      He took account, as he  was  bound  to  do,  of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant destroyed his passport en route to the UK and failed to claim
    asylum  in  France  or  Belgium,  despite  being  apprehended  by   the
    authorities in both countries and being advised  about  being  able  to
    claim there. He found it to be implausible that the Appellant's  school
    would have called the gendarmes  in  to  question  him  about  speaking
    Kurdish, given the background material indicating that Kurdish has been
    officially taught in schools since 2012.  The Appellant  said  that  he
    had encountered gendarmes on four occasions whilst in the mountains and
    had described their  uniforms  as  "blue,  brown,  burgundy  and  plum"
    camouflage; Judge Griffiths rejected this evidence since he had  before
    him a photograph of the Turkish gendarmerie uniform which  "is  nothing
    like" the description given by the Appellant.  Further it was not clear
    why they would ill-treat him or accuse him of anything just because  he
    was in possession of a bottle of water.   Finally  the  Tribunal  found
    that even if the Appellant had been required to report the  authorities
    have shown no interest in him since October 2013, indicating that there
    is no current risk.  Judge Griffiths found  it  more  likely  that  the
    Appellant had been sent here by his parents - to live with his  brother
    - because he did not wish to undertake military service.    The  appeal
    was dismissed.


 4. The Appellant now appeals the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    various grounds. I deal with each in turn.



    My Findings

 5. Paragraph 8 of the grounds reads as follows:


         "At paragraph 30 of the determination the Immigration  Judge  takes
         against the Appellant for not being able to recognise  the  uniform
         of the gendarmes. With respect the Appellant had stated that it was
         soldiers that he had encountered in the mountains that were wearing
         tabards which were in  camouflage.  With  respect  the  Immigration
         Judge  appears  to  discount  this  evidence;  this  is  even  more
         surprising  given  that  the  bundle  contained  evidence  of   the
         gendarmes in tabards. However, of more concern is  the  Immigration
         Judge's finding that  the  Appellant  was  not  apprehended.  There
         appears to be no cogent reasoning behind this finding."


    Having read paragraph 30 of the determination, and this  ground,  I  am
    none the wiser as to what this challenge exactly is. The point that the
    Judge  makes  is  that  the  Appellant  described  the  gendarmes   who
    approached him in the mountains as  wearing  a  camouflage  uniform  of
    various colours. That description was at odds with  the  photograph  in
    the bundle which showed the uniform to be entirely plain.  He therefore
    did not believe that he had had an encounter with  any  gendarmes,  nor
    therefore that he was detained.   The assertion in the grounds that the
    Appellant said it was soldiers who  wore  that  uniform  is  completely
    incorrect: the description is found in response to Q61 of the interview
    where he is asked to describe the Turkish gendarmes uniform.    Nor  is
    it immediately obvious why tabards are relevant, since the tabard  worn
    by the gendarme in the  photograph  is  also  completely  plain.   This
    ground has no merit.


 6. The next paragraph in the grounds reads:


         "The first part of paragraph 31 of the determination is  confusing.
         The Immigration Judge then  decides  not  to  follow  the  'country
         guidance' decision  of  [2004]  UKIAT  00312  IK  (Turkey).  It  is
         submitted that insofar as the Immigration Judge  purports  to  find
         that on the basis of  the  most  recent  background  material  that
         arbitrary arrest and detention no longer takes place in  Turkey  or
         that  there  no  longer  occurs  arbitrary  violence  during   such
         detention that is misguided and simply perverse".


    The latter observation might be  used  to  describe  this  ground.  The
    determination is not in any way confusing. The Judge does  not  "decide
    not to follow the country guidance". As paragraph  35  makes  clear  he
    specifically has regard to the decision in IK. He does not, anywhere in
    the determination, make a finding that  the  Turkish  authorities  have
    stopped arbitrarily detaining or ill treating people. It  is  just  not
    accepted that  this  person  has  been  subject  to  such  persecution.
    Similarly the assertion in the grounds that  the  credibility  findings
    are "predicated  on  the  Immigration  Judge's  misguided  belief  that
    arbitrary detention and ill treatment did not take place in  Turkey  in
    2012" is not made out. I can find nowhere in the determination that the
    Judge makes such findings.

 7. There is, in short, nothing wrong with the credibility findings in this
    determination. The Judge does not  seek  to  depart  from  the  country
    guidance, nor to make  findings  contrary  to  the  country  background
    material.  A further point is taken in challenge  to  the  'section  8'
    findings which are said to be "extraordinary"  and  "not  sustainable".
    The argument appears to be that the Tribunal was not entitled  to  make
    section 8 findings against the Appellant because he was  17  and  under
    the "complete control" of an agent. The Judge took the Appellant's  age
    into account in making his  findings;  the  point  was  that  when  the
    Appellant was with the Belgian and French authorities he was not  under
    the control of any agent and presumably could have  taken  them  up  on
    their suggestion that he claim asylum were it not for the fact that  he
    was coming to the UK in order to be with his brother.




      Decisions

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law and it is upheld.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           23rd December
                                    2014
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 3rd October 2014 by Designated First-tier
Tribunal Judge French

