
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal
Number: AA/05892/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford Phoenix House          |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 16 May 2016                           |  On 20 May 2016                  |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                  M F F J M

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Logan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 17  March  2015.  The  appeal  against  that
       decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Brown  following
       a hearing on 15 September 2015.  This  is  an  appeal  against  that
       decision. The brevity of the decision is possible due to the  common
       sense displayed by Mr Diwnycz.

The grant of permission


    2. First-tier Tribunal Judge White  granted  permission  to  appeal  (4
       November 2015) on the ground that;


          "it is arguable that ... the judge was  in  error  by  relying  on
          unsubstantiated assumptions concerning  the  detention  and  court
          process that were against the weight of the evidence."


The hearing before me

    3. In the grounds seeking permission to appeal  more  detail  is  given
       regarding this assertion. It is unnecessary for me to detail them as
       Mr  Diwyncz  conceded  that  there   were   indeed   unsubstantiated
       assertions and speculation to such an  extent  regarding  the  court
       process and documentation produced that, despite what it said in the
       Rule 24 notice, there was a material error of law and  the  decision
       could not stand.

Discussion

    4. The Judge found as follows;


          [46] the  Appellant  "...was  detained  without  charge  and  ill-
          treated."

    5. This finding was not challenged by the Respondent.  The  assumptions
       and speculation related to what happened after this  do  not  affect
       this finding. Therefore that finding  stands.  Both  representatives
       were of the view that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal for a rehearing given the absence of  findings  beyond
       that detention.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

         I remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  not
before Judge Brown.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
17 May 2016
