
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-WYL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05323/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 November 2016                          | On 18 November 2016          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                     ASA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Asanovic, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


Rule 14:  The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted at an earlier stage.  We find  it  appropriate  to
do so as there are protection issues.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  appellant  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies to both the appellant and  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   ASA, the appellant, is a citizen of Iraq.  He was born on 5 April  1996
    and is now aged 20.  He is an Iraqi Kurd and was born and brought up in
    the Sulaymaniyah Province of the Independent Kurdistan  Region  ("IKR")
    of Iraq.  He claims to have left Iraq on 25 April  2013  by  lorry  for
    Iran.  In a screening interview on 19 June 2013 he stated he left  Iraq
    as he was at risk of being killed by his  former  girlfriend's  family.
    In that interview,  he  gave  the  following  account  as  recorded  at
    paragraph 3.1:

         "I was in love with a girl from my village (HA).  The  family  were
         not in support of the relationship.  When she  became  pregnant,  I
         took her away and we went to live in Sulaymaniyah.  I then went  to
         work one day and before I got back  she  had  been  killed  by  her
         family.  This happened on 25 April 2013 and I fled."

2.   The appellant eventually ended up in France having travelled there  via
    Turkey.   On  27  March  2013,  he  was  fingerprinted  by  the  French
    authorities when he claimed to be an Iranian  national  named  Ako  Ali
    although in his screening interview; he failed to mention that  he  had
    been fingerprinted in France.  He said he had only  been  fingerprinted
    for ID in Iraq and on arrival in the United  Kingdom  (paragraph  2.7).
    In any event he arrived in the United Kingdom on the back  of  a  lorry
    and was arrested by the police on 23 May 2013.  He subsequently claimed
    asylum on 19 June 2013.

3.   The appellant submitted a Statement of  Evidence  Form  dated  26  June
    2013 and was interviewed in relation to his application on 14  November
    2013.  He subsequently submitted a statement  dated  16  February  2015
    accompanied by lengthy submissions, prepared by solicitors  on  Article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive and  Article  3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human  Rights.   His  application  was  rejected  by  the
    respondent on 11 March 2015 when a decision was also  taken  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom.  Full  details  of  the  reasons  for  the
    refusal of the appellant's application are to be found in  Annex  A  of
    the decision.  The  appellant  was  entitled  to  appeal  against  this
    decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under  Section   82   of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   In  a  decision  promulgated  on  12  September  2016  the  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   The appellant sought permission to appeal to this Tribunal and  it  was
    granted on 14 October 2016.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

6.   It was first submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  making  an
    adverse credibility finding at paragraph 41 of  its  determination  had
    failed to have regard to the appellant being a child  at  the  relevant
    time.

7.   Secondly, at paragraph 43 the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  adverse
    credibility findings based on a detailed analysis  of  the  appellant's
    position at various points  following  his  arrival  in  this  country,
    regarding his employment for a short period in Iraq.

8.   Counsel  carefully  took  us  through  the  position  advanced  by  the
    appellant on each of these occasions.  She submitted that there was  no
    inconsistency between the various accounts given by  him.   Rather  his
    position was a  wholly  consistent  one.   Accordingly  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in holding that this was a basis upon which it could
    make  adverse  credibility  findings.   In  any  event   the   detailed
    analytical approach  taken  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  an
    appropriate one where on a number of occasions when he gave  statements
    on this matter he was a child.

9.   The next argument advanced sought to attack the finding by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at paragraph 45 relative to the failure of the  appellant
    to explain how he was tracked down in Sulaymaniyah and the use of  that
    finding to make negative credibility findings regarding the  appellant.



10.  It was first submitted that there was  no  duty  on  the  appellant  to
    explain this.  Secondly, this question was asked by Counsel: how  could
    he explain this without approaching his persecutors?

11.  The final matter put  before  us  was  a  challenge  to  the  following
    finding  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   at   paragraph   45   of   its
    determination:

         "The current as opposed to historic evidence  on  risk  of  men  of
         honour  killing  does  not  suggest  that  a  man  involved  in   a
         relationship with an unmarried girl who falls pregnant as a  result
         of that relationship is necessarily at risk."

    It was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  take
    account of the Danish Immigration  Services  Report  and  the  Canadian
    Immigration Report both of which were before it and in  particular  the
    Canadian Report at paragraph 1.2.  In addition it had  failed  to  take
    account of the expert evidence.  It was further submitted that the  use
    of the word 'necessarily' indicates that the standard of proof  applied
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge was too high.

Reply for the Respondent

12.  Ms Ahmed argued that the first three grounds of  appeal  ran  together.
    She first submitted by reference to  paragraph  35  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination where it said this:

         "I also take into account any relevant guidance and  in  particular
         the "Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Appellant  Guidance"
         (Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010) where relevant."

    that it had taken into account the appellant's age where necessary.

13.  She submitted that it was important to note that by  the  time  of  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant was  no  longer  a
    child.

14.  It was her position that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  make
    its findings at paragraph 41 that the appellant had misled  the  French
    authorities.  This was  not  disputed.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    entitled to consider  this  fact  in  relation  to  the  issue  of  the
    appellant's overall credibility.

15.  It was her position that the First-tier Tribunal had had proper  regard
    to a number of factors which undermined the appellant's credibility and
    that it was entitled to arrive at the conclusion that his evidence  was
    not capable of being accepted.

16.  With respect to the fourth ground of appeal (regarding  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's approach to background evidence) she submitted that it stood
    or fell on the basis of the decision on  the  first  three  grounds  of
    appeal and she added nothing further with respect to this matter.

Discussion

17.  At paragraph 35 the First-tier Tribunal sets out that  it  is  required
    to have regard to the fact that at various stages the appellant  was  a
    child.

18.  From paragraph 41 onwards where the First-tier Tribunal turns  to  look
    at the issue of credibility, however we can identify no point at  which
    it applies the guidance regarding children.  It gives no weight to  the
    fact that the appellant was a child when he made his  journey  to  this
    country, arrived here and gave his initial interviews.  We believe that
    this failure has  materially  affected  the  adverse  findings  on  the
    credibility of the appellant made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This
    failure to apply the guidance is most clearly seen  in  the  comparison
    exercise carried out at paragraph 43 which  takes  no  account  of  the
    appellant being a child at the time of certain of the  interviews.   It
    has no regard to his vulnerability at that time.

19.  Nor at paragraph 41 does the First-tier Tribunal  have  any  regard  to
    the appellant's age and vulnerability at the  time  when  he  made  the
    statements referred to therein.

20.  We are persuaded that the First-tier Tribunal's  failure  to  have  any
    regard to the guidance regarding how to approach its task when  dealing
    with a child amounts to a material error of law.

21.  Turning once more to  paragraph  43,  we  consider  that  the  argument
    advanced by Counsel for the appellant that there are no inconsistencies
    in the various versions of events  put  forward  by  the  appellant  is
    correct.  When we asked the respondent's representative to  direct  our
    attention to any such inconsistency she was unable to do so.  It is our
    clear impression  that  the  core  of  the  appellant's  story  remains
    entirely consistent  throughout.   There  was  no  basis  arising  from
    inconsistency between the various versions of events put forward by the
    appellant to make any adverse findings regarding his credibility.

22.  This exercise carried out by the First-tier Tribunal  at  paragraph  43
    and its decision that it  evidenced  material  inconsistencies  clearly
    forms an important, if not critical, part of its consideration  of  the
    credibility of the appellant.  We believe that the  decision  which  is
    reached based upon the analysis contained in paragraph 43  infects  the
    rest of the First-tier  Tribunal's  consideration  of  the  appellant's
    case.  We are clearly of the view that this is a further material error
    in law.

23.  At paragraph 45 the First-tier Tribunal makes the following finding:

         "However, it has never been properly explained how they  were  able
         to locate H."

    This finding once more  forms  the  basis  of  an  adverse  credibility
    finding relative to the appellant.  It is extremely  difficult  to  see
    how evidence could be produced by the appellant on this  issue  without
    his approaching his persecutors.  It could perhaps be argued  that  his
    family in Iraq could have provided certain information regarding  this,
    however, the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 44 made  a  finding  that
    the appellant had no real contact with his family in Iraq, only  having
    minimal contact with a brother.  Accordingly, it did not seem that  his
    family would be in a position to give any assistance on this issue.  We
    are satisfied that it was not appropriate to base negative  credibility
    findings on the ground of the foregoing finding.

24.  The following further findings were made by the First-tier Tribunal  at
    paragraph 45:

         "The current as opposed to historic evidence on the risk to men  of
         honour  killing  does  not  suggest  that  a  man  involved  in   a
         relationship with an unmarried girl who falls pregnant as a  result
         of that relationship is necessarily at risk."

    We are persuaded that this was not a finding that was open to the First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis of the evidence which was before it.  First,
    this appears to have no proper regard to the terms of the expert report
    before it at paragraphs 5 to 16 and nor does it appear to  have  proper
    regard to the whole terms of the Canadian and  Danish  Reports  earlier
    referred to.  In particular it appears to have no regard to the  Danish
    Report at 1.2.  It appears that examples cited of such honour  killings
    did relate to the period 2005 to 2007.  However, there was no basis  in
    the evidence to hold that these were not continuing to the present day.
     Rather the evidence points to them continuing to the present day.   We
    believe that this is a further material error of law.

25.  For the foregoing reasons we find that there were  material  errors  of
    law in the First-tier Tribunal's determination and its decision  cannot
    be sustained.

Decision

26.  We accordingly set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    which will have to be remade and remit  the  matter  to  a  differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal for that purpose.


Signed                                  Date

Lord Bannatyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

