
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA052262015
                                                                 AA052312015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 May 2016                                |On 23 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SB
                                     AB
                                                                 Respondents

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Edwards instructed by Adam Khattak Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended) in the  light  of
    the appellants' claims for asylum.  This order prohibits the disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the appellants.  Any disclosure in breach of this order may amount to a
    contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless revoked  or
    varied by a Tribunal or Court.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The first appellant was born on [ ] 1965 and the  second  appellant  is
    her daughter who was born on [ ] 2003.  Both are citizens of Pakistan.

 4. The appellants claim to have arrived in the UK on 2 March  2014.   They
    claimed asylum on 21 March 2014.  The basis of their  claims  was  that
    the first appellant's husband was a  senior  official  in  the  Balouch
    Rabuta Ittefak Tehreek (BRIT) Party.  The first appellant also  held  a
    high position in the women's wing and the second appellant  volunteered
    for the party.

 5. The appellants claim that as a result of  their  political  involvement
    the first appellant's husband  had  been  abducted  by  agents  of  the
    Pakistan Security Services  on  18  October  2013  and  when  this  was
    reported to the police they had refused to help.  The  first  appellant
    had then received threats by telephone and her father had  been  spoken
    to, abducted and released on 25 February  2014.   The  appellants  left
    Pakistan on 2 March 2014 using their own passports after an uncle  paid
    a bribe to get them through the airport.  The appellants fear  that  if
    returned to Pakistan they will be killed by the authorities.

 6. In her decision letter dated 4  March  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State
    rejected the appellants' account including that the  first  appellant's
    husband and the first  appellant  herself  had  been  targeted  by  the
    Pakistan Security Services.  As a consequence, the Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellants' claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    under Articles 2 and 3 of  the  ECHR.   The  Secretary  of  State  also
    rejected the  appellants'  claims  under  Article  8.   The  appellants
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Judge's Decision

 7. Judge O'Brien heard evidence  from  the  appellants  and  made  factual
    finding on the evidence in favour of the appellants.  At paras 25-26 of
    his determination he said this:

         "25.     I am satisfied, therefore, to the necessary standard  that
             the First Appellant's account is true.  Given  the  background
             evidence  of  persecution  of   Balochs   by   the   Pakistani
             authorities, the First Appellant's husband's abduction and the
             sudden incidence of threats of violence and abduction suffered
             by the Appellants after they began political  activity,  I  am
             satisfied that they have a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
             and/or serious harm  by  reason  of  their  political  beliefs
             and/or their ethnicity.  I am fortified in this conclusion  by
             the fact that the First Appellant has seemingly come and  gone
             perfectly happily between Pakistan and the United Kingdom  for
             many years and that there is no other apparent reason (nor one
             advanced by the Respondent) for her suddenly wishing  to  stay
             permanently in this country.


         26.  It follows that the Appellants are  entitled  to  a  grant  of
             asylum."

The Secretary of State's Appeal

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 29 September 2015, the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Reid)
    granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal on the  basis  that
    the judge had arguably erred in law by failing to consider whether  the
    appellants would be able to obtain a "sufficiency of  protection"  from
    the Pakistan authorities and whether internal relocation was an option.

 9. In a response under rule 24  dated  29  October  2015,  the  appellants
    sought to uphold the judge's decision on  the  basis  that,  since  the
    judge had accepted that the appellants were at risk from  the  Pakistan
    State in particular  the  Pakistan  Security  Services,  the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection from the state did  not  arise  and  internal
    relocation was also not a safe option.

Discussion

10. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to deal with the issue of sufficiency of protection or
    internal relocation.  That, he submitted, was an error of law  but  the
    real issue was whether it was material given that  the  source  of  the
    persecution was the  Pakistan  State  itself.   He  accepted  that  the
    Secretary of State had not raised the issue of internal  relocation  in
    the decision letter.

11. The judge's finding that the appellants are at risk from  the  Pakistan
    State, in particular the Pakistan Security Services, is not challenged.
     In the light of that, it is difficult to see how  any  argument  based
    upon sufficiency of protection or internal relocation  could  lead  the
    judge to find that the  appellants  had  not  made  good  their  asylum
    claims.

12. The issue of  sufficiency  of  protection  arises  when  the  actor  of
    persecution is a "non-State actor".  Hence, the Qualification Directive
    (SI 2006/2525) in Art 3 states that an actor of persecution or  serious
    harm may be (a) the state; (b) any party  or  organisation  controlling
    the state or a substantial part of the  territory  of  the  state.   In
    addition,  Art  3(c)  includes  non-State  actors  in   the   following
    circumstances:

         "Any non-State actor if it can  be  demonstrated  that  the  actors
         mentioned  in  paras  (a)  and  (b),  including  any  international
         organisation, are unable or unwilling to provide protection against
         persecution or serious harm."

13. Article 4 of the Qualification Directive goes on to deal with  who  can
    be "actors of protection".  The important point  for  the  purposes  of
    these  appeals  is,  however,  that  the  issue  of   "sufficiency   of
    protection" only applies where the actor of persecution is a "non-State
    actor" and has no application where the actor  of  persecution  is  the
    state itself.

14. It might be that  in  a  highly  unusual  circumstance  the  particular
    situation in a country may give some grounds for believing that one arm
    of the state may be able and willing  to  protect  an  individual  from
    persecution by another arm of the state.  That will, however, be highly
    unusual.  There is no evidence to suggest hat it could apply  in  these
    appeals.

15. In fact, in these appeals the Secretary of State did not suggest in her
    refusal letter that the Pakistan State would be  able  and  willing  to
    protect the appellants from the agents of persecution in the  state  if
    the appellants' claims were accepted.

16. In her decision letter, the only reference to sufficiency of protection
    is in paras 38-40.  Those paragraphs refer to the decision in Shah  and
    Islam [1999] Imm AR 283 and AW  (sufficiency  of  protection)  Pakistan
    [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC).  The former case concerns the risk  to  women  in
    general (and in particular  of  domestic  violence)  as  a  "particular
    social group" and, if at all,  the  protection  offered  by  the  state
    against such  domestic  abuse  by  non-state  actors.   The  latter  is
    concerned with the protection of the Pakistan State  against  non-State
    actors, in particular the MQM, a political party.  Paragraph  38  makes
    plain on its face that the consideration of sufficiency  of  protection
    is on the basis that the appellants' claims have not been  established.
    It is, therefore, concerned only with a sufficiency  of  protection  to
    the appellants as returning women to Pakistan.  There is  no  assertion
    and no supporting evidence cited that the Pakistan State would be  able
    or willing to provide sufficient protection to the  appellants  against
    the Pakistan Security Services itself.

17. Likewise, although the heading above  paras  38-40  includes  "internal
    relocation", no specific reference is made thereafter to it and, as  Mr
    Richards accepted, the decision letter does  not  assert  in  substance
    that the appellants may internally relocate.

18. Even though the judge  referred  to  "sufficiency  of  protection"  and
    "internal relocation" and  the  applicable  approach  at  paras  16-18,
    nothing in the evidence, given his finding that the appellants were  at
    risk of persecution at the hands of the Pakistan State, could have  led
    him to conclude that the Pakistan State was able and willing to protect
    the appellants from agents of the Pakistan Security Services on  return
    to Pakistan or that they could safely and reasonably avoid such a  risk
    by internally relocating within Pakistan.

19. The Judge did not materially err in law in reaching his decision.

Decision

20. The judge's decision to allow the appellants' appeals on asylum grounds
    did not involve a material error of law.  Those decisions stand.

21. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is,  accordingly,
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed



                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            Date 23 May 2016

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            Date 23 May 2016
