
IAC-PE-SW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05903/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st May 2015                                 |On 6th May 2015            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                            Partheepan Rajathurai
                        (no anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
                    Canter solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Partheepan Rajathurai date of birth 14th  November  1989
    is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  Having considered all the  circumstances  I
    do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Edwards promulgated on 19th February 2015,  whereby
    the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Respondent dated 30th July 2014. The decision by the Respondent was  to
    refuse the Appellant further leave to remain in the UK and thereupon to
    remove the Appellant from the UK.

 3. By decision made on the 16th March 2015 leave to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted. Thus the matter appears before me to determine in
    the first instance whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    original determination.

 4. The grounds of appeal allege that the judge has failed to properly take
    account of the  medical  evidence  submitted.  In  paragraph  31  Judge
    Edwards states that the appellant has a large number of lesions on  his
    body and that Dr McKenzie is  of  the  opinion  that  the  lesions  are
    consistent with the account  given.  However  the  judge  continues  by
    stating:-

         "The credibility of the account, of course, is  a  matter  for  the
         Tribunal, but what is troubling is that there is no  indication  in
         terms that I can find of the age of the injuries or any  assessment
         of how they may have been otherwise caused."

 5. I draw attention to Dr  McKenzie's  report  specifically  paragraph  76
    wherein the doctor refers to the fact that :-

         "76  All the  lesions  observed  had  appearances  compatible  with
         timescale of  the  reported  injuries  I  was  provided  with  some
         photocopied photographs but the quality was not sufficient  for  me
         to use them to draw any reliable conclusions."

 6. There was some evidence but it is limited. However whilst it would have
    been open to the judge to pass comment as to the limits of the evidence
    given, it was wrong to say there was no evidence.

 7. Similarly as to the assessment of there being no examination  of  other
    potential causes, the judge appears to have  ignored  the  evidence  in
    paragraph 79 onwards.

 8. For example in paragraph 79 Dr McKenzie having  assessed  that  certain
    lesions are attributed to cigarette burns then considers skin  disease,
    insect bites, vaccination scars and  self-harm  and  gives  reasons  to
    discount such.

 9. In paragraph 80 Dr McKenzie examines the method  of  causation  of  the
    injuries he is dealing with  in  detail  and  confirms  that  they  are
    consistent with the description given by the Appellant. It is a careful
    assessment of the method of causation.

10. In paragraph 82 with regard to a white scar radiating out from the anus
    Dr McKenzie again considers alternative causation such as anal fissures
    and gives reasons for discounting such causation. In  paragraph  83  re
    irregular scarring on the penis Dr McKenzie again assesses  alternative
    causation and explanations and gives reasons for discounting such.

11. Judge Edwards does not appear to have  assessed  the  evidence.  Whilst
    there may be reasons for questioning the conclusions of Dr McKenzie, to
    say that Dr McKenzie made no assessment appears to ignore parts of  the
    report. The problem with that is that a failure to properly assess  the
    medical report ignoring the clear assessment by the doctor  as  to  the
    timing and the causation of the injuries may impact on  the  assessment
    of the general credibility of the Appellant's account.

12. In the light of that the whole of the findings of fact of the judge are
    brought into question. In the circumstances there is a  material  error
    in the judge's decision which undermines the findings of fact made. The
    appropriate course is for the appeal to be heard afresh  with  none  of
    the findings of fact preserved.

Decision

13. There is a material error of law in the original determination.  I  set
    the decision aside and direct that the appeal be heard  afresh  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.



Signed   Date 1st May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


