
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05799/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2016                          |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                                     v B
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant in this appeal is a Sri Lankan asylum seeker born on [  ]
    1983.  He applied for asylum on the basis that he  had  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Sri Lanka on grounds of political opinion.   The
    Secretary of State refused his application in a letter dated  20  March
    2015.

2.   The Appellant appealed against that decision and the appeal  was  heard
    on 10 September 2015 by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on 30 September 2015 he dismissed the  appellant's
    asylum appeal.  He also found that he did not qualify for  humanitarian
    protection and dismissed the claim under  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

3.   The  Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  and  permission  was
    initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted on renewal  to
    the Upper Tribunal by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on 6 December 2015
    on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge erred in  relation  to
    the expert medical evidence, particularly with reference  to  paragraph
    16 of the decision.

The Grounds

4.   The grounds drafted by Counsel  assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in  law  in  the  approach  to  the  documentary  evidence  which
    corroborated significant parts of the Appellant's  claim.   It  further
    asserted that the Judge erred in his approach to the  medical  evidence
    in reaching conclusions on the Appellant's credibility before assessing
    the medical evidence.  It is said  that  that  approach  was  unlawful.
    Psychiatric evidence is asserted by the grounds of appeal to have  been
    inadequately dealt with on the basis that no findings were made on  the
    diagnosis therein or the impact on the removal of the applicant to  Sri
    Lanka.

5.   With regard particularly to the documentary evidence it  is  said  that
    the First-tier Tribunal lumped all the documents together and  rejected
    them due to the adverse findings.  It is asserted  that  there  was  in
    fact a considerable amount of documentary  evidence  corroborating  the
    Appellant's arrest in Sri Lanka emanating from various sources and that
    the First-tier Tribunal did not engage with any  of  this  evidence  or
    make any findings on it.  Specific items of the evidence are  then  set
    out in the grounds which it is said that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to have regard to.  It is asserted overall therefore that in the  light
    of the errors made the First-tier Tribunal erred in the  assessment  of
    whether the Appellant was at risk of persecution on return both in  the
    light of the errors in the credibility assessment and in terms  of  the
    assessment of his attendance at demonstrations.

6.   The appeal therefore comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
    determine whether or not there was an error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal and if so what to do about it.

The Hearing

7.   I heard from both representatives at  the  hearing  and  Mr  Jarvis  on
    behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  conceded  that  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's rejection of the documentary evidence and  failure  to  deal
    with the documentation provided did amount to an error of law and  that
    in consequence the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for re-hearing.  Mr Coleman had no objection to that course of  action.
    In the circumstances, having had regard to the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and in particular the reasoning set out at paragraph  16,
    I concluded that there was an error of law  in  the  reasoning  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

8.   In paragraph 16 the First-tier Tribunal, having made in  the  preceding
    paragraphs 12 to 15 a series of adverse credibility  findings,  rejects
    both the medical evidence and the documentary evidence provided by  the
    Appellant on the basis of the prior credibility findings.

9.   There is substantial case  law  on  the  proper  approach  to  experts'
    reports and in the case of Ex  parte  Virjon  B  [2002]  EWHC  1469  Mr
    Justice Forbes found that an adjudicator had been wrong to use  adverse
    credibility findings  as  the  basis  for  rejecting  medical  evidence
    without first considering the medical evidence.  Similarly, in the case
    of Mazrae [2004] EWC Civ 1235 the Court of Appeal  concluded  that  the
    Adjudicator's credibility was flawed  in  that  she  appeared  to  have
    reached an adverse credibility finding on the basis of the  appellant's
    account and that was not shaken  by  the  background  material  and  an
    expert's report having considered them separately.

10.  In paragraph 16 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal states that:

         "As stated in the above paragraphs I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
         events occurred as claimed and the further medical report was  only
         able probably to link the conditions to the claimed events.   Given
         my adverse credibility finding in the  above  paragraphs  I  attach
         little weight to the  submitted  supporting  documents  which  were
         alleged to come from Sri Lanka."

11.  The Appellant had submitted substantial corroborative evidence  in  the
    form of supporting documents allegedly from Sri Lanka  and  the  First-
    tier Tribunal failed to  deal  with  these  documents  individually  or
    collectively other than to say that they were rejected on the basis  of
    prior credibility findings. That approach is prohibited on the basis of
    the case law cited and amounted to an error of law.  It was  clearly  a
    material error because it was a core finding in relation to credibility
    and therefore the decision as a whole cannot stand.   For  that  reason
    therefore I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   Having
    regard to Part 7.2 (a) of the Practice Statements for  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper-Tier  Tribunal,
    the extent of judicial fact finding is such that this matter should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing  with  no
findings of fact preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

