
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05669/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 20 December 2013                             |On 27 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    F S a
                        (anonymity order maintained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, instructed by Luqamani Thompson,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, FSA, is now aged 16 years.  The appellant claims to have
    left Syria when he was 7 years old and  travelled  to  Egypt  where  he
    remained living until he was 14 years old.   He  claims  to  have  left
    Egypt in 2012 and travelled to the United Kingdom via France and Italy.
     He entered the United Kingdom on 28 November 2012.  The appellant  was
    granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside  the  Immigration
    Rules until 1 July 2015.  The appellant appeals against  the  rejection
    of his asylum claim under Section 83 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002.   His  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ross) in a determination dated  31  August  2013.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal were drafted by Mr John Walsh of Counsel who also
    appeared for the appellant at the Upper Tribunal initial hearing.   The
    grounds of appeal are helpfully summarised by Mr Walsh as follows:

    (i)  Failure to have any proper regard for the fact that the  appellant
         was only 15 years of age  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  and  was
         relating events that took place several years ago.

    (ii) The country expert concluded that a core part of  the  appellant's
         claims (his and  his  mother's  experience  at  the  hands  of  the
         parental uncle after the  death  of  their  father)  was  perfectly
         plausible.

    (iii)     The  respondent  and  the  FTT   assessed   the   appellant's
         credibility against the premise that the appellant was claiming  to
         be Syrian - which he did not advance as part of his case.

    (iv) The country expert opined that the appellant  would,  contrary  to
         the finding of  the  judge,  not  be  documented  by  the  Egyptian
         authorities.

3.   At [2] Judge Ross summarised the appellant's account as set out in  the
    respondent's refusal letter:

         "The reasons for refusal letter identify the appellant's claim,  as
         in summary that he claims to be a Syrian national.   His  claim  is
         that his father died when he was 7 years old after which his mother
         took him to live in Egypt.  He is  unsure  whether  his  mother  is
         Syrian or Egyptian.  He has no brothers or sisters.   In  Egypt  he
         lived in a rented house in Menufia.  His mother died when he was 12
         years old and he went to live with his friend's family.  He  worked
         as a carpenter for three years.  He left Egypt  either  because  of
         the troubles which have occurred there or because  his  mother  had
         died and he has no  family.   The  appellant  claims  to  fear  the
         revolution in Egypt, although he does not fear anyone  specifically
         in Egypt or in Syria."

4.   The respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  Syrian  and
    considered it likely that he was Egyptian.  The  respondent  considered
    the appellant could safely return to Egypt.

5.   Dealing with ground (i) I find that this ground does  not  have  merit.
    First, it was abundantly clear to the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that
    the appellant was a minor; at [5] the judge noted  that  the  appellant
    had been granted discretionary leave on account  of  his  minority  and
    that he had before him only an "upgrade" appeal under Section 83 of the
    2002 Act.  Crucially, at [11], Judge Ross  wrote,  "I  found  that  the
    appellant was a lucid intelligent child who was able to understand  the
    proceedings and all the questions put to him."  That sentence  amounts,
    in my opinion, to an adequate  self-direction  by  the  judge  to  take
    account of the appellant's youth in assessing the  credibility  of  his
    evidence.  Notwithstanding the fact that  the  appellant  was  only  15
    years old at the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing, it  was  open
    to Judge Ross to observe that the appellant was "lucid and intelligent"
    and to find that the evidence of the  appellant  was  evasive  and,  at
    times, untrue.  It is, of course, vitally important to have  regard  to
    the nature and characteristics of  a  witness  (including  his  or  her
    youth) when assessing  credibility  but  that  does  not  mean  that  a
    decision-maker cannot find such a witness  has  consciously  sought  to
    hide  the  truth  from  the  Tribunal.   It  is  self-evident  that  an
    individual cannot be expected to remember events which occurred when he
    or she was very young indeed but I do not consider it unreasonable  for
    the judge to have expected the appellant to have given a consistent and
    truthful account of events which may have occurred since he was about 7
    years old.  I find in particular that it was open to the judge to  find
    that "it is likely that [the appellant] has  family  in  Egypt  and  is
    concealing that fact."  It was also open to  the  judge  to  find  that
    Mahmood, with whom the appellant lived for two  years,  was  likely  to
    have been a family member.  It should also be borne in  mind  that  the
    judge was assessing the evidence in  the  context  of  the  appellant's
    categorical statement that he was "not Egyptian, but I don't know  what
    nationality I am."  (Determination,  10).   The  judge  relied  on  the
    Sprakab Report (although, quite properly,  he  did  not  regard  it  as
    determinative)  together  with  other  evidence  including   that   the
    appellant was Egyptian.  The judge did not err in law in reaching  that
    finding and I consider his reasoning to be entirely sound.

6.   Ground (ii) is also without merit.  The assessment of  the  credibility
    of an appellant's account is a matter for the judge although he may  be
    assisted in that task by the opinions of an expert witness.   The  fact
    that the expert found  that  the  appellant's  account  was  "perfectly
    plausible" does mean that the judge had to accept it as true.

7.   Ground (iii) also fails to disclose an error  of  law  in  the  judge's
    determination.  The appellant's claim was that (i) he was not  Egyptian
    but did not know his nationality and (ii) would be at risk on return to
    Egypt.  I have quoted above the  statement  of  the  appellant  ("noted
    verbatim" by the judge at [10]) which makes it entirely clear that  the
    judge was aware that the appellant did not assert that he was a  Syrian
    national.  However, in the light of the appellant's account,  it  would
    appear that the appellant might only be a national of either  Syria  or
    Egypt and it was entirely reasonable for Judge  Ross  to  approach  the
    appeal on  that  basis.   Ultimately,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant had not been telling him the truth and that he had failed  to
    discharge the burden of proving that he would be at risk in Egypt, in a
    country from which the judge found the appellant originated.

8.    Ground  (iv)  records  that  the  country  expert  believed  that  the
    appellant  would  have  left  Egypt  without  any  documents  providing
    evidence of his life there.  At [12],  the  judge  found  that  it  was
    "incredible that the appellant has  no  Egyptian  ID  documents  having
    lived there since the age of 7 and having been to school and worked  in
    Egypt."  I consider it arguable that the appellant's casual work  as  a
    carpenter may not have generated  any  paper  trail.  It  may  be  more
    reasonable to  expect  the  appellant's  school  career  to  have  been
    documented in some way.  However, the judge's puzzlement at the absence
    of any documents from Egypt must be considered in the  context  of  his
    finding that the appellant could have obtained such documents from  his
    friend (or  family  member)  Mahmood  with  whom  he  had  remained  in
    telephone  contact.   There  is  no  suggestion  that  the  judge   has
    criticised the appellant for failing to bring the documents with him to
    the United Kingdom.  Background material  indicates  that  Egypt  is  a
    sophisticated bureaucratic state and I consider it reasonable  for  the
    judge to expect that an individual who had  spent  seven  years  living
    there would have access to some documents relating to his residence.  I
    find that it was open to the judge to conclude that, by  not  producing
    any documentation from Egypt, the appellant was seeking to conceal  the
    truth about his nationality.  Even if I am wrong in that conclusion,  I
    find that the judge has  given  other  entirely  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant had failed to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proving that he would be unable to return to Egypt or would be at  risk
    there.

9.   Finally, the judge was well aware that  proper  reception  arrangements
    would have to be made for the appellant to be received upon  return  to
    Egypt.   At  [20],  he  wrote,  "[the   appellant]   position   as   an
    unaccompanied minor has been taken into account by virtue of this grant
    of leave.  Formal enquiries ought now to be made as to the provision of
    ID and  travel  documents."   That  observation  followed  the  earlier
    finding by the judge that  the  appellant  is  likely  to  have  family
    members living in Egypt to whose custody he might return.

10.  In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

This appeal is dismissed



Signed                              Date 16 January 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
