
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05600/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2016                   |On 20 October 2016                   |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ELIDA [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sills, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S George promulgated on 23 February 2016  in  which
    she allowed the appeal of the respondent  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her asylum and  to  remove  her  from  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. This matter previously came before the Upper Tribunal when  the  appeal
    was heard by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Archer  who  unfortunately
    became extremely unwell before he was able to produce  as  decision  on
    his reserve decision and accordingly by way of  a  transfer  order  the
    matter comes before me today.

 3. There in reality little dispute  over  the  facts  of  this  case.   In
    essence the appellant's case  is  that  she  is  at  risk  of  domestic
    violence from her husband and also from violence from her family as she
    has  committed  adultery,  has  had  children  from  another  man   and
    accordingly she would face serious ill-treatment if returned to Albania
    as her actions had infringed upon the  honour  and  reputation  of  her
    former husband and her current family.

 4. The Secretary of State did not accept her case and did not accept,  for
    reasons set out in the refusal letter, that she would  be  at  risk  on
    return.  As noted by Judge George at paragraph 16 of  her  decision,  a
    large part of the facts was not disputed.

 5. The judge's found that the appellant is a member of a particular social
    group and that she had been subjected to domestic violence.  The  judge
    then sets out the risks in respect of internal relocation at paragraphs
    [33] to [38] and next addresses sufficiency of protection at paragraphs
    [39] to [44] of her decision.

 6. The judge's findings at paragraphs [33] to [36] are not  entirely  easy
    to comprehend on first reading, but in the context of the decision as a
    whole, and bearing in mind that it had been accepted that she had  been
    subjected  to  domestic  violence,  it  appears  that  what  the  judge
    concluded was that the appellant would be at risk from her  family  and
    from her husband if they came into contact with her but not  that  they
    would necessarily actively look for her. The judge found that  this  is
    because they have in effect contained the shame  that  would  otherwise
    occur and that the appellant has moved away.

 7. The judge also found that if the respondent were to return  to  Albania
    that the situation would be different in that there  was  a  real  risk
    that her presence would come to the attention of the  family  and  that
    accordingly the difficulties which had arisen due to the shame she  had
    brought would come to the attention of others and that they would  then
    take action.  The judge also found out that it would  not  be  possible
    for the appellant reasonably to relocate within Albania in any event.

 8. The judge  then  found  that  there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and then went onto allow the appeal also under Article 8.  I
    do not need to deal with the latter  issue  in  any  great  detail  for
    reasons which will become apparent.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on relatively narrow
    grounds in that it is  said  that  the  judge  had  made  contradictory
    findings, stating at paragraphs [33] and [34] that  the  husband  would
    not be involved in being a danger to the  appellant  but  at  paragraph
    [35] that she had found that she would be at  risk  of  coming  to  the
    attention of her family because of the attentions of  others  and  that
    thus the findings at paragraphs [33] and [35]  were  contradictory,  it
    not being explained why strangers would feel  the  need  to  trace  her
    family.

10. The second ground is that the error is compounded by  the  findings  at
    paragraph [36] that the appellant's now partner would have the  ability
    to relocate with the appellant, be that in Albania or Kosovo.

11. I heard submissions from Mr Walker and Mr Sills.  These focused on  the
    findings set out at  paragraphs  [33]  to  [36]  of  the  decision.   I
    consider that it is implicit in these findings that if she returned  to
    her home area, and there is no challenge  to  this  finding,  that  the
    respondent would be at risk  there  from  domestic  violence  from  her
    family and her former husband who had already perpetrated  that.  Hence
    the  decision  focused  on  internal  relocation  and  sufficiency   of
    protection

12. I consider, and Mr Walker did not demur from this position when it  was
    put to him, that in reality there is not a  contradiction  between  the
    judge's findings that the family would not actively seek her  but  that
    if confronted with a return there would be a difficulty.  The point  is
    that the judge found that the risk arises not from the  fact  that  the
    family would actively seek her but  that  if  she  did  come  to  their
    attention whether they actively this would result in the danger to  her
    as a result.

13. At Mr Walker accepted, the judge's observation that the appellant's now
    partner would be able to assist her  is  of  limited  assistance  given
    firstly that he is not Albanian and, second, it is not correct  to  say
    that somebody can relocate to another state, in this  case  Kosovo,  as
    amounting to internal relocation.

14. I accept Mr Sills' submission that there is no challenge to the finding
    at paragraph [38] that it would be unreasonable for  the  appellant  to
    relocate within Albania.  As the judge found, and there is no challenge
    to this, there is no guarantee that her partner could join her as he is
    not Albanian and she would  be  at  risk  as  a  single  woman  without
    children given the social difficulties that exist for single  women  in
    Albania who face difficulty in moving or in  living  apart  from  their
    families without permission  and  that  this  would  put  her  and  the
    children at greater risk.

15. For these reasons I am not satisfied  that  the  judge  did  not  reach
    contradictory findings and I note that in reality this is  at  best  an
    adequacy of reasons case, as Mr  Walker  accepted.  When  viewed  as  a
    whole, the judge's conclusions are adequately reasoned. It  is  evident
    to the losing party that the judge was satisfied,  having  applied  the
    relevant case law and having directed herself properly as  to  the  law
    and evidence, that the respondent was at risk in her  home  area;  that
    there was a risk to her if she returned, as her family  would  know  of
    it, and then seek  to  harm  her;  and,  in  any  event,  that  it  was
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect her to relocate, there being  in
    effect no sufficiency of protection.

16. I find that  properly  considered,  the  judge's  conclusions  are  not
    contradictory and when reviewing the decision as a whole,  although  it
    could have  been  better  expressed,  there  is  no  contradiction  and
    accordingly the findings are sustainable.




SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold that decision.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 19 October 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


