
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05848/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2015                           |On 29 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     t r
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy of Counsel instructed by LG Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Scobbie signed on 29 September 2014 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision dated 2 August  2014  to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom in consequence of refusing his application  for
    asylum.





Background

2.   The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, born  on  30  November  1986.
    He arrived in the United Kingdom on  6  September  2010  holding  entry
    clearance as a student that he states was obtained for him by an agent.
     He did not claim asylum on arrival.  An  application  for  asylum  was
    made on 21 October 2013, and in due course refused for the reasons  set
    out in a 'Reasons for Refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 31 July 2014.  The
    removal decision was made in consequence of the refusal of asylum.

3.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.  His appeal was  dismissed  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Scobbie.

4.   The Appellant made an application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal which was granted on 3 November 2014 by Designated First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Zucker.

Consideration

5.   The details of the Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  are  summarised  at
    paragraphs  8-19  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.    It   is
    unnecessary to reproduce those paragraphs here.

6.   The Judge accepted the Appellant's account of having been  tortured  in
    Sri Lanka, stating this at paragraph 49:

          "My conclusion from this is that I accept the Appellant's  account
         in so far as it related to him having been tortured.  This does not
         necessarily  mean  that  I  have  accepted  the  remainder  of  his
         account".

7.   The Judge then went on to reach the following conclusion  at  paragraph
57:

          "I have certainly accepted that the Appellant was a Tamil and that
         he was tortured in detention at one time.  However I do not  accept
         that the authorities have been actively looking for him at any time
         after his release from prison for the reasons set out above".

8.   The Judge thereafter, having reviewed 'country  guidance',  stated  his
    conclusions in the appeal in the following terms at paragraph 62:

          "In all of these circumstances and adopting the issues set out  in
         the case of GJ and Others I concluded that the Appellant was not  a
         person who would be of any interest to the authorities in  view  of
         their priorities at the present time.  There is nothing in his past
         or present conduct to suggest that  he  would  be  perceived  as  a
         present threat to the Sri Lankan state.  He would not be at risk of
         persecution in Sri Lanka if returned.  His asylum claim fails."

9.   The Judge also rejected the Appellant's claim under Articles  2  and  3
    of the ECHR and also rejected  his  claim  in  respect  of  family  and
    private life with reference to paragraph 276ADE and Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

10.  A core element of the Appellant's asylum claim, and the  primary  focus
    of the issues before the Upper Tribunal in respect of risk  on  return,
    was the Appellant's claim to be the subject of an arrest warrant issued
    by the Magistrates' Court in  Batticaloa.  (A  copy  of  the  purported
    arrest warrant is to be found in the papers on file.)

11.  The Appellant referred  to  the  fact  of  an  arrest  warrant  at  his
    substantive asylum  interview  conducted  on  17  December  2013.   The
    following exchange takes place over questions 75-77 in respect  of  the
    authorities attending at the Appellant's parents' home:

         "Q 75:   What did they say?

         A:   Where is your son, he is missing from jail.

         Q76: Did they have an arrest warrant?

         A:   Yes

         Q77: Was this given to your family?

         A:   Yes"

    As already indicated the Appellant in due course produced a copy, which
    was sent to the Respondent following the interview.

12.  The Respondent did not accept that  the  arrest  warrant  was  genuine.
    The explanation for the Respondent's decision in this regard is set out
    at paragraphs 9-13 of the RFRL in the following terms:

         "9.  You are aware that the conflict in Sri Lanka ended five  years
             ago, in May 2009.  However, you explain that you are sure that
             you are being sought in Sri Lanka, citing the existence of  an
             arrest warrant (AIR,  Q135-136).   Careful  consideration  has
             been  given  to  the  submitted  arrest  warrant  (Annex   D).
             However, this document is  not  of  the  professional  quality
             expected of an official document.  For example, your  name  is
             spelled incorrectly, omitting  the  'e'  from  your  forename.
             'Failure' is spelt as 'filure'.   Although  it  is  understood
             that spelling mistakes can occur even in  official  documents,
             it must be noted that this word is spelled incorrectly  twice.
             Furthermore, the official stamp for the court  omits  the  's'
             from 'Magistrate's Court' instead reading 'Magitrate's  Court'
             (Annex D).  It is considered highly unlikely that an  official
             stamp would contain such a spelling  mistake.   This  document
             cannot be relied upon.

         10.  Further consideration has been given to  this  document.   You
             claim to have escaped from prison in February 2010 (AIR, Q68).
              No explanation has  been  received  as  to  why  this  arrest
             warrant was not issued until eight  months  later  in  October
             2010, the month after you left the country.  It is  considered
             likely that your absence from prison  would  have  been  noted
             long before then.  The document also refers to  your  'filure'
             to attend court.  However,  you  have  failed  to  mention  or
             submit any correspondence or court summonses related  to  this
             offence.  The document is also an email scan  rather  than  an
             original document, further reducing the  weight  that  can  be
             applied to it.

         11.  Furthermore, a letter from  the  British  High  Commission  in
             Colombo dated 14 September 2010 reported that: 'Formally it is
             difficult for the accused to be  able  to  obtain  a  copy  of
             his/her own arrest warrant.  When an arrest warrant is issued,
             a copy is kept on the legal file and the original is handed to
             the police.  An accused cannot apply for copies of the  arrest
             warrant to the relevant court.  However,  in  practice  forged
             documents  are  easily  obtainable   throughout   Sri   Lanka.
             Additionally given ongoing and well documented  concerns  over
             corruption in the police it would probably not prove difficult
             to obtain a copy  of  an  arrest  warrant  although  it  would
             probably require prior  contact  within  the  police  service'
             (COIS report, para 10.17).  You have not  explained  how  your
             family were able to obtain a copy of this arrest warrant.  The
             objective information clearly states that arrest warrants  are
             not handed to the accused or their family.   This  information
             reinforces the belief that the submitted arrest warrant cannot
             be relied upon.

         12.  Moreover, this arrest warrant,  amongst  the  other  documents
             relating to an attack you suffered  in  early  2009,  must  be
             considered in line with the  principles  set  out  in  Tanveer
             Ahmed Pakistan [2002] UKIAT  00439...   However,  due  to  the
             credibility concerns outlined above,  it  is  considered  that
             little weight can be attributed to the submitted documents.

         13.  It must also be noted that fraudulent documents are widespread
             in  Sri  Lanka.   A  British  High  Commission  letter  of  14
             September 2010 stated that: 'The high level of  corruption  in
             Sri Lanka and the unscrupulous actions of government officials
             at all levels, somewhat undermines  the  issuing  process  for
             many official documents'  (March  2012,  COIS  Report  on  Sri
             Lanka, para 27.02).  The high  levels  of  corruption  in  Sri
             Lanka also reduce the  weight  that  can  be  applied  to  the
             submitted documents.  Your submission of these documents  does
             not further your asylum claim.  Rather, as  a  result  of  the
             issues identified above with the arrest warrant, they  further
             undermine the credibility of your asylum claim."

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also  did  not  accept  that  the  arrest
    warrant was genuine.  He stated the following at paragraphs 51-56:

          "51.    I have grave concerns relative to whether or not an arrest
             warrant was issued for the Appellant.  Firstly, the  Appellant
             had been released some considerable time by  his  own  account
             before  an  arrest  warrant  was  issued.   Further,   perhaps
             conveniently from his point of view, it was  issued  after  he
             had left the country.

         52.  I make the above comment  because  the  Appellant  managed  to
             leave the country on his own passport having obtained a  visa.
             He did say that he used an agent but the fact remains that  he
             used his own passport.  It is not  absolutely  definite  proof
             that he was not being looked for by the authorities but it  is
             in my view somewhat of a credibility issue nonetheless.

         53.  Further, the Appellant has not really satisfactorily  answered
             the point that arrest warrants are said by the Respondent  not
             to be obtainable by anyone other than the police and also held
             on  file.   The  Appellant  has  not  given   a   satisfactory
             explanation for this  or  quoted  any  background  information
             which contradicts what the Respondent said.

         54.  Further, there are the many errors in the documentation.  Some
             of it may be caused by careless policemen but how a date stamp
             from a magistrate's court  could  spell  the  word  magistrate
             wrongly is beyond my comprehension.

         55.  My overall conclusion from this is  that  the  arrest  warrant
             cannot be relied upon and in my view  the  Appellant  has  not
             established even  to  the  lowest  standard  that  any  arrest
             warrant was issued for him.

         56.  I say this not only because of the  unsatisfactory  nature  of
             the document itself but because the Appellant managed to leave
             the country on his own passport and because the arrest warrant
             was allegedly issued such a lengthy time after  the  Appellant
             left prison."

14.  The grounds of challenge to the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge that have been settled by Mr  Paramjorthy,  who  did  not  appear
    before the First-tier Tribunal, criticise the Judge's reference to  the
    Respondent's  position  at  paragraph  53  of  the  decision  as  being
    incomplete.

15.  As indicated in the quotation cited above the  Judge  stated  that  the
    Respondent  had  indicated  that  arrest  warrants  were  "not  to   be
    obtainable by anyone other than the police".  As is apparent  from  the
    passages already cited from the RFRL, this is not,  strictly  speaking,
    an accurate statement of the  Respondent's  position.   The  Respondent
    acknowledged in the RFRL that it  might  be  possible  to  obtain  such
    documents through the use of bribery.

16.  In those circumstances I accept that the Judge's  reference  is  indeed
    truncated and incomplete in a way to render the sentence  at  paragraph
    53 inaccurate.

17.  However, in my judgment this does not avail  the  Appellant.   This  is
    because even if in certain circumstances it is possible  to  obtain  an
    arrest warrant, for example through the use of bribery,  the  Appellant
    does not give any such account but simply states that the document  was
    handed over to his  family  when  the  authorities  attended  at  their
    address.  The evidence indicates that such  documents  are  not  simply
    handed over.  To that extent the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  correct
    in stating  at  paragraph  53  that  the  Appellant  had  not  given  a
    satisfactory explanation for the way  in  which  he  had  obtained  the
    arrest warrant, or more particularly the way in which it had come  into
    the possession of his family members notwithstanding  that  this  issue
    was very clearly raised at some length in the RFRL.

18.  Further this submission does not begin to  address  the  other  serious
    defects in the presentation  and  form  of  the  arrest  warrant,  most
    notably the misspelling on the  official  stamp  purportedly  from  the
    Batticaloa Magistrates' Court.

19.  Yet further in this regard it is to be noted that the Judge  identified
    other credibility issues at paragraph 58.

20.  In all such circumstances it seems to me the Judge's  analysis  of  the
    documentation and the analysis of the way in which it came to be in the
    Appellant's possession is not impugnable as being materially  wrong  in
    law - either in itself or in combination with the second aspect of  the
    challenge raised on behalf of the Appellant.

21.  The second aspect of the Appellant's challenge is  in  respect  of  the
    Judge's references to the Appellant leaving Sri Lanka through the usual
    channels in his own identity: see paragraphs 52 and 56.

22.  It is indeed the case that the Appellant stated at his  interview  that
    he left Sri Lanka with the help of an agent.  It is apparent that  this
    is asserted not only in the context of obtaining  the  necessary  entry
    clearance to embark for the United Kingdom, but also that the Appellant
    was assisted by the agent to proceed  through  the  checks  at  Colombo
    Airport (AIR, Qs89-101 and as noted in the RFRL in the summary  of  the
    Appellant's history at paragraph 3).

23.  In the premises of the grounds, Mr Paramjorthy identifies by  reference
    to paragraph 394 of the country guidance case of GJ and  Others  (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  that  the
    pervasive use of bribery and corruption including  at  the  airport  in
    Colombo is such that it is possible for persons even if wanted to  pass
    through the various checks and controls. Accordingly, it is  submitted,
    the Appellant's ability to do  so  should  not  have  been  a  material
    consideration in the way in which the Judge appears to have had  regard
    to it. In this context Mr Paramjorthy had in  mind  in  particular  the
    passages at paragraphs 52 and 56 of the determination.

24.  Again I accept these points raise valid issues in the abstract: but  in
    my judgment, on the particular facts of this case, the defects  in  the
    arrest warrant and the  manner  in  which  it  was  obtained  as  being
    discrepant with the available country information,  and  the  Appellant
    otherwise not having addressed  the  substance  of  the  RFRL  in  this
    regard, any issue as to the Appellant's ability to pass through Colombo
    Airport are  effectively  rendered  immaterial.   Given  the  defective
    content of the purported arrest warrant and the absence of any adequate
    explanation of how it was obtained,  I  consider  there  was  only  one
    realistic outcome to  the  decision  in  respect  of  the  validity  or
    otherwise of the arrest warrant.  Necessarily,  as  identified  in  the
    RFRL, a rejection of the genuineness of the  arrest  warrant  not  only
    undermined the Appellant's assertion to be  at  risk  on  return  as  a
    person wanted by the authorities but also  undermined  his  credibility
    more generally.

25.   The  remaining  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  are
    essentially premised on the existence of a  valid  arrest  warrant  and
    necessarily fail in light of my  conclusion  that  the  Judge  did  not
    materially err in law  in  his  approach  to  this  issue  and  reached
    conclusions that were open to him and were sustainable on  all  of  the
    available evidence.

26.  Accordingly I find no material errors and the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal stands.

Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and stands.

28.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.



The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the hearing on 15 January 2015.



Signed        Date: 27 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
