
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05516/2011

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|on 2nd July 2013                              |On 19th August 2013          |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                               N M (Sri Lanka)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Allen instructed by Vasuki Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms Everett Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant was born on the 25th March 1989 and is a  citizen  of
        Sri Lanka. His appeal against the direction for his removal to  Sri
        Lanka was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Molloy  in  a
        determination dated 29th September 2011 which was set aside by  the
        Upper Tribunal, following a hearing at Field House on 22nd February
        2012, as it was found the Judge has erred in  failing  to  consider
        the medical evidence with the degree of care required in an  appeal
        of this nature.


     2. The appellant's representative on that  occasion,  Ms  Allen,  also
        sought to argue that the adverse credibility findings should be set
        aside as the contradictions in the evidence  upon  which  they  are
        based could be directly attributable to  mental  health  and  other
        issues.  No decision was made on the application  as  the  Tribunal
        was unable to proceed further for the reasons set out in the  error
        of law document. A direction was given for the case  to  be  listed
        for a 'for mention' hearing after 18th April 2012 with the  parties
        being in a position to review the medical evidence and discuss  the
        scope of any future hearing.


     3. On 23rd May 2012 the Tribunal was advised that  the  appellant  had
        been referred for a brain scan which it was  anticipated  would  be
        completed within six weeks. The case was adjourned  for  a  further
        CMR hearing. The appeal was listed before another UT Judge on  25th
        February 2013 but no progress was made  as  it  is  a  'part-heard'
        matter.  On  17th  April  2013  Mr  Paramjorthy  appeared  for  the
        appellant 'Pro Bono'. He advised the Tribunal  that  the  appellant
        had been 'evasive' for the past six months. He had not engaged with
        his father, had failed to keep appointments made  within  the  NHS,
        and had not been compliant at all. As a result of the  considerable
        period of time that has elapsed since the 'error  of  law  hearing'
        and the fact amply opportunity  has  been  provided  to  allow  any
        further reports to be obtained, the lack  of  any  such  additional
        evidence, and the failure of the appellant to engage with  services
        made available to him, it was directed that the  matter  be  listed
        for a final hearing as there was no basis for further delay.


     4. The remaining issues  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  are  agreed  as
        follows:


     i.   The risk of return in light of the preserved findings.


     ii.  Article 3 and 8 in relation to the risk of suicide.


     iii. Article 8 family life and the issue of the  need  for  support  in
   light of            his mental health issues.



The preserved findings


     5. Notwithstanding the failure of the appellant to cooperate  and  the
        lack  of  any  further  medical  evidence,  bar  a  report  from  a
        psychotherapist Antonia Kreeger, Ms Allen renewed  her  application
        for the adverse credibility findings of  Judge  Molloy  to  be  set
        aside on the basis that the discrepancies relied upon by the  Judge
        could be attributable to mental health and other issues.


     6. I accept this submission may be made  in  an  appropriate  case  as
        illustrated by the case of SM (Iran) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 371  in
        which an Immigration Judge found that the appellant's evidence  was
        not credible, but made no finding in respect of her claim  to  have
        PTSD.  The Court of Appeal  said that whilst it may be difficult to
        postulate that all the unsatisfactory elements of  the  Appellant's
        evidence might be  explained  by  a  PTSD  diagnosis,  it  was  not
        possible to know what the Tribunal's approach to the evidence might
        have been had  it  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  PTSD.   The
        claimant was entitled to a clear decision on whether she  had  PTSD
        and what effect that disorder had on her evidence.


     7. In this appeal there was a finding by Judge Molloy in  relation  to
        the  medical  evidence.  Ms  Allen  specifically  referred  me   to
        paragraph 84 of the determination in which Judge Molloy states:


     84.  Noting that behaviour, noting  the  limited  time,  observing  the
          appellant's prior immigration history and willingness  to  deceive
   an             Entry Clearance Officer as to  his  true  intentions  when
   claiming to             visit the United Kingdom as a tourist, noting the
   other evidential             issues,  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies
   already referred to at                length, noting that at least  three
   if not four of his brothers have                   successfully fled  Sri
   Lanka and have obtained sanctuary elsewhere,            noting  that  his
   parents are currently in the United Kingdom  after  his            father
   claimed   asylum   and   then   withdrew   his    appeal    against    an
   adverse decision upon the  same,  the  Tribunal  is  not  persuaded  that
   this appellant's account as given to  the  respondent  and  as  given  to
   Dr Raj Persaud is anything other  than  a  stage  managed  concoction  of
   events whose genesis  lies  in  an  attempt  made  by  the  appellant  to
   create not only a fictitious  claim  to  asylum  but  also  to  invent  a
     fictitious mental illness so that he can re-join some  members  of  his
     family.


     8. Ms Allen's sought to persuade the Tribunal  that  as  it  has  been
        found the Judge had made a material error of law in  his  treatment
        of the medical evidence [para 16 Error of law finding] the  adverse
        findings should be set aside.


     9. It is settled jurisprudence that a party is entitled to retain  the
        benefit of a finding made in his or her favour unless there is good
        reason to set it aside. Had Judge Molloy gone no further there  may
        have been merit in Ms Allen's submissions but in paragraphs 85  and
        86 Judge Molloy  sets  out  findings  in  the  alternative  in  the
        following terms:


     85.  In the alternative the Tribunal might  just  have  been  persuaded
   that           the reasonable degree of likelihood is that the  appellant
   does suffer             from some mental health issues.   However,  these
   could have been              hereditary if it is reasonably likely be the
   case that the  appellant's              mother  also  has  mental  health
   issues. Alternatively, and noting that             the  appellant  claims
   to have worked on a family farm on and off over             the years, it
   considers   that   he   might   have   had   an   accident   there    and
   suffered an injury to his head and that this  caused  his  mental  health
     issues. Then again he  could  have  had  any  other  type  of  accident
   involving injury to his head.


     86.  However, and because of all the issues noted herein at length, the
              Tribunal is  not  persuaded  that  the  reasonable  degree  of
   likelihood is           that a true account has been given to it by  this
   appellant with                   reference to what he  says  happened  to
   him in Sri Lanka.


    10. The Court of Appeal in SM (Iran) were concerned  that  it  was  not
        possible to know what the Tribunal's approach to the evidence might
        have been had it accepted that the Appellant had PTSD, in this case
        we do.  The primary finding is that the mental health problems  are
        fictitious but, in the alternative, when considering  the  elements
        referred to by the Judge the appellant's account had not been shown
        to be credible.


    11. The medical evidence available to Judge Molloy was the report  from
        Dr Persaud. It is noted in the report that the  appellant's  mother
        is said to have 'completely lost her mind' and  exhibits  signs  of
        severe  mental  illness.  His  mother  has  been  admitted   to   a
        psychiatric  hospital  in  Sri  Lanka  in  the  past  and  received
        medication from  her  GP  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant
        provided Dr Persaud with his  history  and  claimed  to  have  been
        detained for a week in May 2009 during which  time  he  was  beaten
        extensively and tortured. It is noted that the  appellant's  memory
        of events around the time of the beatings is very poor as it is  of
        events since.


    12. In his summary Dr Persaud states:


     SUMMARY


     This man  exhibits  many  symptoms  of  psychiatric  disorder  and  the
   constellation would most likely suggest diagnosis of Depression, PTSD and
     brain injury. He is also at suicide risk given his  hopelessness  about
   the    future.


    13. Dr Persaud's opinions is stated to be as follows:


     OPINION


     In my opinion given the caveats of the limited time I have had to  make
   an     assessment of this man combined with his getting  very  upset  and
   being  unable to properly answer some questions as well as  the  lack  of
   informants     to corroborate his testimony as to events that befell him,
   it is possible to   form an opinion to the extent of the following.


     (1)  This man appears  from  his  account  to  have  suffered  multiple
   life events of an extreme nature which would qualify the  kind         of
   event which would be regarded as severe and extraordinary.      These are
   the kinds of events required for a  diagnosis  of  Post         Traumatic
   Stress Disorder to be considered.


     (2)  These  life  events  include  the  receipt  of  experiences  which
   would amount to torture by most understandings of that term.


     (3)  He has, according to his account, also suffered loss events  of  a
   psychologically complicated nature due to his separation from         key
   members of his family who he was very close to when he          left  Sri
   Lanka. Several brothers are scattered across the world as       a  result
   of fleeing Sri Lanka. He has also lost his  mother  to             severe
   mental illness.


     (4)  He appears extremely fearful for his life, should he return to Sri
          Lanka given the series of extraordinary  and  severe  life  events
   he experienced and the implications of the torture he received        and
   his subsequent actions in fleeing from Sri Lanka.


     (5)  A factor in his suicidality is despair over  separation  from  his
   brothers with whom he was close. Another factor is his memory        loss
   and  disorientation  due  to  the  beatings   to   the   head   that   he
   sustained.  He  appears   befuddled   and   worried   about   his   newly
   developed in capacity.


     (6)  His decision making ability  having  been  called  into  question,
   possibly  secondary  to  a  brain  injury,  there  is  a  real   question
   about his ability to  make  decisions  in  his  own  best  interests  and
   therefore  at  present  given  his  present  mental  state   satisfactory
   instruct  legal  representation.  In  particular  his  upset  about   his
   predicament  and   its   implications   affects   his   decision   making
   ability. He has also never  received  any  specialist  treatment  at  all
   for  his  significant  psychiatric   and   neurological   symptoms.   For
   example he has never been prescribed an antidepressant  or  had         a
   brain scan.


     (7)  It follows from paragraphs five and six above that there is a real
          question about  his  psychological  and  neurological  fitness  to
   attend  legal  proceedings.  I  understand  he  has  not   received   any
   specialist   NHS    psychiatric    or    neurological    assessment    or
   treatment.


     (8)   He  exhibits  symptoms  of  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder,  a
   psychiatric  diagnosis  recognised   by   all   the   major   psychiatric
   classification  systems.  He   also   shows   memory   loss   or   recent
   onset, i.e since his beating  to  the  head,  which  are  cardinal  signs
   of brain disorder or damage.


     (9)  He also  exhibits  symptoms  of  severe  clinical  depression.  He
   scored 48  on  the  Beck  Depression  Inventory  -  a  standard  tool  or
   questionnaire  used   to   screen   for   depression.   This   score   is
   consistent  with  the  very  severe  end  of  clinical   depression.   He
   scored 66 on the Impact of Events Scale commonly used  to         measure
   PTSD. This is a very high score indeed.


     (10) He has suicidal thoughts.


     (11) Given paragraphs eight, nine and ten  of  above  it  follows  that
   he  would  be  regarded  as  a  candidate  for  urgent  psychiatric   and
   psychological   treatment   and   neurological   assessment    by    most
   health  services  and  that  he  should  receive  such  treatment  and  a
   reassessment    made    about    his    ability    to    attend     legal
   proceedings.


      (12)  The  treatment  he  would  require  should  involve   specialist
   intervention   -   in   particular   treatment   which   is   based    on
   expertise  on  the  aftermaths  of  torture,  complex  loss,   depression
   and brain injury.


     (13) It does not appear from the information  we  have  that  this  man
   is receiving the correct treatment or indeed any treatment at all.


     (14) It follows from the paragraph above that if he  continues  not  to
   receive  the  correct  intensive  treatment  that  his   prognosis   must
   be regarded as guarded at best.


      (15)  I  am  in  particular  concerned   by   the   particular   toxic
   combination  of  events  -  legal  proceedings  with   their   inevitable
   stresses   and   the    possibility    of    unfavourable    catastrophic
   outcome, plus ongoing severe untreated psychiatric disorder.


     This combination is likely  to  dramatically  elevate  the  chances  of
   suicidal behaviour.


    14. The adjournment of the proceedings and referrals  made  thereafter,
        with which the appellant did not corporate, were made as  a  result
        of the above diagnosis.


    15. On the issue of  preserved  findings:  in  light  of  the  lack  of
        evidence establishing that the findings made  by  Judge  Molloy  in
        relation to the core elements of the  claim  are  infected  by  any
        arguable legal error they  shall  stand.  They  are  summarised  in
        paragraph 92 of the determination as follows:


     92.  In short, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the reasonable degree
   of         likelihood is that this appellant has a  bother,  Kantharuben,
   who had        associations with the LTTE. It is not similarly  persuaded
   that this      appellant himself had any associations with the  LTTE.  It
   is not              similarly persuaded he assisted the LTTE  with  maps,
   with the            location of the Sri Lankan army forces personnel  and
   with telling the        LTTE where to plant claymore bombs.   It  is  not
   similarly persuaded          that this appellant was detained for  either
   one week, six or seven       months, or for  approximately  one  and  one
   half years or so                 commencing May 2009 and, at  the  latest
   estimate coming from the          appellant,  ending  2011.   It  is  not
   similarly persuaded that at any time      the  appellant  was  beaten  or
   otherwise suffered  physical  abuse.....   It          is  not  similarly
   persuaded that his father and his other named               brothers  had
   any association with the LTTE themselves,  nor  is  it          similarly
   persuaded that any of them suffered in Sri Lanka whether         this  be
   by way of detention and/or physical abuse.

Discussion



    16. There is no statement from the appellant who was  not  tendered  to
        give oral evidence and so the issues are to be  considered  on  the
        basis of the written material before the Tribunal only.


    17. For the purpose of the proceedings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  a
        second report has been produced, dated the 26th June 2013,  written
        by Antonia Kreeger who describes herself as a psychotherapist  with
        a Postgraduate Diploma in psychodynamic counselling, in addition to
        other qualifications in cognitive behavioural therapy, counselling,
        and psychotherapy. She states in the report that her qualifications
        have given her the knowledge to be able to  assess  how  severe  an
        applicant's distress is and whether their  symptom  show  signs  of
        PTSD.


    18. Ms Kreeger refers to the report of Dr Persaud and states  that  the
        purpose of her report is to assess  the  appellant's  psychological
        distress due to events and torture in Sri Lanka and to  assess  the
        best possible chance of his continued recovery  and  prevention  of
        relapse.  Having undertaken various assessments Ms Kreeger sets out
        her opinion/recommendation/advice in section 4 of the report, where
        she states that the appellant will return to a state of the loss of
        all consciousness, as he did when he came to the United Kingdom, if
        returned to Sri Lanka.  If  his  symptoms  worsen  he  will  become
        extremely vulnerable causing a potential risk as it was likely that
        he  would  again  attempt  suicide.   Ms  Kreeger  refers  to   the
        appellant's symptoms "increasingly and worsening  so  rapidly"  and
        states that in her opinion it is in  his  best  interests  to  stay
        where he feels safe and  secure  and  where  he  can  continue  the
        progress he has made in the UK to give  him  a  greater  chance  of
        recovery; together  with  psychological  and  family  support.  The
        recommendation is for involvement of visits from  a  mental  health
        team to  monitor  his  symptoms,  consistent  family  support,  and
        further counselling.


    19. The assessment of whether an individual is  telling  the  truth  is
        made more difficult if their  own  evidence  is  that  they  suffer
        mental illness or  other issues affecting not only their ability to
        recall events but also the accuracy of  their  recollection.  Judge
        Molloy was  faced  with  this  issue  but  it  is  clear  from  the
        determination and he clearly weighed up the evidence in  the  round
        and concluded that the core of the claim was not credible. As  such
        it was found that he faced no risk on return to Sri Lanka  and  was
        not entitled to grant of international protection.


    20. If the appellant's account was taken as being credible he is  still
        not able to prove that he is entitled to any form of  international
        protection. The appellant's account, set out in detail in paragraph
        3 of the refusal letter of 23rd November 2010, is  that  he  was  a
        supporter of the LTTE to whom he gave food,  money,  and  gold.  In
        April or May 1980 he was identified by a masked man and taken to an
        internally displaced peoples camp in Point Pedrop whether a  number
        of other people, including his whole family. He was detained at the
        camp five days during which time he was threatened  and  questioned
        at gunpoint on seven or eight occasions for  five  or  ten  minutes
        each time. He was asked why he had given food to the LTTE to  which
        he replied that as he was asked for food he gave it to them. He was
        threatened but not harmed. During the detention  his  identity  was
        checked and returned to him and he was told to report, on  release,
        once a week to the camp for five weeks. The  appellant  experienced
        no further problems following his release from the camp.


    21. In 1997 his oldest son claimed to have  experienced  problems  with
        the LTTE and the army and so he came to the United Kingdom to claim
        asylum. Every month in his village the Sri Lankan Army would  round
        up individuals and during three such  roundups  the  appellant  was
        stopped: in 2000, February 2003 and in 2004. He  was  arrested  and
        taken before a masked man but not identified and  so  was  released
        and allowed to go free. The appellant claims he  moved  to  another
        location in 2003 although in 2005 returned to his native home area.


    22. In 2005  two  of  his  sons  who  supported  the  LTTE  joined  the
        organisation but due to fear of arrest disappeared in  2005.  As  a
        result of this his wife became mentally ill. One son came to the UK
        in 2006 to study and stay with his brother. The appellant travelled
        to the UK in 2008 to visit his son  and  stayed  for  three  months
        before returning to Sri Lanka.  He returned to the UK  in  February
        2010 with his wife and claimed asylum because he alleged he and his
        wife were sick and there was no one to look after them in Sir Lanka
        and he was frightened of the Sri Lankan Army.


    23. The refusal  letter  records  a  number  of  discrepancies  in  the
        evidence of concern to the Secretary of State and the Judge  Molloy
        in relation to his account.


    24. The appellant claims to have assisted the LTTE but not to have held
        any position or rank within that  organisation.  He  may  have  had
        family members who joined but even if he was detained from May 2009
        to 2011 and beaten whilst being  questioned  in  detention,  it  is
        clear that he was released. A letter from his uncle  in  Sri  Lanka
        suggests that the appellant's father asked him to assist  with  the
        release and there is no credible evidence  that  the  appellant  is
        subject to an arrest warrant or  that  he  was  a  put  before  the
        courts, even at  the  height  of  the  troubles  in  Sri  Lanka.  A
        substantial number of individuals were rounded up  or  detained  by
        the authorities in camps as a  result  of  the  military  operation
        against the LTTE in 2009 and were later released. This does not  in
        itself create a risk for the appellant on return.


    25. The question one has to consider is whether the appellant's profile
        at the point of return to the airport is such so as to bring him to
        the adverse attention  of  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka.  Those
        currently facing a real risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  on
        return to Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise, are:


          (a)     Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
   the integrity of Sri             Lanka as a  single  state  because  they
   are, or  are  perceived  to  have  a                significant  role  in
   relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the            diaspora
   and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


          (b)     Journalists whether in print  or  other  media)  or  human
   rights activists,            who, in either case, have criticised the Sri
   Lankan government, in                 particular its human rights record,
   or who are associated with publications            critical  of  the  Sri
   Lankan government.


          (c)     Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned
   and                 Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri  Lankan
   security forces,             armed forces or the Sri  Lankan  authorities
   in alleged war crimes.  Among             those who  may  have  witnessed
   war crimes during the conflict,                    particularly in the No-
   Fire Zones in May  2009,  only  those  who  have                  already
   identified  themselves  by  giving  such  evidence  would  be  known   to
   the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at  real  risk  of
          adverse attention or persecution on return as potential or  actual
   war                 crimes witnesses.


          (d)     A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
   accessible at           the airport, comprising a list of  those  against
   whom there is an extant                court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
   Individuals whose name appears on a                "stop"  list  will  be
   stopped    at    the    airport    and     handed     over     to     the
   appropriate Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in  pursuance  of  such  order  or
   warrant.


    26. Even taking his case at its highest I find the appellant has failed
        to discharge the burden of proof upon him to the required  standard
        show that his profile (actual or perceived) fits any of  the  above
        categories such as to place  him  at  risk  on  return,  even  when
        considering the issues and factors set out  in  cases  such  as  LP
        (LTTE area - Tamils - Colombo  -  risk?)  Sri  Lanka  [2007]  UKAIT
        00076.  I find the appellant has failed to discharge the burden  of
        proof upon him to the required standard to show that he is entitled
        to be recognised as a refugee, entitled to a grant of  humanitarian
        protection, or able to succeed under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR  so  far
        as they relate to his claim to be  at  risk  from  the  Sri  Lankan
        Authorities or the army in his home state.


    27. In relation to the medical evidence, taking the  appellant's  claim
        at its highest, he is suffering from a  potential  mental  illness,
        suffering from PTSD  and  depression,  and  there  is  a  realistic
        prospect of attempted suicide.


    28. The appellant currently has the support of his family in the United
        Kingdom and it appears that his coming to this country is part of a
        pattern of family migration.  I  do  not  accept  that  he  has  no
        relatives in Sri Lanka as there is in the file  a  letter  from  an
        uncle who stated that, at the request of the appellant's father, he
        obtained the appellant's released from  detention  and  helped  him
        find an agent and to come  to  the  United  Kingdom.  There  is  no
        evidence  that  such  family  connections  would  not  be  able  or
        available to assist the appellant on return. I do not find it prove
        that he would therefore be abandoned.


    29. In relation to Article 3 ECHR and  the  appellant's  mental  health
        issues the threshold is a very high one. On appeal to the EctHR  in
        N v UK Application 26565/05 the Grand Chamber upheld  the  decision
        of the House of Lords and said that in medical cases Article 3 only
        applied in  very  exceptional  circumstances  particularly  as  the
        suffering was not the result of an intentional act or omission of a
        State or non State body.  The EctHR said that Article 3  could  not
        be relied on to address  the  disparity  in  medical  care  between
        Contracting States and the applicant's state of origin.   The  fact
        that  the  person's  circumstances,  including  his  or  her   life
        expectancy, would be significantly reduced was  not  sufficient  in
        itself to give rise to a breach of Article 3. Those same principles
        had to apply in relation to the expulsion of any  person  afflicted
        with any serious, naturally occurring physical  or  mental  illness
        which might cause suffering pain or  reduced  life  expectancy  and
        required specialist medical treatment that  might  not  be  readily
        available or which might only be available at considerable cost.


    30. In J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 the Court of Appeal said that in  a
        foreign case the Article 3 threshold would be particularly high and
        even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment was not the  direct
        or  indirect  responsibility  of  the  public  authorities  in  the
        receiving state and resulted from some naturally occurring  illness
        whether physical or mental.


    31. In Balogun  v  United  Kingdom  (Application  no.  60286/09)  ECtHR
        (Fourth Section), May 2012,  the  Nigerian  applicant  submitted  a
        report from a specialist psychiatric registrar which stated that he
        had attempted suicide after being notified of the  refusal  of  his
        human rights claim.  Nonetheless, it was held that the  Applicant's
        complaint under Article 3 against deportation was  manifestly  ill-
        founded and therefore inadmissible pursuant to Articles  55(3)  and
        (4) ECHR. The UK Government had outlined appropriate steps it would
        take throughout the deportation process to  protect  the  Applicant
        from the risk of suicide. In light of those precautions to be taken
        by the Government and the existence of adequate psychiatric care in
        Nigeria, the Court could not be persuaded that  there  would  be  a
        breach of Article 3 if the Applicant was deported to Nigeria (paras
        29 - 34).


    32. There are clearly  adequate  mental  health  services  and  medical
        facilities available in the United Kingdom  and  it  has  not  been
        proved that such services  and  facilities  as  the  appellant  may
        require will not be available to him in Sri  Lanka.  There  is  the
        question of whether the appellant will engage with such services as
        it is clear that he has not cooperated with attempts  to  obtain  a
        brain scan and other services facilitated by the  adjournments.  If
        he fails to engage his prognosis will be the same whether he is  in
        the United Kingdom or Sri Lanka and if there is  any  deterioration
        as a result that must be  a  matter  for  which  he  is  personally
        responsible and not the United Kingdom Government.


    33. The case of Balogun is of particular interest as it was found  that
        the  complaint  by  the  appellant  was  manifestly  unfounded  and
        therefore inadmissible before the European Court. As  it  has  been
        proved that there are adequate facilities  at  each  stage  of  the
        process to meet the  appellant's  needs,  I  do  not  find  he  has
        discharged the burden of proof upon him to the required standard to
        show that he is able to meet the Article 3 threshold.


    34. In relation to Article 8, I have considered this  by  reference  to
        family and private life together with the question of his  physical
        and moral integrity. The family life element is based upon the fact
        there are family in United Kingdom. It  is  claimed  the  appellant
        needs the support of his family in the UK due to his mental  health
        issues but I do not accept the claim there  is  no  family  in  Sri
        Lanka available to assist and/or  adequate  services  available  to
        provide support if required. A local example is evidence  that  the
        appellant's mother was able to  receive  psychiatric  care  in  Sri
        Lanka. The appellant and his wife will be returned together and  if
        she requires ongoing  care  it  has  not  been  proved  not  to  be
        available either. I accept that the appellant's  parents,  brother,
        and other family members are here but I do not accept that even  if
        it is established that there is an element of dependency created as
        result of the appellant's personal circumstances, that  this  makes
        the  decision  to  return  disproportionate  bearing  in  mind  the
        appellant has no lawful right to remain in the United Kingdom,  the
        availability of medication  and  support  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  the
        legitimate aim of the need to have valid and  workable  immigration
        controls based upon the economic needs of the United Kingdom.  I am
        satisfied that the Secretary of State has discharged the burden  of
        proof upon her to the required  standard  to  show  that  it  is  a
        proportionate decision.


    35. Whilst I accept, as a result of  events  that  he  claims  to  have
        occurred, his mental health, or a combination of such  events,  the
        appellant has a subjective fear I  find  any  stated  fear  of  ill
        treatment in Sri Lanka is not objectively well founded which weighs
        against there being a real risk of there  being  a  breach  of  any
        protected human rights. I have also found that the  United  Kingdom
        and Sri Lanka have effective mechanisms to reduce the risk, if  the
        appellant chooses to engage with such services, which  also  weighs
        against there being a real risk of a breach. If the  appellant  has
        not engaged with services that are available they cannot be said to
        form part of his private life in the United Kingdom. To the  extent
        there has been engagement I accept  this  will  form  part  of  his
        private life but I do not find it shown in the  circumstances  that
        his removal will have such an adverse effect upon his physical  and
        moral integrity so as to make the decision  disproportionate  under
        Article 8.


    36. Whilst I accept that the appellant wishes to remain in  the  United
        Kingdom with other family members it is  established  jurisprudence
        that Article 8 does not allow individuals to choose the country  in
        which they wish to reside. I  find  the  appellant  has  failed  to
        discharge the burden of proof upon him to the required standard  to
        show the United  Kingdom  Government  will  be  in  breach  of  any
        obligation it has under any international convention should  he  be
        returned to Sri Lanka, which he may be as he  is  no  more  than  a
        failed asylum seeker which in itself creates no  identifiable  risk
        warranting a grant of international protection.


Decision

    37. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been found to have materially
        erred in law and his determination set aside. I remake the decision
        as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 15th August 2013












