
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/05164/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2016                      |On 6 April 2016                 |
|                                      |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    [Z A]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Smith (counsel) instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent: Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant, on the basis of the appellant's age and to  preserve
the anonymity direction made in the First-tier tribunal.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Aujla promulgated on 15 November 2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.


3. The Appellant was born on [ ] 1998 and is a national of Afghanistan.

4. On 30 July 2010 the respondent refused the appellant's claim for  asylum,
but, because of the appellants the young age, granted  leave  to  remain  in
the UK until 30 July 2013. At that stage the appellant did  not  appeal  the
refusal of asylum. On 22 July 2013 the appellant applied for  further  leave
to remain in the UK. The respondent refused that application  on  6  January
2015, but granted further discretionary leave to remain in the  UK  until  6
June 2015.

5. The appellant has submitted a separate application for  leave  to  remain
in the UK on article  8  ECHR  grounds.  The  respondent  has  refused  that
application. The appellant appealed the respondent's  refusal.  That  appeal
was due to be heard  in  mid-March  2016  before  the  First-tier,  but  the
hearing has been vacated to await the outcome of this appeal.


The Judge's Decision

6. The Appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision  of  6  January
2015 (refusing asylum)  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Aujla ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

7. Grounds of appeal were lodged and  on  25  January  2016  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Rintoul gave permission to appeal stating

      "It is arguable that First-tier Tribunal Judge Aujla  erred  in  that,
      having indicated [41] that he had serious concerns about some  of  the
      assertions  made  in  an  expert  report,  these  are  not  adequately
      identified, nor is it clear which parts of the report he accepted  and
      which he did not. It is in particular unclear at [46] why the expert's
      opinion that  the  appellant  might  be  treated  as  a  deserter  was
      rejected.


      "All grounds are arguable"

The Hearing

8. (a) Ms Smith, for the appellant, adopted the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. She told me that the Judge had failed  to  make  clear  findings  in
relation to an expert report relied on by the appellant, and had  failed  to
indicate whether he rejected or accepted the expert evidence. The thrust  of
her argument was that the decision was undermined by a  failure  to  provide
adequate reasons, and a failure to take account of  material  evidence.  She
told me that the Judge accepted the core aspects of the appellants claim  at
[44], but then refused to accept the appellant  as  a  credible  witness  at
[48] when consideration was given to the  appellant's  attempts  to  contact
his mother.

   (b) Ms Smith reminded me that there  are  four  grounds  of  appeal.  The
   fourth ground of appeal is a criticism of the Judge's treatment  of  part
   of the appellant's claim that he risks persecution  as  an  unaccompanied
   minor if returned to  Afghanistan.  The  appellant  celebrated  his  18th
   birthday in January 2016. Miss Smith restricted submissions  in  relation
   to the fourth ground of appeal by arguing that  the  appellant  has  only
   just attained majority.

   (c) Ms Smith drew my attention to the  report  prepared  by  Dr  Schuster
   (between pages 65 and 100 of the appellant's  bundle).  She  argued  that
   although the Judge appears to reject the expert report at [41], the Judge
   does not adequately specify why he rejects the report. She told  me  that
   that is a material error of law because (she argued that) the  Judge  did
   not make clear findings, but instead said at [41] and [45]  that  he  had
   studied the report and now rejects it.

   (d) Ms Smith told me that it is a crucial part of the appellant's  claim,
   supported by the expert's report, that the appellant will be treated as a
   deserter, and that that is not a matter with which the Judge  engages  at
   all. She reminded me that the expert report finds that the  appellant  is
   westernised and will be easily identified in Afghanistan as a  young  man
   who spent his teenage years in the UK.  She  told  me  that  despite  the
   Judge's findings at [49], the decision does not  reconcile  the  expert's
   report with the Judge's decision that  the  appellant  does  not  have  a
   profile which would attract risk in Afghanistan.

   (e) Ms Smith told  me  that  the  Judge  has  not  adequately  considered
   internal relocation, and that the  Judge's  conclusion  at  [50]  of  the
   decision elides consideration of the expert report.

   (f) Ms Smith told  me  that  the  Judge's  findings  at  [48]  (that  the
   appellant had not been truthful about contact with his mother)  flies  in
   the face of the findings at [44]  of  the  decision  and  does  not  take
   account of the unchallenged evidence  that  the  appellant  had  provided
   truthful information to the British Red Cross, which led to contact  with
   his cousin in Afghanistan. She told me that the Judge failed to  consider
   TN, MA & AA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2015] UKSC 40.

8.   Mr Tarlow, for the respondent, relied on  the  terms  of  the  rule  24
reply submitted for the respondent. He told me that the  decision  does  not
contain any errors, material or otherwise; that the decision is a  carefully
worded, well-reasoned decision containing adequate findings of fact  leading
to a conclusion which is manifestly open to the Judge to reach. He  reminded
me that the expert's report is  lengthy,  and  told  me  that  it  would  be
unrealistic for the Judge to refer to each paragraph  contained  in  such  a
lengthy report. He told  me  that,  in  reality,  the  challenge  is  simply
disagreement with the Judge's findings of fact rather than an argument  that
a material error of law has been made. He urged me  to  dismiss  the  appeal
and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9. The Judge only mentions the expert report  in  three  paragraphs  of  the
decision. At [38] the Judge  states  that  he  is  taking  the  report  into
account. At [45] he repeats that he  is  taking  the  expert's  report  into
account. At [41] the Judge states

      "I have carefully studied the expert report. Whilst I have  given  the
      report appropriate weight, I do have serious concerns  about  some  of
      the assertions made therein. There are a number of assertions made  by
      the expert which were  not  independently  sourced  and  I  raised  my
      concerns during Ms Smith's submissions when she was referring  to  the
      expert report."

10. Is not sufficient for the Judge to say that he is simply taking  account
of the expert report. It is not clear from [41] which  part  of  the  expert
report the Judge accepts and which part he  rejects.  The  objective  reader
cannot tell what weight has been attached to the expert report, even  though
the Judge declares that the weight attached  is  appropriate.  The  decision
contains no meaningful analysis of the contents of the  expert  report,  not
even a comparison between the expert's conclusions and what is found in  the
background material.

11.   In NA v UK Application 25904/07 2008 ECHR 616  it was  said  that  "in
assessing such material, consideration must  be  given  to  its  source,  in
particular its independence, reliability  and  objectivity.  In  respect  of
reports, the authority and reputation of the author, the seriousness of  the
investigations by means of which  they  are  compiled,  the  consistency  of
their conclusions and that corroboration by other sources are  all  relevant
considerations."

12. The Judge only deals with the expert report  at  [41],  and  there  only
gives the report superficial attention, failing to reach a conclusion  -  or
even make findings - in relation to the quality of  the  evidence  from  the
expert. Although the Judge makes reference to  "serious  concerns"  he  does
not at any point in the decision  set  out  what  those  concerns  are.  The
superficial treatment of the expert report amounts to a  material  error  of
law.

13. At [44] of the decision the  Judge  finds  that  overall  the  appellant
gives a credible account. The Judge starts [48] of the decision  by  stating
that he does not accept the appellant's account of his attempts to  maintain
contact with his mother in Afghanistan to be credible. There  is  clearly  a
conflict between the Judge's findings at [44] and [48]. The Judge  does  not
provide adequate reasons for explaining why on the one  hand  he  finds  the
appellant to be credible  but  in  other  respects  he  does  not  find  the
appellant credible. In his overall  assessment  of  credibility,  the  Judge
does not take account of the accepted fact  that  the  appellant  cooperated
with the British Red Cross and gave them sufficient  information  to  enable
contact to be established with the appellant's cousin in Afghanistan.

14.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15. I find that the inadequacy of  findings  in  relation  to  the  detailed
expert evidence placed before the  First-Tier  together  with  the  lack  of
reasoning  surrounding  the  conflicting  findings  about  the   appellant's
credibility amount to material errors of law. I consider  the  error  to  be
material because  had  the  Tribunal  conducted  a  properly  reasoned  fact
finding exercise, based on an analysis of the evidence,  the  outcome  could
have been different.

16.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a material  errors  of
law. I must set the decision aside.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 a case may  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:


    (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18.  Both Ms Smith and Mr Tarlow agreed that if I find a material  error  of
law, this case should be remitted to the First-tier  because  the  appellant
has an outstanding appeal before the First-tier and  it  is  desirable  that
both matters be dealt with together. In this case  I  have  determined  that
the case should be remitted because of the nature and  extent  of  the  fact
finding exercise necessary to reach a just decision in these  appeals.  None
of the findings of fact are to stand; a complete re-hearing is necessary.

19. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Taylor  House
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Aujla.

CONCLUSION

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

21. I set the decision aside. The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                                                              Date 15
March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

