

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 23 December 2014                           |On 20 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                 musa jaiteh
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Y Darboe, Queen's Park Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who was born on 12 December 1993 and who is a citizen of
    Gambia, appeals against the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    V A Osborne that was promulgated on  2  October  2014.   Judge  Osborne
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the immigration decision of 21
    July 2014 to remove him as an overstayer having refused his asylum  and
    human rights claims.

 2. The appellant relied on three grounds of appeal.  The  first  was  that
    Judge Osborne erred procedurally by failing to grant an adjournment for
    the  appellant  to  obtain  a  proctologists  report  to  confirm   his
    homosexual activity. As discussed at the  hearing,  this  ground  falls
    away in light of the judgment of the Court of Justice of  the  European
    Union in A, B, C v Staatsecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie (C-148/13
    (plus ), 2 December 2014) [2014 EUECJ C-148/13.   Such  evidence  would
    not be admissible in connection with a protection  claim  even  if  the
    appellant were to consent to such a report being prepared  following  a
    medical examination.

 3. I add that  even  if  this  clarification  of  the  law  had  not  been
    forthcoming, I would have found against the appellant  on  this  ground
    because there is no evidence that an application for an adjournment was
    made to Judge Osborne.

 4. Although it is clear that an application to adjourn was received by the
    Tribunal on 19 August 2014, that application  was  refused  three  days
    latter by Designated Judge Coates because he was not satisfied  that  a
    report from a proctologist was  either  necessary  or  appropriate  for
    establishing the appellant's sexuality.  There  is  of  course  nothing
    wrong with that decision in light of the Court of  Justice's  judgment.
    There is no evidence that this application was renewed at  the  hearing
    on 22 August 2014 or that any  other  application  was  made  to  Judge
    Osborne by Mr L Darboe who represented the appellant before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. The second  and  third  grounds  of  appeal  overlap  insofar  as  they
    challenge the credibility findings made by Judge Osborne.  Mr Y  Darboe
    advised me that the appellant did not seek to challenge  those  finding
    on perversity or rationality grounds  and  given  the  manifestly  well
    reasoned determination it is clear to see why he made that  concession.
    There was no prospect of any  argument  on  perversity  or  rationality
    grounds succeeding.

 6. The submission was that the judge had failed to have proper  regard  to
    the evidence.  She had failed to take account of the photographs of the
    appellant with another man.  They were evidence of his sexuality  given
    that they showed him kissing.  The complaint was that the  judge  found
    the photographs to be of poor quality because she only had  photocopies
    and not the originals, which had been retained by the Home Office.

 7. There is no merit in this point because although  Judge  Osborne  found
    the evidence to be of poor quality,  she  did  not  dispute  that  they
    showed the appellant with another man.  What  she  found,  however,  at
    paragraph 57 is that the relationship between  the  appellant  and  the
    other man was not a genuine relationship and that the evidence provided
    was self-serving.  That finding  was  open  to  the  judge,  given  her
    assessment  of  the  other  evidence,  including  the  appellant's  own
    accounts, set out earlier in the determination.

 8. The submissions also allege that the judge failed  to  appreciate  that
    the appellant might never have known the true  date  of  birth  of  his
    claimed partner.  The appellant  did  not  dispute  that  there  was  a
    difference in what he understood to be his partner's date of birth  and
    that stated in his partner's passport but that there was no  reason  he
    should have known his partner's actual date of birth.

 9. It is clear that this  point  was  never  made  to  Judge  Osborne  and
    therefore it is not possible to say she erred by  not  considering  it,
    particularly since she considered the evidence presented which showed a
    discrepancy that was not explained.  In any event,  even  if  there  is
    merit in the point, it could  not  have  altered  the  judge's  overall
    findings as it was only one of a number of reasons why she thought  the
    appellant had not been truthful about his sexuality.

10. The submissions continue by alleging that the judge failed to  properly
    consider the documents relied  on  by  the  appellant.   The  appellant
    sought to distance himself from the errors in the documents relating to
    his uncle and aunt and said the judge was wrong to hold him responsible
    for the errors they contained.  This is not a sound argument because as
    the appellant submitted the documents it can be assumed he  knew  their
    contents.  The fact  he  failed  to  deal  with  the  errors  in  those
    documents means the judge could not give them any significant weight.

11. The appellant also alleges that the judge made  contradictory  findings
    in relations to the truthfulness of the appellant's claim  to  be  gay.
    However, it is clear that the allegation is based on  a  misreading  of
    the determination.  The judge recognises that the  appellant  might  be
    gay but that to determine that issue she would have to have  regard  to
    all of his evidence.  When she examines all aspects of the  appellant's
    account she concluded that he was not a truthful person  and  therefore
    had failed to establish his account including that of his sexuality.

12. I am satisfied there is nothing in the  second  and  third  grounds  of
    appeal because I find the judge properly assessed all the evidence  and
    reached clear and cogent reasons for her findings.  The grounds  amount
    to mere disagreement with the findings made and  do  not  disclose  any
    legal error.

13. As the grounds are not made out, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal fails
    and the decision of Judge Osborne stands.



Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

There is no error on a point of law in Judge  V  A  Osborne's  determination
and her decision is upheld.




                               Signed        Date 6 January 2015


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
