
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05126/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 19 February 2016                      |On 22 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                                    [V T]
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms J Hassan of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on [ ]  1985.   He  appeals
   to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davidge dated 21  August  2015  refusing  his  appeal  against  the
   decision of the respondent dated 4 March 2015  refusing  him  asylum  and
   humanitarian protection  and  to  remove  him  from  the  United  Kingdom
   pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2. Permission to appeal was at first  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge and subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkely  on  16
   November 2015 who stated that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Judge
   may have erred in his determination for the succinct reasons set  out  to
   ground one of the grounds of appeal.

   The first-tier Tribunal's findings

3. The Judge in his  determination  made  the  following  findings  which  I
   summarise.

    . I have a psychiatrist report  dated  17  March  2015  from  Dr  Robert
      Lawrence MRCPPych, including a statement that the appellant is not fit
      to face a court hearing because "he does  not  have  the  capacity  to
      understand the court proceedings and it would be impossible for him to
      withstand any form of cross  examination".  The  diagnosis  in  severe
      psychosis secondary to depression.   I  also  had  the  benefit  of  a
      medical report dated 3 August 2015 from Professor  S  Lingham  MD  who
      made the report following an  examination  on  30  August  2015.   The
      doctor notes that the appellant is clinically depressed  and  presents
      with symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder which psychosis.   The
      report considers the scars of the appellant and finds them  diagnostic
      of burns consistent with having been  caused  over  two  years  prior,
      which have not been self-inflicted, not being in  an  area  where  the
      patient could easily cause them himself, and whilst it  is  impossible
      for him to say that they  have  not  been  deliberately  inflicted  to
      mislead, they have not been caused by a  surgical  procedure,  do  not
      result from a medical condition, and  not  inflicted  through  ritual.
      One of the scars may have been caused by deep wounds arising in severe
      accident or injury, the doctor states, "I cannot clinically think of a
      scenario  where  the  patient  could  have  been  accidentally  burned
      repeatedly to cause such injuries".




    . The doctor notes that the scars are typical of cigarette burns and the
      he is satisfied, finding no reason to dispute the history provided  by
      the patient, they are  highly  consistent  with  his  account  of  ill
      treatment. I am satisfied that the  medical  evidence  is  capable  of
      corroborating the appellant's account  of  ill  treatment  and  counts
      positively in my assessment of credibility.




    . The appellant submitted documentary  evidence  from  the  court  which
      states that a complaint had been made to the authorities prompting his
      arrest in May 2  May  2010,  on  suspicion  of  being  "a  leader"  in
      "planting bombs".   The  documents  states  that  he  was  before  the
      Magistrate in person on nine occasions.  The  appellant  said  in  his
      interview that he only went to court twice, once in May 2010 and  then
      again in August  2010.   The  appellant  was  quite  specific  in  his
      interview about that.  In his witness statement he reiterates he  only
      went to court twice and says that he was  not  taken  more  often  the
      cause he was so badly beaten that it was likely the authorities wanted
      to avoid the magistrate's seeing his condition.




    . The appellant also states in connection  with  the  second  period  of
      detention between January and March 2013 that  he  was  not  taken  to
      court.  The court documents he relies upon state that he was.  In  his
      witness statement apparently to resolve these discrepancies, he  draws
      a distinction between being taken to court and one where he  sees  the
      magistrate.  The appellant had an  opportunity  in  his  interview  to
      explain exactly what happened, and this latest  explanation  does  not
      sit well but the documentation, and has  all  the  characteristics  of
      being a gloss intended to meet a difficulty as it has become  apparent
      to him than with the truth.




    . In his interview, the appellant said his bail conditions  required  to
      report weekly.  Contrary to that position he said he had in fact  only
      departed after his release and then left the country  before  she  was
      next due to report.  The chronology he  provides  does  not  fit  with
      weekly reporting as this would  have  necessitated  him  reporting  at
      least twice before release to the point that it would  not  have  been
      the once he said and contrary to his account he had already failed  to
      report before he left the country.




    . Further discrepancies arise in connection  with  the  bail  conditions
      upon which he says he was released in 2013.  His evidence was that  he
      had to report weekly, the court documents he relied on  state  it  was
      monthly.  In his witness  statement  he  changed  it  to  monthly  but
      provides no explanation as to why in his interview he said weekly.  If
      he was to report monthly, that he would  not  have  been  required  to
      report before the date he says he left Sri Lanka and yet  he  says  he
      had reported accompanied by his uncle.   The  appellant's  account  is
      inconsistent and the discrepancies remain unexplained.   The  lawyer's
      letter does not assist the appellant in  this  regard.   There  is  no
      expert verification  report  of  the  court  documents.   The  medical
      evidence does not address the discrepancies  specifically,  I  find  I
      cannot infer that the fact of suffering and post-traumatic  to  stress
      disorder and having the scarring described in the report  provides  an
      adequate explanation.  The discrepancies between his account  and  the
      documents is undermining of his account and  the  reliability  of  the
      documentation.




    .  The  appellant  produced  a  letter  from  the  lawyer  who  he  says
      represented him in the Magistrates court.  In his interview he did not
      know the details of his lawyer and I find his inability to record  his
      name and firm is undermining of his credibility.  The medical evidence
      does not deal directly with this  point.   The  appellant  explanation
      that it was not a Tamil  name  which  is  why  he  had  difficulty  in
      recording it, is not  a  credible  explanation  given  the  appellants
      contact with his lawyer was for two years in post flight contact.




    . There are aspects of the appellant's account which count adversely  in
      my assessment of his credibility and upon which his mental  state  and
      have no bearing.  His account  that  his  cousin  and  brother-in-law,
      Joseph Alex, the government servant, stood surety for him to report as
      required.  It is self-evident that no arrest  warrant  was  issued  at
      that time because the appellant had left the  country  and  re-entered
      without being arrested on a warrant.




    . The appellant asserts that on re-entry though he was not detained  for
      failing to attend bail in connection with the suspicions he was a lead
      bomber, but because of re-entering without proper  documentation.   He
      relied instead on the proposition was that he was an LTTE activist and
      as he had been outside of the country, it was presumed, raising  funds
      and support for the course of separation  outside  the  country.   His
      assertion that he was subsequently released on  bail,  with  his  same
      relative as a surety, but fails to recognize the  difficulty  apparent
      in the assertion that the authorities would  accept  as  surety  of  a
      relative who had failed in his duties previously,  particularly  given
      the seriousness of the suspicions  for  the  first  detention:  namely
      being a leader in planting bombs.  When the  matter  was  put  to  the
      appellant, he simply asserted that he could find no one else to  stand
      as surety.  His explanation does not meet the difficulty.  There is no
      witness statement from the appellant's brother in law or uncle who  he
      says actually paid the bail funds and attended the first to  reporting
      date by the appellant in 2013 and also facilitated his flight from Sri
      Lanka who has been in touch with his family, and has been subjected to
      harassment on account of his relationship with the appellant.   Whilst
      corroboration is not a requirement the absence of evidence  reasonably
      available, given the production of all the documentary  evidence  from
      both sources, does not assist the appellant.




    . Looking at the evidence in the round  I  find  that  I  can  place  no
      reliance on the appellant's chronology of detention and ill-treatment.
       But at its highest I find that the evidence shows that the  appellant
      has been in an IDP camp that he has suffered deliberate  ill-treatment
      through the application of burning rods and cigarette burns.  When and
      in what context, it is  not  established  even  to  the  low  standard
      applicable.  Taking into account the country guidance which is on  the
      point  that  although  detention  and  ill-treatment  of  Tamils   was
      relatively commonplace prior to the cessation of the conflict.  I find
      that the appellant has not established, even to  the  lower  standard,
      that he  was  detained  and  ill-treated  following  the  end  of  the
      conflict, or there is an outstanding warrant for his arrest.

The grounds of appeal

4. The appellant in his grounds of  appeal  states  the  following  which  I
   summarise.  The  Judge  accepted  that  the  combined   effect   of   the
   psychiatrist and forensic evidence was that the  applicant  had  suffered
   ill-treatment by the application of burning rods and cigarette  burns  at
   an IDP camp.  The Judge considered that the country guidance  shows  that
   detention and ill treatment was relatively  common  place  prior  to  the
   cessation of the conflict.  This finding  gives  rise  to  a  fundamental
   error of fact that undermines the safety of the risk  assessment.   While
   IDP's were subject to poor conditions but no  interrogation  relating  to
   LTTW involvement took place within  the  IDP  camps.   Interrogation  and
   torture to secure a confession took place  in  army,  Cid,  TID  and  all
   police camps. Therefore, the error undermines the credibility assessment.




5.  The  second  ground  of  appeal  is  that   the   Judge   having   noted
   psychiatrist's opinion that the appellant was unfit to give evidence,  it
   was unfair for the Judge to draw adverse inferences from his  failure  to
   give evidence.


6. The third ground but is that the lawyers letter was vague and lacking  in
   detail but the e appellant secured bail on two occasions  in  respect  of
   two different cases, the lawyer provided the dates of detention  that  he
   had been  investigated  when  the  appellant  left  the  country  without
   reporting.


   The hearing

7. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties which  are  set  out
   in my Record of Proceedings.


     Error of law findings

8. I have given anxious scrutiny to  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Judge and  have  taken  into  account  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  the
   documents.


9. Permission was essentially given on the first ground of appeal  which  is
   that the Judge erred in law  by  his  finding  that  that  the  appellant
   suffered deliberate ill treatment through the application of burning rods
   and cigarette burns which took place while the appellant was in an in  an
   IDP camp and not in detention  by  the  authorities  as  claimed  by  the
   appellant. The main thrust of the grounds of appeal is  that  it  is  not
   possible for the appellant to have suffered these injuries in an IDP  and
   therefore the only explanation  is  that  the  injuries  must  have  been
   inflicted when he was detained.


10. The Judge stated at paragraph 31 "taking the evidence at  its  highest",
   I find that the evidence shows that the appellant had been detained in an
   IDP camp and that he has suffered ill-treatment  by  the  application  of
   burning rods and cigarette burns.  When and in what context,  it  is  not
   established even to the low standard applicable".  (emphasis mine)


11. I do not read this as saying that the Judge specifically found that  the
   appellant suffered ill-treatment at an IDP camp.   He  stated  that  when
   these  injuries  were  inflicted  and  in  what  context  has  not   been
   established.


12. The Judge has given ample ad cogent reasons for  finding  the  appellant
   and his claim not credible.  He found the  appellant  inconsistent  about
   many matters and found that the appellant has  not  adequately  explained
   the inconsistencies in the  evidence.   He  found  that  the  appellant's
   evidence was inconsistent with the documents provided. He said  that  the
   medical evidence is not  capable  of  explaining  these  inconsistencies.
   He found the appellants account about his appearances at the magistrate's
   court in Sri Lanka and bail were also inconsistent.  He also did not find
   it credible that the appellant would be of interest to the authorities on
   his re-entry into Sri Lanka on the bases  of  his  re-entry  without  the
   proper documentation and not because he was a  person  who  was  involved
   with bombs, which is a much more serious crime.


13. The Judge also did not find  it  credible  that  the  authorities  would
   accept the same surety and grant the appellant bail for the  second  time
   when the appellant had previously not abided to the bail conditions  with
   the same surety.  The Judge was entitled to  find  that  the  appellant's
   inability to remember the name of his  lawyer,  even  though  he  was  in
   contact with him for two years,  goes  to  his  credibility  and  to  the
   credibility of his claim that he appeared before a magistrate.   He  also
   found that the number of times that he said that he appeared  before  the
   magistrate, which was two times, is not consistent with  the  documentary
   evidence which stated it was on nine occasions.


14. I find that the Judge was entitled and required to reach her  conclusion
   based on her consideration and evaluation of the evidence as a whole.   I
   find that the Judge did take into account the medical report. However, an
   expert report is simply evidence in the case, which  must  be  considered
   and assessed together with all of the other evidence in the  case.   This
   is what the Judge did.  I find that the Judge was entitled to find and to
   take into account that the appellant gave inconsistent evidence  and  his
   account was not credible or plausible and was entitled  to  consider  the
   expert report together with the appellant's own  account  in  reaching  a
   conclusion as to whether the scarring was consistent with the appellant's
   account.  The Judge found that  taking  the  case  at  its  highest,  the
   appellant suffered these injuries but he has  not  proved  to  the  lower
   burden of proof, that they were  inflicted  by  the  authorities  in  the
   circumstances stated by the appellant.


15. The appellant's remaining grounds of appeal are of no  merit  whatsoever
   and a merely quarrel with the Judge's findings.  I find  that  the  Judge
   considered the evidence in the round gave  sustainable  reasons  for  her
   finding  that  the  appellant's  evidence  is   not   credible   in   her
   determination. I find that the Judge's reasoning is  understandable,  and
   not perverse.

16. For each of these reasons the judge  was  not  satisfied,  even  to  the
   lowest standard, that the  events  of  which  the  appellant  speaks  are
   credible

17. In R (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA
   Civ 982 Brooke LJ commented on that analysis as follows:
       15. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used  the  words
       "vital" and "critical" as synonyms of the word "material"  which  we
       have used above. The  whole  of  his  judgment  warrants  attention,
       because it reveals the anxiety of an appellate court not to overturn
       a judgment at first instance unless it really cannot understand  the
       original judge's thought processes when he/she was  making  material
       findings.
18. I find that I have no difficulty in understanding the reasoning  in  the
   Judge's determination for why she reached her conclusions.  I  find  that
   the grounds of appeal and no more than a  disagreement  with  the  Judges
   findings of fact and the conclusions that she drew from such findings.


19. In any event, I find that a differently constituted Tribunal  would  not
   come to a different conclusion on the evidence in this appeal. There  are
   many inconsistencies in the evidence which cannot  be  explained  by  the
   medical evidence provided.  The medical evidence is based on the  account
   given by the appellant to them about his  circumstances  which  has  been
   found not credible by the Judge for good reasons.  It is for the Judge to
   determine the credibility of the appellant and of the medical experts.

20. I find that no error of law has been established in  the  determination.
   I find that the Judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant is  not
   entitled to be recognised as a refugee  or  to  be  granted  humanitarian
   protection in this country. I uphold the decision.


DECISION

Appeal dismissed


     Dated this 15th day of March 2016

Signed by,

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Mrs S Chana


