
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05122/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 November 2016                      |On 30 November 2016               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     J Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:           Ms A. Walker, Counsel instructed by Marsh &
Partners
For the respondent:          Mr P. Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  11
    March 2015 to refuse a protection claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Boylan-Kemp  ("the  judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 04  March  2016.  The  judge  heard
    evidence from the appellant and found him to be a credible witness.  He
    was able to give detailed answers to questions and was able to  provide
    plausible and reasonable explanations for any apparent discrepancies in
    his evidence [46]. The judge accepted on the low standard of proof that
    the appellant had been a member of the Sea Tigers  [52].  His  evidence
    was that he was forcibly recruited. She also accepted  his  account  of
    his detention and torture in May 2009 [53]. The judge also accepted the
    appellant's account of his escape from detention in July 2010 following
    payment of a bribe [54].

3.    Having accepted that the appellant's account of past  persecution  the
    judge turned to consider risk on return with reference to the  relevant
    country guidance decision in GJ and others (post-civil war;  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319. She noted the submissions made by  both
    parties on the  issue,  which  included  the  appellant's  reliance  on
    reports from his family members to say that the authorities had been to
    their house to make enquiries about his whereabouts  [62].  Earlier  in
    the decision the judge also noted the appellant's evidence that the Sri
    Lankan authorities were still  interested  in  him  [23].  The  judge's
    conclusions on risk on return were as follows:

           "63. Upon consideration of these submissions  in  light  of  the
           evidence provided by the appellant to show his involvement  with
           the LTTE and his attendance at  anti-government  demonstrations,
           and upon consideration of the relevant authorities, I find  that
           I do not accept that someone of his level of involvement in  the
           LTTE would now be perceived to be at risk to the government upon
           his return. Therefore, I find that I am not persuaded,  even  to
           the lower standard, that the appellant has proven  that  due  to
           his imputed political opinion there would be a real risk to  him
           of ill-treatment amounting to persecution. Consequently, I  find
           that the appellant does not warrant a grant of asylum under  the
           Refugee Convention."

4.    The appellant appeals on  the  ground  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to make findings in relation to material  evidence,  namely  the
    letters from the appellant's mother and sister,  which  indicated  that
    the appellant was still of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

Decision and reasons

5.    At the outset of the hearing the parties agreed  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an  error  in  relation  to  a
    point of law. Mr Singh accepted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make
    findings with  regard  to  evidence  that  was  material  to  a  proper
    assessment of risk on return. The parties were agreed  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal could go on remake the  decision  without  the  need  to  hear
    further evidence from the appellant. It was  agreed  that  the  hearing
    would proceed on the basis that the judge had found the appellant to be
    a credible witness. The Home Office Presenting Officer on  the  day  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  did  not  appear  to  challenge  the
    credibility of the evidence from the appellant's  family  members.  The
    judge recorded the Presenting Officer as  having  submitted  that  "the
    authorities have not  arrested  the  appellant's  family  or  issued  a
    warrant for his arrest" and that this was therefore "indicative of  the
    fact that the Sri Lankan authorities now hold little, if any,  interest
    in him." [62].

6.    Mr  Singh  accepted  that,  in  light  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    positive credibility findings, the appeal should proceed on  the  basis
    that there had been no challenge to the reliability of the letters from
    the appellant's mother and  sister.   In  fact,  his  submissions  went
    further than that. He accepted that the judge had found  the  appellant
    to be a credible witness  and  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
    evidence of his family members. He accepted that the authorities appear
    to be aware of the appellant's diaspora activities in the UK. In  light
    of that evidence he said that  it  was  difficult  to  argue  that  the
    appellant would not be at risk and accepted that the case  may  deserve
    to be allowed on its  merits.  He  said  that  this  did  not  set  any
    precedent. He asked me to note that there was no evidence to show  that
    the appellant was on a stop list.

7.    The First-tier Tribunal judge  accepted  the  appellant's  account  of
    past events. Acts of persecution must be sufficiently serious by  their
    nature or repetition to constitute a severe violation  of  basic  human
    rights  or  be  an  accumulation  of  various   measures,   which   are
    sufficiently severe as to affect the individual in  a  similar  manner.
    The past  ill-treatment  suffered  by  the  appellant  was  undoubtedly
    sufficiently serious to amount to persecution.

8.    The appellant says that he was captured at the end of the war but  was
    taken for investigation by army intelligence after only a few days.  He
    says that he was seriously ill-treated, including  beatings,  cigarette
    burns, water boarding and was subjected to various humiliating  methods
    of 'sexual torture'. The medical evidence  also  identifies  a  gunshot
    wound. The appellant says that he was questioned about  his  activities
    for the LTTE and was identified by another man as a member of the LTTE.
    He says that the level of torture increased once he was identified as a
    member of the LTTE. He was asked questions about how the LTTE  obtained
    their weapons and where they hid their weapons.  He  was  detained  for
    just over a year before his brother in law secured his release  through
    payment of a bribe.

9.    Article 4(4) of the Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC),  reflected
    in paragraph 339K of the immigration rules, makes clear that  the  fact
    that a person has already been subject to persecution or  serious  harm
    or to direct  threats  of  such  persecution  or  harm,  is  a  serious
    indication of his well-founded fear of  persecution  or  real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm, unless there are good reasons to consider  that
    such persecution or serious harm will not be repeated.

10.   The appellant fled the country with the assistance  of  an  agent  and
    spent a period of time living illegally in India before  travelling  to
    the UK via Bahrain and France. He says that he arrived in the UK August
    2012 and claimed asylum shortly after.  He  does  not  claim  to  be  a
    particularly active member of the Tamil diaspora in the  UK,  but  says
    that  he  has  attended  three  or  four  events   organised   by   the
    Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) including  Commemoration
    Day on 27 November 2015.

11.   The appellant produced various letters  from  family  members  in  Sri
    Lanka in support of the appeal. A  letter  from  his  mother  dated  28
    August 2014 told him that men from military intelligence  had  come  to
    search the house and asked for him to report to them. A letter dated 18
    February 2015 informed him that the CID had made enquiries with her and
    her neighbours regarding his whereabouts. In other correspondence dated
    26 October 2015 his mother reported that the CID  kept  visiting  their
    house to ask whether they had any contact with him. They asked  her  to
    attend the CID office to answer questions.  In  a  more  recent  letter
    dated 10 January 2016 she told the appellant that the CID came back  in
    the New Year and accused her of lying about what contact she  had  with
    him. In a letter dated 23 January 2016, his sister, who lives with  his
    mother, wrote to say that the CID visited the house again and said that
    they had received information that he  was  working  for  the  LTTE  in
    London.

12.   Whilst I cannot discount the possibility that the  letters  have  been
    written by members of  the  appellant's  family  in  order  to  provide
    evidence to assist his asylum appeal, I take into account the fact that
    the appellant was found to be  a  credible  witness.  The  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal hearing, having heard him
    give evidence, did not appear to dispute the content of the letters but
    argued that they did not show that  the  appellant  was  of  sufficient
    interest to give rise to a risk on return.

13.   I find that the appellant's claim that the authorities have  continued
    to show an interest in him is plausible in light of the facts  of  this
    particular case and in the context of the background evidence.

14.   Firstly, the appellant  was  found  to  be  a  credible  witness.  The
    reliability of the letters from his mother and sister can be viewed  in
    that context. Secondly, it is  plausible  that  someone  who  has  been
    released through irregular means on payment of a bribe might  still  be
    of interest  to  the  authorities.  In  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  the  Tribunal
    considered evidence from a Sri Lankan barrister who stated that it  was
    common for people to be able to secure release on payment of  a  bribe,
    but it did not necessarily indicate that the authorities no longer  had
    an interest in the person. Such cases would  normally  be  recorded  as
    "escaped from detention". Absconder action would be commenced  and  the
    detainee's details would be passed to the National Intelligence  Bureau
    [146 GJ (Sri Lanka)].  The  Tribunal  considered  his  evidence  to  be
    "useful and reliable" [275].  Thirdly,  the  respondent's  most  recent
    Country Information and Guidance (CIG) report on Sri Lanka dated August
    2016 outlines evidence from the International Truth and Justice Project
    (ITJP), an organisation seeking to  support  accountability  for  human
    rights abuses in Sri Lanka, which stated that Tamils with tenuous links
    to the LTTE or low-level cadres continue to  be  targeted,  along  with
    their families [6.6.3 CIG].  In  light  of  the  above  evidence  I  am
    satisfied that the letters from the appellant's family members  can  be
    relied upon as evidence to  support  his  claim  that  the  authorities
    continued to have an ongoing interest in him.

15.   It seems that the guidance given by the Tribunal in GJ (Sri Lanka)  if
    often misapplied. The fact that  country  guidance  identifies  certain
    risk categories does not obviate a judicial  decision  maker  from  the
    need to give anxious scrutiny to the particular facts of a  case  based
    on the evidence available at the date of the hearing. The mere level of
    diaspora activity is not the touchstone for an assessment  of  risk  on
    return. The central question is whether the Sri Lankan authorities  are
    likely to view a person as someone who is perceived to be a  threat  to
    the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state. The assessment of whether
    a particular person's profile will give rise to  that  perception  will
    depend on the individual circumstances of each case.

16.   In this case I find that the following factors, when considered  as  a
    whole, are sufficient to give rise to a real risk on return:

       i) It is accepted that the appellant has  suffered  past-persecution
          as a result of his previous forced  recruitment  and  involvement
          with the LTTE Sea Tigers.


      ii) The appellant was not detained in a rehabilitation camp, but  was
          questioned by military intelligence about his activities for  the
          LTTE. He was released through irregular means  on  payment  of  a
          bribe. The background evidence suggests that this is likely to be
          recorded as an escape from detention and  that  his  details  are
          likely to have  been  passed  on  to  the  National  Intelligence
          Bureau.

     iii) The authorities periodically question the appellant's family  and
          neighbours about his whereabouts. The more recent  correspondence
          from the appellant's sister suggests that the authorities suspect
          that the appellant is working for the LTTE in London.

      iv) The background evidence outlined in the most  recent  CIG  report
          shows that the authorities continue to monitor activities in  the
          Tamil diaspora in the UK [2.3.3 & 6.6.8]. The Tribunal in GJ (Sri
          Lanka) recognised that the Sri Lankan  authorities  conducted  an
          intelligence led approach, which included  monitoring  activities
          in the UK.


   v) Although the appellant's activities in the UK have been limited, it is
      notable that he has been associated with  the  TGTE,  an  organisation
      that was proscribed by the Sri Lanka authorities in 2014. The level of
      his involvement is arguably less relevant in  circumstances  where  an
      organisation has been deemed by the Sri Lankan authorities as one that
      presents a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state.  Association
      with such an organisation is  likely  to  give  rise  to  the  adverse
      attention of the Sri Lankan authorities.

      vi) The  background  evidence  shows  that  the  authorities  take  a
          particular interest in Tamils who are returning from abroad.  The
          CIG sets out evidence from the Immigration and Refugee  Board  of
          Canada, which reported that individuals returning from abroad are
          particularly subject to  screening.  The  ITJP  reported  that  a
          security  force  insider  testified  that  military  intelligence
          officials from Joseph  Camp  were  actively  looking  for  Tamils
          returning from abroad in  order  to  interrogate  them  with  the
          intention of detaining and torturing them [6.5.2].  While  it  is
          difficult to assess the reliability of  an  unnamed  source,  the
          information is consistent with other evidence that shows that the
          Sri Lankan authorities continue to intimidate, harass, detain and
          torture those who are perceived to  support  the  LTTE  [2.3.8  &
          6.1.2].

     vii) While there is no direct evidence to suggest that  the  appellant
          is likely to be on a 'stop list', the evidence shows that  it  is
          likely that he would  be  subject  to  intensive  questioning  on
          return, at which point his background is likely to  become  known
          to the authorities.

    viii) For these reasons, I am satisfied that there are no good  reasons
          to consider that the past  persecution  that  the  appellant  has
          already suffered would not be repeated. The evidence shows on the
          low standard of proof that the authorities are  still  likely  to
          have an active interest in him  and  would  perceive  him  to  be
          someone who continues to pose a threat to the unitary Sri  Lankan
          state.


17.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law in relation to the assessment of risk  on
    return. For the reasons given above I remake the decision and  conclude
    that the appellant continues to have a well-founded fear of persecution
    for  reasons  of  his  actual  or  attributed  political  opinion.  The
    appellant's removal would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under
    the Refugee Convention.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I remake the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 30 November 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




