
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/05166/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal  Courts of Justice     |         Decision & Reasons           |
|On  19 June 2017                      |Promulgated                           |
|                                      |On 20 June 2017                       |
|Decision prepared 19 June 2017.       |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                Majeed Jaferi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Ms R Moffatt, of Counsel instructed by Kent
Law Clinic
For the Respondent:          Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   On 29 February 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  set  aside  the
    determination of the Judge in the First-tier on the basis that  he  had
    erred in his consideration of the rights of the appellant under Article
    8 of the ECHR. The decision of the judge to dismiss  the  asylum  claim
    was upheld.

2.     Judge Rimington ordered that the appeal be  adjourned  to  a  further
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal  on  the  issue  of  the  rights  of  the
    appellant  under Article 8  and preserved the findings  of  the  First-
    tier Judge  with  regard  to  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
    partner,  their child and  his  partner's   daughter.  The  appeal  was
    adjourned to await the sentencing of the appellant on drugs offences.
3.     The appellant has now been sentenced and the respondent  has  made  a
    first decision to deport but has not yet made a deportation  order.  Mr
    Whitwell produced, at  the  hearing,  a  letter  from  the  appellant's
    partner's mother, Ms H,  which  asserted  that  the  appellant  was  no
    longer in a relationship with his partner. He asked that the appeal  be
    adjourned to a further hearing so that her  evidence  could  be  heard.
    Moreover, it was appropriate that the respondent  make  a  decision  to
    deport before the appeal was further considered by the  Tribunal.  Both
    representatives considered that it  was  appropriate  that  the  appeal
    proceed to a further hearing in the First-tier, limited to the   issues
    of the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  and  that
    the hearing should be a hearing afresh: no findings of fact  should  be
    preserved. I was asked to order that the appeal be  listed  for  a  for
    mention hearing  in the First-tier  as  it might be  that  by  then   a
    decision had been made to  deport against which the appellant wished to
    appeal.

4.      I therefore remit the appeal for a hearing afresh in the  First-tier
    limited to the issue of the rights of the appellant under Article 8  of
    the ECHR. No findings of fact are preserved.

         Directions
        The appeal is to be listed for a for mention hearing after  the  1st
    week of August 2017 at Taylor House.



Signed        [pic]                     Date: 19 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy.



