
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05221/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 13th May 2015                              |On 1st June 2015              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR ZEESHAN AFZAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin, Counsel instructed by AH Law Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, Mr Zeeshan Afzal, whom we shall call the Claimant, is a
    citizen of  Pakistan  whose  appeal  was  allowed  on  asylum  grounds,
    humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Coutts in a decision promulgated on 12th February  2015.
    As the judge put it, the issue before him was whether the Claimant  was
    a gay man  and  whether,  in  consequence,  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    persecution if he returned to Pakistan.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted that if the Claimant was gay then he would face persecution in
    Pakistan.  The judge's findings were that he was satisfied to the lower
    standard that the Claimant was a gay man and he therefore  allowed  the
    appeal.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed on three grounds.  Ground one was  that
    the judge had failed to take into account a previous  decision  of  the
    judiciary, namely that a judge of the Upper Tribunal had made a  number
    of concerned comments on the nature and timing of  the  Claimant's  EEA
    application and clearly did not believe the Appellant.

 3. The second ground was that the judge had failed to adequately deal with
    the Claimant's history of litigation and his  failure  to  mention  his
    claimed sexuality particularly given his case was that when he came  to
    the UK in 2010 it was for his  safety.   The  judge  had  accepted  his
    account regarding the issues he had with his former  advisers  and  had
    therefore failed to follow the  authority  of  BT  (former  solicitors,
    alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311 which provided that if  an
    appeal was based in whole or in part on allegations about  the  conduct
    of former representatives there must be evidence that those allegations
    had been put to the representatives.  The judge had  therefore  wrongly
    accepted the Claimant's account that  he  had  been  let  down  by  his
    previous advisers.  In addition the judge had failed properly to  apply
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act.

 4. The third ground is that the judge erred in allowing the  appeal  under
    asylum and humanitarian protection in that they are mutually  exclusive
    - we interject here that Ms Daykin for the claimant readily agreed that
    the judge had erred in that regard.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the third ground was
    made out and the other grounds were arguable although it was said  that
    the second ground had "little merit".

 6. We received a Rule 24 response  from  Ms  Daykin  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing. Its terms are as follows.

 7. The decision to grant permission appeared to be on  the  basis  of  the
    judge's  failure  to  follow  Devaseelan  (second  appeals  -  ECHR   -
    extraterritorial effect) Sri Lanka* [2002] UKIAT 00702  but  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision was not (Ms Daykin's emphasis) an appellate decision.
     As such Devaseelan did not apply.  Even if it did apply the judge  had
    adopted the correct approach.  The judge had gone on  to  consider  the
    evidence before him including the  Claimant's  full  witness  statement
    regarding his sexual  orientation  and  the  actions  of  his  previous
    advisers.  The challenge under the first ground  amounted  to  no  more
    than a disagreement with the findings.

 8. In terms of the second ground the judge had considered  copies  of  two
    letters  of  complaint  the   Claimant   had   sent   to   his   former
    representatives and he had detailed in oral evidence the steps he  took
    to obtain a response but to no avail.

 9. In terms of the third ground it was  conceded  that  in  light  of  the
    finding that the Claimant met the  criteria  of  a  refugee  the  judge
    should not also have allowed  the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.

10. Before us Mr Jarvis for the Secretary of State relied on  his  grounds.
    It was important to note that at item "I" of  the  Home  Office  bundle
    there was a decision by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  which  indicated
    that the Claimant's application was no more than a cynical  attempt  to
    frustrate removal.  She had referred to the fact there was no  previous
    mention of the Claimant being homosexual.  Whilst this was not strictly
    a Devaseelan point the Secretary of State viewed  the  comments  of  an
    Upper Tribunal Judge as significant.

11. In terms of the second ground of  appeal  it  was  highly  relevant  to
    obtain the advice of the solicitors when their conduct was  challenged.
    The solicitors required to be put on notice and while the Claimant  had
    produced two letters before the First-tier Tribunal indicating that  he
    was complaining about their conduct and inviting their comments, it was
    a material error in law of the judge not to state what the contents  of
    the letters were and go on to make a factual finding  on  whether  they
    were actually sent to the solicitors  concerned.   Finally,  Mr  Jarvis
    asked that he be allowed to amend his grounds of appeal to include  the
    fact that the Secretary of State  had  made  some  fifteen  credibility
    points in the refusal letter which the  judge  had  not  satisfactorily
    dealt with.  On the basis of  the  extreme  lateness  of  the  proposed
    amendment and having regard to fairness to the Claimant we  refused  to
    allow the grounds to be amended in this way.

12. For the Claimant Ms Daykin relied on her Rule 24 notice.  The judge had
    properly taken account of the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    raised a number of credibility issues  against  the  Claimant  and  had
    noted them in paragraph 19 of her decision.  He had given clear reasons
    for concluding that the Claimant was gay  in  his  sexual  orientation.
    The judge had noted that the evidence supported  his  involvement  with
    Stonewall which was his choice (paragraph 26).   The  judge  had  found
    this was an indication of the  Claimant's  confidence  to  be  able  to
    express his sexual orientation freely.

13. In terms of the second ground the Claimant had sent two letters to  the
    agents dated 15th August 2014 and 20th November 2014.  They called  for
    a response from the agents and none was forthcoming.  It was correct to
    say that no specific findings had been made  in  that  regard  but  the
    judge had clearly accepted the Claimant's evidence to be true.

14. After a  brief  adjournment  we  indicated  to  parties  that  we  were
    dismissing the Secretary of State's appeal for reasons which  we  would
    give in writing and which we now do.

Conclusions

15. While it is very clear  that  strong  views  were  expressed  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kebede in dealing with  an  application  on  the  papers
    before her it is accepted by Mr Jarvis that this could not be construed
    as an appellate decision and therefore does not fall within  the  ambit
    of Devaseelan requiring the judge to use that decision  as  a  starting
    point. There was therefore no  obligation  in  law  for  the  Judge  to
    comment on the views expressed by the Upper Tribunal  Judge  and  as  a
    result the first ground of appeal cannot succeed.

16. The judge accepted that it might be that the Respondent was correct  in
    that the number of credibility issues  taken  by  her  should  be  held
    against the  Claimant  (paragraph  20).   However  he  noted  that  the
    contrary might well be the case in that the Claimant had now provided a
    full account and in particular in his latest  witness  statement  dated
    16th January 2015 where he talked of his  sexual  orientation  and  his
    experiences both here and back home in Pakistan.  He explained that his
    previous advisers had let him down.

17. The judge looked at the Claimant's case in the  round  (paragraph  23).
    He noted it was entirely plausible, given  his  background  and  coming
    from a country where gay men were persecuted, that he should  feel  shy
    or reticent about expressing his sexual orientation.  He noted how  the
    Claimant explained how he felt  different  to  other  boys,  describing
    himself as effeminate; preferring to help his mother  cook  the  family
    meals and taking care of his appearance  by  plucking  his  eyebrows  -
    something which caused a conflict with his father, who insulted him  as
    a result (paragraph 23).

18. The judge accepted the Claimant's  evidence  that  his  feelings  about
    himself and towards men came on slowly and developed.  He found it  was
    not implausible that the Claimant's  family  would  have  arranged  his
    release from police custody by a bribe nor did he  find  it  incredible
    that after that time the Claimant remained in Pakistan to consider  his
    future.  The judge went on to  say  (paragraph  25)  the  Claimant  had
    explained and he accepted his account regarding the issues he had  with
    his former advisers. For the sake of completeness it  would  have  been
    better if the judge had  referred  to  the  terms  of  the  letters  of
    complaint but the only  reasonable  inference  to  draw  from  all  the
    judge's findings is that he accepted that the letters were sent by  the
    Claimant and that no reply had been received. On this basis the  second
    ground of appeal falls away.  He accepted the Claimant's evidence  that
    he was in a relationship with Tasweer Iqbal (paragraph 26) for  reasons
    he gave.

19. He correctly  applied  the  lower  standard  of  proof  (paragraph  27)
    concluding that the Claimant was a gay man.  Contrary to  the  grounds,
    he took into account Section 8 of the 2004 Act finding  the  Claimant's
    evidence to be credible for the reasons given.

20. As we pointed out to parties it would be fair to say that other  judges
    might not have accepted that  the  Claimant  was  a  credible  witness.
    However Judge Coutts gave a number of sound and cogent reasons  why  he
    was accepting the Claimant's account was reasonably likely to  be  true
    to the low standard required in this jurisdiction.  There is  therefore
    no error of law in his findings in relation to his allowing the  appeal
    on asylum and human rights grounds.  The only  correction  required  is
    that we must alter the decision in  respect  of  the  third  ground  of
    appeal as stated above.



Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law in relation to allowing the appeal
    on humanitarian protection.

22. We therefore set aside the decision and  remake  the  decision  in  the
    appeal by allowing the appeal on asylum grounds  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.

23. No anonymity direction is made.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald    Dated

