
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05484/2015
                                                               AA/05482/2015
                                                               AA/05486/2015
                                                               AA/05490/2015
                                                               AA/05489/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 February 2016                  |On 24 March 2016                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                     AA
                                    ea(1)
                                     va
                                    ea(2)
                                     ma
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Knorr, Counsel instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  ANONYMITY

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
an anonymity order is made in respect of each of the Appellants. Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or other competent Court orders otherwise, no report  of  any
of the  proceedings  herein  or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall,
directly or indirectly, identify any of  the  Appellants.  This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nigeria whose dates of birth are [ ] May
    1972, [ ] February 1978, [ ] May 2003, [ ] May 2011 and [ ]  July  2013
    respectively.  The First and Second Appellants are the married  parents
    of the remaining Appellants.  On 10 April 2015 decisions were  made  to
    refuse the Appellants' international protection and human rights claims
    brought principally on the basis of the risk contended for  in  respect
    of the Third and Fifth Appellants said to be at risk of female  genital
    mutilation ("FGM") and the risk to the Fourth Appellant diagnosed  with
    Cri-du-Chat who was said to be at risk of witchcraft accusations.   The
    Appellants and each of them appealed. Their appeals were heard by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Devittie sitting on 24  September  2015,  at
    Taylor House.  He dismissed the appeals on all grounds.

 2. Not content with that  decision,  by  Notice  dated  13  November  2015
    application was made for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 8 December 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Chambers  refused
    permission but upon a renewed application to the Upper  Tribunal  Upper
    Tribunal, dated 23 December 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul, granted
    permission.

 3. The entirety of the claim as advanced before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was summarised in the skeleton argument  which  is  set  out  by  Judge
    Devittie in his Decision and Reasons and it is convenient to repeat  it
    here:-

         "The First Appellant was born in Ijigbo-Osun state in Nigeria.   In
         2002 he married the Second Appellant, whom he had known since 1983,
         and they lived in Lagos.  The Third Appellant was born  in  Nigeria
         on 29 May 2003.  The Appellants are of Yoruba ethnicity...

         The First Appellant trained as a mechanic in Nigeria and after that
         he worked as a driver at Global Bank plc.  On 19 February 2005  the
         First Appellant came to the UK on a visitor's visa and on 13  April
         2008 the Second and Third Appellants joined him  in  the  UK.   The
         Third Appellant was four years old at the time.  She  has  attended
         school in the  UK  since  shortly  after  her  arrival,  first,  at
         Deptford Park Nursery School, then from 2009, at  Tidemill  Primary
         School, and she is at St Matthew Academy.  All of her  friends  are
         in the UK and she has very strong links with her church

         On 7 May 2011 the Fourth Appellant was born.  The Fourth  Appellant
         has  a  diagnosis  of  Cri-du-Chat  which  has  resulted  in   very
         significant learning and developmental difficulties.  He has  gross
         microcephaly (small head circumference leaving  the  cranial-facial
         distortions) and obvious neurological abnormalities  impacting  the
         way he walks.  He has severe speech and language delay, and  cannot
         speak.  He also has severely delayed fine motor and visual  skills.
         His disability also severely impacts his social skills.  He  has  a
         tendency to lick and bite people and things and is violent  towards
         other adults  and  children,  hitting  out  at  them,  due  to  his
         frustration at his inability to express himself.  He cannot do most
         physical things, such as feeding himself, brushing teeth,  dressing
         and he is not toilet trained.  He requires a  very  high  level  of
         educational support in order to access education and also  requires
         constant supervision, due to the  risk  that  he  will  harm  other
         children  and  his  complete  lack  of  awareness  of  danger.   He
         currently attends Watergate School for disabled children  which  is
         in Lewisham

         On 11 July 2013 the Fifth Appellant was born.   Prior  to  claiming
         asylum the family made a number of applications for leave to remain
         in the UK on human rights grounds, all of which were  unsuccessful.
         On 6 August 2014 the Appellants claimed asylum.  Their asylum claim
         was refused on 10  April  2015.   The  Appellants  fear  return  to
         Nigeria because they  believe  the  Fourth  Appellant  faces  risks
         associated  with  his  disability,  including  discrimination   and
         witchcraft accusations and, the Third and Fifth Appellants  a  risk
         of FGM.  The First Appellant also maintains that  it  would  breach
         Articles 8 and 3 if he and the children  are  removed  to  Nigeria.
         The Appellants rely on the expert reports of Dr King, Gary Foxcroft
         (Expert on Witchcraft in Nigeria) and Peter  Horrocks  (Independent
         Social Worker)."

 4. The First and Second Appellants gave evidence. Judge Devittie  rejected
    their claims placing significant weight upon the fact that a number  of
    applications to regularise their stay in the United Kingdom,  had  been
    made by the First and Second Appellants;  the  First  Appellant  having
    first arrived in the United Kingdom on a visit  visa  in  2004.   Judge
    Devittie was of the view that if the claimed risk to the  daughters  of
    FGM and to the Fourth  Appellant  of  accusations  of  witchcraft  were
    genuine then reliance would have  been  placed  upon  the  same  at  an
    earlier stage.

 5. With regard to the risk of FGM, notwithstanding the expert evidence and
    background  material  pointing  to  FGM  being  practised  amongst  the
    Yoruba's, of which the Appellants were members,  Judge  Devittie  noted
    that the First and Second Appellants  had  "strong  Christian  values".
    Given the educational and professional backgrounds  of  the  First  and
    Second Appellants, whom the judge categorised as  "Middle  class",  the
    judge came to the view that  the  First  and  Second  Appellants  would
    protect  their  daughters  from  FGM  in   Nigeria.    He   found   the
    "overwhelming likelihood" was that  the  First  and  Second  Appellants
    would return to Lagos where they would be able to seek work  and  where
    they had retained family and social ties.

 6. Turning to the Fourth Appellant, Judge Devitte  found  the  immigration
    history of the First and Second Appellants relevant. He was of the view
    that, "The present application is, without question, the last step in a
    well calculated plan by the First  Appellant,  initiated  in  2005,  to
    settle his family in the United Kingdom."  He  recognised  however  the
    special needs relating to  the  Fourth  Appellant  but  discounted  the
    evidence of the social worker on the basis that much of the information
    had been furnished by the First and Second Appellants whose credibility
    he, Judge Devitte, had cause to question.   He  recognised  the  strong
    belief in Nigeria in witchcraft and accepted that  there  was  a  lower
    threshold to be met when assessing whether a minor, with a  disability,
    might be exposed to cruel and degrading treatment but came to the  view
    that insofar as there was any risk, the  First  and  Second  Appellants
    would be able to obviate it.  He referred to  the  "balance  of  power"
    being with the First and Second  Appellants  both  in  respect  of  any
    accusation of witchcraft and risk of  FGM.   However  he  made  a  very
    significant finding at paragraph 20 of his Decision and  Reasons  which
    reads as follows:

         "It is beyond question in my view, that the Fourth Appellant  would
         suffer societal discrimination, and face other real difficulties in
         that he would not be able to access the same level  of  quality  of
         care and support that he enjoys in the United Kingdom.  I am unable
         however, to find that he would be subjected to cruel and  degrading
         punishment  at  a  level  that  would  attain  the   threshold   of
         persecution under the Refugee Convention."

    At paragraph 29 he went on to say:

         "I accept, that in the light of the Fourth Appellant's  disability,
         he  would  face  a  level  of  societal  discrimination,  and   the
         perception that he has evil spirits.  I have however found that the
         treatment to which he would be exposed, would not attain the  level
         of persecution for the purposes of the convention.  I accept,  that
         he may well not be able to participate  fully  in  community  life,
         because of perceptions in Nigeria.  I also accept  that  the  other
         members of  the  family  may  also  suffer  a  degree  of  societal
         discrimination."

 7. As to the risk of FGM that was simply found not to be well founded.

 8. In the renewed application for permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal,
    the grounds submit that  fundamental  to  the  appeal  was  that  Judge
    Devittie had found that the Fourth  Appellant  would  be  perceived  as
    having evil spirits but then failed to engage with the evidence. Had he
    done so, it was submitted,  he  would  have  found  that  the  evidence
    demonstrated that the family, and the Fourth Appellant  in  particular,
    would face persecution.  It  was  submitted  that  Judge  Devittie  had
    overlooked medical evidence in the Respondent's bundle and, the finding
    that the parents would be  able  to  protect  their  children,  and  in
    particular the  Fourth  Appellant,  went  against  the  weight  of  the
    evidence, and in particular the expert evidence.

 9. The grounds go on to submit that Judge Devittie erred in  finding  that
    the application now under appeal was the  first  time  that  the  First
    Appellant had raised any concern about risk to  the  Fourth  Appellant.
    Judge Devittie referred to a previous application made  on  31  January
    2013 in which the risk of a violation of  Article  3  might  have  been
    raised. However there were three submissions made with respect to that.
    Firstly The Appellants were not aware of an application  made  on  that
    date (Neither of the representatives  nor  I  were  able  to  find  any
    evidence of an application on that date). There was, however,  evidence
    of an application made on 3 January 2014,  in  which  at  paragraph  14
    mention was made of the Fourth Appellant's medical  conditions  with  a
    follow up letter, dated 14 February 2014. However  it  would  not  have
    been reasonable to make application in January 2013 on the basis of any
    medical condition affecting the Fourth  condition  until  there  was  a
    diagnosis and that was not until August 2013. Further the letters of  3
    January 2014 and 14 February 2014 did mention the medical condition but
    the condition was progressive and it was only when  the  condition  had
    progressed that it could be said that there was the significant risk of
    the witchcraft allegations contended for.

10. The principle submission however was  that  in  accepting  the  medical
    condition of the Fourth Appellant it was necessary to engage more fully
    with the expert evidence. Before me  the  ground  crystallised  to  the
    submission that having recognised  that  the  Fourth  Appellant  had  a
    disability and having found as a fact  that  there  would  be  societal
    discrimination it was necessary for the judge to make  findings  as  to
    the nature of that discrimination in order properly to  assess  whether
    it reached the threshold of persecutory conduct especially  given  that
    the Fourth Appellant was a child.   Still  further  having  found  that
    there would be societal discrimination it was submitted that it was not
    open to the judge to find that the First and Second Appellants would be
    able to obviate the risks either to the Fourth Appellant or  indeed  to
    the Third and Fifth Appellants because societal pressure to undergo FGM
    coming as it would from friends and family would be irresistible in the
    context of Nigeria.

11. In granting permission Judge Rintoul said:

         "It is arguable that,  as  the  renewed  grounds  aver,  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Devittie erred in concluding [19(ii)] that there was
         a lack of independent medical evidence and  that  the  parents  had
         exaggerated the Fourth Appellant's disability.  It is also arguable
         that the judge did not engage properly with the evidence as to  the
         risks to the child if he  were  as  the  judge  accepts  [29]  evil
         spirits."

Was there an error of Law?

12. Ms Knorr began by focusing quite  properly  on  the  finding  of  Judge
    Devittie  at  paragraph  29  in  which  he  had  accepted  the   Fourth
    Appellant's disability and that he would face  societal  discrimination
    together with the perception that he was possessed by evil spirits.  Ms
    Knorr submitted that in finding, as he did, that the treatment to which
    the Fourth Appellant would be exposed would not  attain  the  level  of
    persecution for the purposes of the convention, the  Judge's  reasoning
    was inadequate. Still further it was necessary  then  to  consider  the
    impact on the rest of the immediate family i.e. all the Appellants.

13. For the Respondent Mr Clarke began his submissions by  saying  that  it
    was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  reaction  which  the  Fourth
    Appellant would face in Nigeria would  be  discriminatory  rather  than
    persecutory. However as Ms Knorr developed  her  submissions,  he  very
    properly conceded that Judge Devittie had not adequately  engaged  with
    the evidence relating to  the  witchcraft  accusations  that  might  be
    levelled at the Fourth Appellant and the impact  on  the  other  family
    members.

14. There was considerable evidence before Judge Devittie relating  to  the
    Fourth Appellant.  The nursery manager and key worker,  Carol  Best  at
    the '999 Club' where the Fourth  Appellant  had  been  attending  since
    October 2014 describes the Fourth Appellant as, "unable to  communicate
    verbally  with  only  three  recognisable  words  which  were,   'Mama'
    'Hallelujah' and 'Yum Yum.'"   He  was  described  also  as  unable  to
    interact with his peers with no awareness of social norms. His only way
    of interaction was to hit out, bite or grab.  He is in need of constant
    supervision and support and left unattended with books, would mouth  or
    chew them or tear them.  He  would  also  throw  objects  when  he  had
    finished with them without regard to where they would land or whom they
    might hit.  He showed no awareness of toilet training and no  awareness
    of danger.  He is described as  unsteady  on  his  feet  and  prone  to
    falling over.

15. Consistent with the submission that there was only a diagnosis  of  the
    Fourth Appellant's condition in August 2013 is a letter written  by  Dr
    Mina Ryten, of Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital, and it also  seems  clear
    from that letter that the condition was progressive because  there  was
    some suggestion, when the letter was written on 30  August  2013,  that
    there might come a time when [EA(2)] might be able to  start  a  family
    though there was significant caution associated with the  observations.
    A letter of Dr Ryten of  the  same  date  to  Dr  Kumar  at  University
    Hospital  Lewisham  speaks  of  challenging  behaviour   and   frequent
    tantrums.

16. There was a developmental assessment carried out in August  2013  which
    demonstrated that at that time though the Fourth Appellant was 2  years
    and three months old, he had manipulative skills only of  a  ten  month
    year old.  Visual skills were at eight months, hearing and language  at
    twelve, as were speech and language,  and  interactive  social  skills,
    with self care social skills at fifteen months, but cognitive skills at
    only eight.

17. By early 2014 there was  some  concern  about  the  Fourth  Appellant's
    hearing.  There is a speech and language therapy summary  report  dated
    14 April 2014.  It  is  of  note  that  the  behaviour  of  the  Fourth
    Appellant was consistent with what  the  First  and  Second  Appellants
    described and in clinic it was noted that the Fourth Appellant required
    a high level of adult support to engage in functional  play  with  toys
    and that he tended to throw or lick the  toys.   The  conclusions  were
    that during play he  required  full  adult  support;  understanding  of
    language was significantly delayed and he presented with  significantly
    delayed expressive language skills.

18. By 30 September 2014 it was noted that the Fourth Appellant  tended  to
    be hyperactive with behaviour  difficult  to  manage  and  it  was  not
    possible to take him to  the  playgroup  or  church  because  he  would
    constantly run around, attack other children  and  scream  excessively.
    That finding was simply reportage of what the Fourth Appellant's mother
    had told Dr Tsampanaki, Speciality Doctor in Community Paediatrics  but
    the examination of the doctor showed the Fourth Appellant  to  be  very
    noisy during play with short attention span and some interest  in  toys
    but he would mostly throw them around.  He was observed to lick a  boot
    persistently so that the medical evidence appears consistent  with  the
    description given by the Second Appellant. The  summary  conclusion  in
    that letter of 30 September 2014 describes the Fourth Appellant as only
    having achieved a developmental age of 12-18 months when was 3 years of
    age.

19.  There  were  two  reports  from  Gary  Foxcroft,  Executive  Director,
    Witchcraft and Human Rights Information Network dated 13  January  2015
    and 22 September 2015 respectively.  His qualification as an expert was
    not in issue.  One of the questions asked of Mr Foxcroft  was  how  the
    Fourth Appellant  was  likely  to  be  perceived  and  treated  by  the
    community on relocation to Nigeria.  Mr Foxcroft reviewed  the  medical
    evidence and observed that the Fourth Appellant's disabilities would be
    obvious to anyone with whom he came into contact.

20. Mr Foxcroft, in his first report, states that  Nigerian  children  with
    disabilities are particularly at risk of being accused  of  witchcraft.
    He states that the belief that  disability  is  a  sign  of  witchcraft
    originates from the supernatural explanation of life events,  behaviour
    and misfortunes that most Nigerians believe in.  He goes on to speak of
    a number of character traits that are commonly described as  linked  to
    witchcraft and these are:

         Challenging behaviour;
         Social difficulties;
         Challenges in communication;
         Repetition behaviour;
         Sickness and medical conditions;
         Bedwetting;
         Sleepwalking;
         Having bad dreams;
         Not doing what is asked of them by parents - This often known as
         being "Stubborn."

    There is a societal aspect and reference is made to families  that  are
    poor or socially marginalised which was not,  I  observe,  the  finding
    made in respect to the First and Second Appellants.

21. I note from the  first  report  at  paragraph  18  that  children  with
    disabilities  such  as  Cri-du-Chat  syndrome  are  considered  to   be
    particularly at risk of witchcraft accusations  given  the  mental  and
    physical disabilities.

22. At paragraph 19 Mr Foxcroft refers to the UN Special Representative  to
    the Secretary General on Violence Against Children - Marto  Santos  who
    issued a statement on witchcraft at the  UN  Human  Rights  Council  in
    March 2014.  In her statement she said:

         "The growing  reality  of  children  being  accused  of  witchcraft
         reveals a serious  pattern  of  discrimination,  social  exclusion,
         violence,  abandonment  and  sometimes  even  murder  of   innocent
         children.  Vulnerable children, such as those with  disabilities...
         are often the target of witchcraft accusations.  Beyond branding  a
         child as a witch, in itself a form of psychological violence  these
         accusations often lead to physical attacks against  these  children
         and other extreme human rights violations."

    I pause to  observe  that  Judge  Devittie  does  not  appear  to  have
    considered whether the very fact of being  accused  of  being  a  witch
    might itself amount to persecutory conduct in the form of psychological
    violence, nor how others would behave towards the Fourth Appellant  and
    his family by which I mean being violent or shunning  them,  given  the
    disabilities. According to the same report, Ms Santos went  on  to  say
    that overall,

         "To be labelled a witch ... is tantamount to being declared  liable
         to be killed with impunity."

    Mr Foxcroft went on at paragraph 25 of his report to consider the  risk
    to all Appellants and opined that they would be  at  risk  of  physical
    attack, verbal attack, attempts to ostracise them  from  the  community
    where they were to live, together with public disgrace.

23. Mr Foxcroft then comments upon the First Appellant's witness  statement
    which he describes as, "The most lucid and detailed witness report that
    I have seen provided on  the  role  of  the  church  and  community  in
    fuelling accusations of witchcraft."  Judges are constantly reminded in
    this jurisdiction of the need  to  look  to  the  societal  context  of
    particular witnesses and Mr Foxcroft as an expert  states  that:  "Many
    Nigerians would not wish to talk  openly"  of  the  matters  which  are
    relevant in this appeal.

24. Another aspect of this appeal which was not apparently touched upon  by
    Judge Devittie is that, according to Mr Foxcroft the First  and  Second
    Appellants would be likely to be seen as  being  cursed  themselves  by
    evil spirits having given birth to such a disabled child.

25. 95% of people with whom Mr Foxcroft worked in Nigeria hold a belief  in
    witchcraft and in his opinion  there  is  no  link  between  levels  of
    educational attainment and depth of belief.

26. Looking to the degree of protection that would be offered by the  state
    in Nigeria, Mr Foxcroft says that it would be little or ineffective and
    he gives his reasons.

27. In his second report Mr Foxcroft speaks of the facilities available  to
    children such as the Fourth Appellant and to the fact that in  2008  it
    was made unlawful to accuse anyone of witchcraft.  However, the law  is
    largely ignored.  Significantly  in  the  further  report  Mr  Foxcroft
    states:

         "Children who suffer witchcraft stigmatisation face  discrimination
         on numerous levels as well as suffering from significant  physical,
         emotional,   psychological   and   spiritual   harm.     Witchcraft
         stigmatisation therefore has far reaching negative implications for
         the enjoyment of a range of children's rights, including the  right
         to be free from abuse and neglect, from  torture  and  inhuman  and
         degrading treatment of the right to  education  and  the  right  to
         family life."

28. Still further in Mr Foxcroft's opinion without family support it  would
    be very difficult for the First and Second Appellants to find safe  and
    secure accommodation because most landlords would  not  wish  to  house
    persons believed to be witches.

29. I have no difficulty whatsoever in finding that the  finding  of  Judge
    Devittie lacks adequate reasoning.  It is important  to  bear  in  mind
    that the Fourth Appellant is a young  child  with  a  very  significant
    disability who clearly will face many challenges without the allegation
    of witchcraft.  However, where Judge Devittie erred in my judgment  was
    that having found that the Fourth  Appellant  would  face  a  level  of
    societal discrimination and the perception that he had evil spirits  it
    was necessary given the evidence available to make findings as  to  how
    that societal discrimination would manifest itself.  The failure to  do
    so goes to the very core of the judgment  and  in  my  view  it  simply
    cannot stand.

The Third and Fifth Appellants

30. The case advanced on behalf of the Third and Fifth Appellants was  that
    they would risk FGM were they to be returned.  The report  relied  upon
    in support of that contention was the report of Dr King whose report is
    dated 7 September 2015.  According to  the  report,  FGM  is  practised
    across the majority of ethnic groups in Nigeria.  The Yoruba culture is
    the most prevalent group engaged in FGM.  I note  that  the  Appellants
    are Yoruba. Although Mr Clarke was for submitting  that  there  was  no
    sufficient evidence that there would be any risk  in  Lagos,  Ms  Knorr
    pointed out that Lagos is in fact in Yoruba land.

31. I note however that it is said that the  practice  is  on  the  decline
    among the middle classes and the more educated with every family  being
    different and "the balance of power" in  an  extended  family  will  be
    greatly dependant on the financial  status  of  individuals.   For  the
    Appellants' family it was said that the high prevalence of FGM in their
    ethnic group put them at risk but I note also that  the  expert  report
    was premised on the First and Second Appellants not being middle class.



32. What concerns me with respect to the Third and Fifth Appellants was the
    extent to which Judge Devittie appears to have focused on the delay  in
    making a claim based upon these risks in  circumstances  in  which  the
    delay, certainly so far  as  the  Fourth  Appellant  was  concerned  is
    explicable by a lack of diagnosis and the  progressive  nature  of  the
    condition.

33. Of concern was identifying the evidential basis for  the  finding  that
    the First and Second Appellants were, "middle class."  The evidence  of
    Dr King noted that the First Appellant was currently unemployed but  in
    Nigeria was a mechanic who in Nigeria would be hired  through  networks
    and through an apprentice system.  A mechanic would  be  a  low  income
    position.

34. One is driven to the view that there is a real risk that the judge  was
    so concerned by the apparent delay in the First and  Second  Appellants
    making reference to both FGM and more particularly witchcraft that this
    overshadowed and coloured all of the findings.

35. I am satisfied that there  were  material  errors  of  law  which  with
    respect to the Fourth Appellant can  be  summarised  by  a  failure  to
    consider and make findings which flow  from  the  finding  of  societal
    discrimination with an overemphasis on the apparent delay of the  First
    and  Second  Appellants  in  making  a  claim  based  upon  the  Fourth
    Appellant's disability. With respect to FGM the finding that the  First
    and Second Appellants were middle class  was  based  upon  insufficient
    evidence for that finding and an overemphasis on delay.

36. The submission by Mr Clarke that with respect to FGM there was  nothing
    material in any errors because there was no sufficient evidence of  the
    practice in Lagos was one which he recognised  he  could  not  maintain
    given Lagos was in Yorubaland.

Remake or Remit?

37. I have no hesitation whatsoever in finding that it  is  appropriate  to
    remake the decision with respect to  the  witchcraft  allegations.  The
    evidence relating to the Fourth Appellant's condition is clear, I  need
    not  repeat  it.   In  my  judgment  the  effect   of   the   "Societal
    discrimination" accepted by Judge Devittie goes much further and points
    to a real risk of the Fourth Appellant being a virtual prisoner  if  he
    is to be protected from the wider society.  I am reinforced in my  view
    by the supporting evidence of Dr King who at 7.2. of her report states:

         "I can strongly agree with [AA] and with the  professional  opinion
         of Gary Foxcroft that [EA(2)]'s condition will be  associated  with
         witchcraft.  In particular I can  add  that  the  Yoruba  term  for
         someone with a mental illness or disorder or a learning  disability
         of any kind of behavioural abnormality is "Were."

         "Were" in most cases are believed to have been attacked by  spirits
         (Jegede.2005).  In these cases a spiritual curse is  likely  to  be
         demanded.  This means "Special Prayers" can  include  incantations,
         fasting, and/or beatings in Nigeria  and  the  Anglophone  area  of
         Cameroon.  I have seen young people with mental health or  learning
         disabilities chained, cut "fasted" (temporarily deprived  of  food)
         and as part of being  prayed  for.   People  with  abnormal  social
         behaviour are often associated with powers such  as  speaking  with
         the dead or indeed being dead  spirits  revisiting  families  in  a
         malevolent manner.

         There  is  a  vast  amount  of  negative   stigma   and   spiritual
         associations around the presentation of symptoms of  mental  health
         problems or mental disability  across  the  country.   Poor  mental
         health or mental disability is often seen as a  form  of  spiritual
         attack and treated by exorcism that could  involve  physical  abuse
         such as chaining, beating, acid burning  or  starving  as  well  as
         prayer..."

38. The real risks of the Fourth Appellant is so great that in my  judgment
    the types of reaction to which the Fourth Appellant is at risk of being
    exposed can only be described as persecutory.  I do not  find  contrary
    to Judge Devittie that the "Balance of power" that the First and Second
    Appellants may hold would be sufficient to obviate the  risk.   It  may
    well be that the First and Second Appellants would not  behave  towards
    their child in any of the ways  described  as  posing  a  risk  by  the
    experts but that ignores the behaviour of others.  I bear in mind  also
    the importance of the church to this family  evidenced  by  the  letter
    from the Olivet Baptist Church.  The real risk to the Fourth  Appellant
    is that he would have to be left at home  because  were  he  to  go  to
    church he would either on his journey or whilst there  in  Nigeria  run
    the risk of persecutory conduct by others.

39. My findings with respect to the Fourth Appellant are not the end of the
    matter. It is abundantly clear to me from the evidence that  the  whole
    of the immediate  family  would  be  affected  by  the  allegations  of
    witchcraft to such an extent that they too would be at a real  risk  of
    persecutory conduct.

40. Given my findings, any error of law with respect to  the  FGM  concerns
    relating to the Third and Fifth Appellants are not material  because  I
    find that they are entitled to international protection with  the  rest
    of the family. Further because of the general policy to  keep  families
    together where there is a refugee within the immediate family  none  of
    the family should be removed and also because of the Article  3  and  8
    ECHR rights of the family members none of the Appellants  can  lawfully
    be returned to Nigeria.

41. As to article 8, the Fourth Appellant clearly needs both of his parents
    and there is clearly family life between all  of  the  Appellants.  The
    fact that I have found  the  Fourth  Appellant  a  refugee  means  that
    applying the five stage test in Razgar, the proportionality  assessment
    favours the First and Second Appellants without more. Given the ages of
    the  Third  and  Fifth  Appellants  they  too,  on  a   proportionality
    assessment are entitled on any view to be  with  their  parents,  their
    interests are a primary consideration and although I would  be  obliged
    in considering Section 117B in respect of all of  the  family  members,
    the public interest in a case such as this clearly does not require the
    removal of any of the members of the family.

42. I should say that, for the avoidance of doubt that but for  my  ability
    to remake the decision with respect to witchcraft allegation,  I  would
    have remitted the issue with respect to FGM for rehearing because in my
    judgment it cannot so easily be said, even to the lower standard,  that
    the Third and Fifth Appellants would be exposed to FGM. Findings  would
    need to be made without an overemphasis on  weight  being  attached  to
    delay. Further the finding that the First and  Second  Appellants  were
    middle class would need to be revisited. Still further what  protection
    might be offered from family members  would,  again,  need  to  be  re-
    examined.  However, I see no benefit at all in remitting the matter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for findings to be made when, on the  basis  of
    the findings that I have made the Appellants are entitled to the relief
    they seek.

43. I finish, by expressing my gratitude both to Ms Knorr and to Mr  Clarke
    for the assistance they gave in this  matter.   I  appreciate  that  Ms
    Knorr took  me,  at  some  length  through  the  UNHCR  guidelines  and
    international protection with respect to child asylum claims  dated  22
    December  2009.   I  have  had  regard  to  that  document  and  indeed
    highlighted certain parts of the  document  during  the  course  of  Ms
    Knorr's  very  helpful  submissions  to  me  including  in   particular
    paragraphs 35 and 36 in which it was said:

         "Persecution may also be established through an accumulation  of  a
         number of less serious violations.  This could for instance be  the
         case where children with disabilities or  stateless  children  lack
         access to birth registration and, as a  result  are  excluded  from
         education, healthcare and other services.

         Measures of discriminations may amount  to  persecution  when  they
         lead to consequences of a substantially prejudicial nature for  the
         child concerned."

44. Those passages from the UNHCR document only go to reinforce my judgment
    that not only did Judge Devittie err but that the  only  proper  course
    was to set aside his decision and remake the decisions.

45. I have made an Anonymity Order in this appeal because of  the  children
    and the nature of the appeals.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of  law.
The decision is set aside.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
remade such that the appeals of Appellants and each of them are  allowed  on
international protection and human rights grounds (Articles 3 and 8).


Signed   Date

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Zucker
