
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-dh-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05368/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 December 2016                            |On 17 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                   mr mSb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford of Counsel instructed by Aden & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is a citizen of Somalia who appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  respondent  dated  11
    March 2015 to refuse to grant the appellant asylum.  In a decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 17 October 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Howard dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed with permission.  As raised  by  the  permission
    judge, and conceded by Mr Wilford before me,  the  24  page  permission
    grounds are unnecessarily long.  However Mr  Wilford  helpfully  relied
    only on the arguable errors of law identified by the  permission  judge
    as follows:

    Ground 1:  The judge having accepted that the appellant is a member  of
    a minority clan concludes that he has a significant family  network  in
    Somalia without properly explaining his reasons for  arriving  at  this
    finding;

    Ground 2:  Although the judge  accepts  that  the  appellant  has  been
    diagnosed as having had a stroke and being HIV  positive  he  makes  no
    proper findings as to the extent of the appellant's mental illness  and
    the availability of treatment for the same after he took  into  account
    the report of Mr Hoehne.

    Ground 3:  All this affected the findings of the judge in  relation  to
    MOJ and Other (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC)
    in view of the particular circumstances of this appellant.

Error of Law

 3. I was satisfied and indicated at the hearing that the judge's  approach
    to the  appellant's  circumstances  in  this  case,  in  particular  in
    relation to the appellant's mental health, discloses a  material  error
    of law.  Although, in itself, the submission on the judge's finding  in
    relation to the appellant having relatives in Mogadishu would amount to
    no more than a disagreement with that finding, viewed in the context of
    the appellant's mental health difficulties including his  diagnosis  of
    PTSD,  I am satisfied that his subsequent approach to  MOJ  and  Others
    was flawed.

 4. This is combined  with  the  judge's  failure  to  adequately  consider
    Article 8 and indeed, as Mr Whitwell conceded, to address Article 8  at
    all.  The judge found  that  there  was  no  Article  8  claim  as  the
    appellant's only relative in the UK, his wife, had separated  from  him
    following his attack on her.  However the appellant has been in the  UK
    since 2009 and there was no consideration as to whether Article  8  was
    engaged in relation to private life or whether there  were  grounds  to
    consider the appellant's case  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to Article 8.

 5. This error was compounded by the fact that the judge found at [32] that
    the appellant had lived with his extended  family  in  Mogadishu  "with
    these conditions for an extended period in the recent past'.   However,
    although that applied to the appellant's stroke and  his  diagnosis  of
    HIV, it was  not  disputed  by  Mr  Whitwell  that  the  appellant  was
    diagnosed with PTSD and mental health difficulties following arrival in
    the UK.  In  these  circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    findings, both on the applicability of MOJ and Others (as  regards  the
    effect of the  appellant's  particular  circumstances  and  his  mental
    health difficulties together with his other medical  difficulties)  and
    in relation to any Article  8  assessment,  are  flawed.   Although  Mr
    Whitwell did not concede the appeal  he  accepted  that  there  was  no
    consideration of Article 8.

 6. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there is a material error of
    law in Judge Howard's consideration, such that the appeal must  be  set
    aside in its entirety and no findings  are  preserved.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice Statement 7.2, the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by  any  judge
    other than Judge Howard.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered  de  novo
by any judge other than Judge Howard.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 30 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
