
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05737/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 20 February 2014                           |On 5 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JAY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY



                                   Between

                           HANI AHMED ABED WIHAYBI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss F Kadic
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated
    23 July 2013 whereby the appellant's  claims  for  asylum  as  well  as
    humanitarian protection were dismissed. The appeal is  brought  against
    the humanitarian protection part of the determination.

2.   The appellant is a national of Jordan of Palestinian origin born on  27
    April 1984.  Although he had a business visa  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom, he claimed asylum on arrival.  He was interviewed  on  29  May
    2013 and on 3 June the Secretary of State refused the application.  The
    basis of the application was the appellant's claim that he had a sexual
    relationship with a woman in October 2012.  His request  to  marry  her
    was turned down by her family in November.  In March 2013  the  woman's
    family found out about the relationship and threats to kill ensued.  In
    particular,  on  24  March  2013  the  woman's  brother  came  to   the
    appellant's family home with  five  other  men  carrying  a  gun.   The
    appellant was out at the time but he came to learn of what happened and
    started making arrangements to come to this country.

3.   The claim could not  succeed  under  the  Refugee  Convention  but  the
    Immigration Judge considered it separately on  humanitarian  protection
    grounds.  The Tribunal concluded that the appellant was an evasive  and
    unsatisfactory witness and not a man of truth. The judge observed  that
    the claim was unsupported and implausible. The  appellant  admitted  to
    going out in disguise between 24 March 2013  and  his  arrival  in  the
    United  Kingdom  on  10  May  and  that  his  disguise  amounted  to  a
    traditional veil for a man.  The Immigration Judge was  unimpressed  by
    that.  He was also unimpressed by the fact that the appellant  did  not
    know that the woman's family had filed a complaint against him and that
    the woman in question had not  in  fact  committed  adultery.   In  any
    event, the woman was now  married  to  her  cousin,  according  to  the
    Immigration Judge's finding, and there was nothing to suppose that  her
    family would now wish to bring the whole of the family  into  disrepute
    by going after the appellant.

4.   At paragraph 15 of the determination we see an independent  finding  on
    the issue of  internal  flight  where  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant could safely relocate internally elsewhere in the Kingdom  of
    Jordan.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  two
    bases.  First,

         "The representative's record of evidence attached to the permission
         grounds supports the claim that the appellant's  evidence  was  not
         that the girl had married her  cousin  after  the  appellant  fled,
         rather that the appellant did not know whether or not  she had done
         so."

6.   Secondly, the  judge  granting  permission  felt  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had failed to distinguish between that part  of  the  decision
    relating to the claim for asylum and the removal decision.  However  we
    believe that there is nothing in this latter point; the decision making
    in relation to humanitarian protection is  clearly  differentiated.  As
    for the first point, we have investigated the issue by reference to the
    Immigration Judge's Record of Proceedings which do  appear  to  support
    the proposition that the evidence before him was that  the  appellant's
    information was that the woman in question had now married her  cousin,
    and we have also looked at the Home Office Presenting Officer's note of
    evidence where, and we are grateful to Mr Jacks for drawing this to our
    attention, is is clear that on two occasions the appellant said that he
    did not know if this woman was married or not.

7.   In those circumstances we feel that there is merit in  the  point  that
    the Immigration Judge erred or certainly  made  a  mistake  of  fact  -
    whether that amounts to a mistake of law is another matter  -  when  he
    said that the woman in question is now married  to  her  cousin.   That
    goes slightly too far.

8.   Mr Jack submitted that the determination can nonetheless  be  supported
    on two grounds.  The first  ground  was  that  the  error  of  fact  in
    relation to the marital status of the woman makes no difference to  the
    reasoning in paragraph 14 of the determination. When one correlates the
    facts as found with the  underlying  evidence  the  position  would  be
    exactly the same if this woman were not married. There is some evidence
    that men may be the subject of honour killings so called but  the  real
    issue is the stigma which attaches to these matters coming out into the
    public domain.

9.   The point that the Immigration Judge was  making  is  that  the  family
    would not take action against the appellant regardless of  whether  she
    was married: we might add, because it would bring public  attention  to
    the adultery of the woman and cause not merely shame but  diminish  her
    marriage prospects.

10.  We are adding that  final  ingredient,  the  diminishment  of  marriage
    prospects, but the reasoning of the Immigration Judge can be upheld  on
    the basis that it really makes no difference to the issue of shame  and
    stigma and all the related issues of whether the woman has married  her
    cousin or not.  So we agree with Mr  Jack  that  the  decision  can  be
    upheld on this independent ground.

11.  There is a further problem for the appellant and it  is  a  fundamental
    problem and it demonstrates, we regret to say, that  really  permission
    in this case should  not  have  been  granted  at  all.   Although  the
    appellant below did advance submissions on  the  ground  that  internal
    relocation was not  an  option  in  the  circumstances  of  this  case,
    paragraph 15 of the determination makes it clear that  the  Immigration
    Judge was of the view that the appellant could safely  relocate.  There
    is no challenge to finding in the grounds and so the appellant is bound
    by that conclusion.  It could only be upset in any  event  if  it  were
    perverse and there is nothing we have seen  to  demonstrate  that  that
    could be the position.

12.  So it follows that if internal relocation is  an  option  according  to
    the Immigration Judge the rest of the determination, in  particular  14
    does not really matter even if there is an error of law in it, which as
    it happens we find that there is not.

13.  So for both of those reasons - no error of law  in  paragraph  14,  and
    once the matter had been investigated in some  detail,  an  independent
    basis for the overall conclusion in  paragraph  15  -  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.





The Honourable Mr Justice Jay
