
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05789/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Sent         |
|On 4 August 2014                                |On 11 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF

                                   Between

                          Sriram Thiruvampalamayam
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner of Counsel, instructed by Greater London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson of the Specialist Appeals Team

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Tamil national of Sri Lanka born on 29 July 1982.

 2. On 26 September 2007 he entered the United  Kingdom  with  leave  as  a
    student.  He was granted further leave on a number of occasions in  the
    same capacity, on one occasion on appeal.  It  appears  that  in  early
    2013 the Respondent curtailed the Appellant's student  leave  whereupon
    on  23  April  2013  the  Appellant  sought   international   surrogate
    protection on account of a fear  of  persecution  or  ill-treatment  on
    return to Sri Lanka because of his political opinion.  He stated he had
    previously been arrested and ill-treated by the Sri Lankan  authorities
    in 2007 because during 2006 on three separate occasions he had provided
    accommodation for LTTE members.  On 31 May 2013 the Respondent  refused
    his application and proposed to make directions for his removal to  Sri
    Lanka.

History of the Appeal

 3. By a notice dated 18 June 2013 the Appellant lodged  notice  of  appeal
    under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act of 2002
    as amended.  By a determination served on the  Appellant  on  2  August
    2013, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese dismissed the appeal on
    all grounds.  On 11 September 2013 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Brunnen granted the Appellant permission to appeal and at a hearing  on
    23 October 2013 before the President and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Latter,
    the Respondent accepted the determination of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Abebrese had to be set aside because he had failed properly to
    consider the medical evidence.

 4. The Upper Tribunal gave permission for fresh evidence  to  be  admitted
    which in the event was the documentation from the authorities  and  the
    courts in Sri Lanka and remitted the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for hearing afresh. On 1 April 2014 the matter came before Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Lobo.

 5.  A  letter  of  1  April  2014  which  according  to  the  transmission
    information at the top was sent at 20.47 hours on Monday  31  March  by
    the Appellant's then representatives to the Tribunal stating they would
    be unable to  attend  the  hearing  because  "we  understand  from  the
    representative that his wife had to be admitted  to  the  hospital  for
    delivery before the due date and as a result he is unable to attend the
    Tribunal for today's hearing".  The  letter  is  to  be  found  on  the
    correspondence tag of the Tribunal's file immediately before the Record
    of Proceedings of the hearing on 1 April.  Subsequently there has  been
    filed with the Tribunal a letter of 23 April 2014 confirming a birth by
    emergency caesarean section at 13.12 hours on 31  March  2014  together
    with a statement by the representative.  The representative  states  he
    informed a colleague at 18.00 hours on 31 March that he  would  not  be
    able to attend the hearing the next day and that the  Appellant's  file
    was with him and there was no time to pass it to a different  advocate.



 6. At paragraphs 2 and 3 of the determination the Judge noted the position
    and refused an adjournment on the basis that the representative's  firm
    should have been able to  cover  the  situation,  albeit  at  the  last
    moment, by instructing Counsel.  He also said:-

         This appeal was essentially a re-hearing  de  novo  of  a  previous
         appeal because ... that Immigration Judge ...  failed  to  consider
         the medical evidence.  The Upper Tribunal had in  addition  allowed
         in new evidence.  As an Immigration Judge I am able to consider the
         medical evidence and the new evidence.  Apart from that there  were
         no issues.

    The Judge did not make any acknowledgement that  the  medical  evidence
    and the new evidence from a lawyer in Sri Lanka and  the  courts  there
    went to the issue of the Appellant's credibility.

 7. The Appellant again sought permission to appeal and on 6 May 2014 Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers granted permission.

Error of Law Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 8. The grounds for appeal challenged the Judge's refusal of an adjournment
    and asserted he had failed properly to consider the  medical  evidence,
    alleging the Judge had made an adverse credibility finding against  the
    Appellant before considering  the  medical  evidence  contrary  to  the
    process recommended in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367.

 9. At the hearing copies  of  the  documents  relating  to  the  emergency
    caesarean  section  of  the  representative's  wife  was  shown  to  Mr
    Parkinson and both parties were referred to the very recent judgment in
    PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1011.  The issues raised  by  the
    grounds for appeal were discussed between the parties  and  myself  and
    the parties agreed that in the  light  of  the  information  about  the
    representative's wife which was before the Judge and that the Appellant
    had been represented at each step of his  appeal,  the  effect  of  the
    refusal of the adjournment application was  in  all  the  circumstances
    tantamount to preventing  the  Appellant  receiving  a  full  and  fair
    hearing. Accordingly, the hearing before the Judge had to be considered
    as a nullity and it was appropriate for the matter to be remitted for a
    full re-hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. I would  add  the  Court  of  Appeal  has  given  some  guidance  about
    documentation from Sri Lankan lawyers and Sri Lankan courts in PJ  (Sri
    Lanka).

11. The consequence is that the determination of Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lobo must be set aside in its entirety and the appeal remitted
    for hearing afresh in the First-tier Tribunal before a Judge other than
    Judges of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese and Lobo.

Anonymity

12.  There was no request for anonymity and having considered the  documents
    in the Tribunal file and heard the error of law appeal I find there  is
    no need for anonymity.

DECISION

    The determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lobo contained an
    error of law such that it should be set  aside  and  the  appeal  heard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

    The appeal to be heard before any Judge other than Judges of the First-
    tier Tribunal Abebrese and Lobo.

    Tamil interpreter.

    Time estimate - four hours.

    Venue - Taylor House on 27 January 2015.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  08.
viii. 2014




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal







