
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th January 2015                          |On 4th February 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     F H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 10th November 1995.
       He first came to the UK on 21st December 2008, when he was  13  years
       old. His initial asylum claim was refused on 20th March 2009, but  he
       was granted discretionary leave from 20th April 2009  to  20th  April
       2012. He  appealed  the  refusal  of  asylum,  and  this  appeal  was
       dismissed on 9th June 2009. On 19th April 2012 the appellant  applied
       for further leave to remain on asylum and human rights  grounds.  His
       application was refused on 17th  June  2014,  and  he  appealed  once
       again. His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Stokes following a hearing on 26th August 2014.

    2. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 5th December  2014  I  found
       that Judge Stokes had erred  in  law,  and  set  aside  his  decision
       dismissing the appeal under Article  8  ECHR  whilst  preserving  his
       unchallenged determination dismissing the asylum appeal.  My  reasons
       for this decision are appended as Annex A to this  determination.   I
       preserved the finding that the appellant had  family  in  Afghanistan
       but made it clear that further evidence and submissions could be  put
       forward on the current nature of the  appellant's  relationship  with
       that family by both parties.

    3. The matter came back before me to re-make the appeal under Article  8
       ECHR.

Evidence & Submissions

    4. The appellant attended the Tribunal and adopted  his  two  statements
       which he confirmed were true and correct  and  his  evidence  to  the
       Tribunal. Mr Shilliday did not wish to cross-examine the appellant.

    5. In summary, in relation to Article 8  ECHR  the  appellant  says  the
       following in his statements. He has been in the  UK  since  2008.  He
       lived with Ms P A from the age of 13 years to 18 years. He now visits
       her every two or three weeks. She provides  him  with  financial  and
       emotional support. He has attended The [ ] Academy and [  ]  College,
       where  he  is  currently  studying  for  a  BTEC  Level  3  in  civil
       engineering. His course will finish in the summer  of  2016,  and  he
       hopes to start a university degree in  civil  engineering  in  autumn
       2016. He has friends in the UK through  college,  school,  youth  and
       sports clubs and by attending his local mosque.

    6.  The  appellant  has  genuinely  lost  contact  with  his  family  in
       Afghanistan. He has been to the Red Cross about trying to trace  them
       on three occasions, once in 2012 and twice in 2014. He had also asked
       Social Services to do this before these visits but they had not  done
       anything.  He would not be able to contact his family if he  were  to
       return to Afghanistan.  He would feel like a stranger if he were sent
       back there.

    7. He has friends who have  been  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain
       having been in the UK for six  years  with  discretionary  leave  and
       feels it is unfair if he is forced to return to Afghanistan given his
       period of discretionary leave and residence in the UK.

    8. Ms Iqbal relied upon her skeleton argument and oral submissions.

    9. In summary she submits that as the appellant's application  was  made
       prior to the 9th July 2012 that transitional provisions mean that  it
       falls to be determined under the general law relating  to  Article  8
       ECHR,  with  consideration  given  to  s.117B  of  the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act. This could be seen to  be  the  case
       from Edgehill v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402  at  paragraph  32.  The
       appellant had made a renewed application  for  asylum  (which  was  a
       matter under the Immigration Rules)  prior  to  9th  July  2012,  and
       simultaneously for leave to remain on the basis of his Article 8 ECHR
       rights.

   10. Further even if the Immigration Rules did apply and were found not to
       assist the appellant in relation to his claim to have family life  in
       the UK  there  was  no  interim  test  of  exceptionality  before  an
       assessment under the general law of Article 8 ECHR  was  carried  out
       (see MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ at paragraph  131).  It  was
       just necessary to show that there were elements not considered  under
       the  Immigration  Rules.  This  could  easily  be  done   given   the
       appellant's claimed relationship with a foster mother, which was  not
       a relationship dealt with under the Immigration Rules, and  the  fact
       that discretionary leave was not a type of leave  considered  by  the
       Immigration Rules.

   11. Ms Iqbal submits that the appellant's age had never been disputed  by
       the respondent. He arrived in the UK a month after his 13th birthday.
       The respondent had failed in her duty to trace the appellant's family
       in Afghanistan, and he has been unable to do so  via  contacting  the
       Red Cross or in any other way. The appellant is a nineteen  year  old
       young man, and there is no "bright line" between his  being  a  child
       and  adult.  If  he  were  forced  to  return  he  would  have  grave
       difficulties.  The family may well exist in Afghanistan but it should
       be accepted that the appellant did not have current contact with them
       as this had not been challenged at any point. Ms Iqbal  accepted  the
       weight to be given to the failure  to  trace  was  unclear  after  EU
       (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 32 but argued it was a  relevant
       factor in the appellant's favour when considering the proportionality
       of removal under Article 8 ECHR.

   12. The appellant had family and private life in the UK.  He  has  family
       life with his foster carer who brought him up  from  the  age  of  13
       years and with whom he maintains a relationship. There is a letter in
       the respondent's bundle from Ms A, and it is to be noted that at  the
       last hearing Ms A had attended  with  the  appellant.  There  were  a
       number of cases since Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31  which  have
       made it clear that young people keep their family life  relationships
       with their original family after the age  of  18  years  unless  they
       founded a new family, see HK (Turkey) v SSHD  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  583.
       This appellant had only moved out from Ms A's home because of the way
       Social Services contracts work.

   13. The appellant has made an extensive private life for himself  in  the
       UK,  including  significant  studies.  Documents  relating   to   his
       qualifications and current studies are in the appellant's bundle. The
       relationships he has made and the private  life  he  has  established
       have all been whilst lawfully present in the  UK  with  discretionary
       leave.

   14. If the appellant's private life was considered under the  Immigration
       Rules then it should be found that there would  be  very  significant
       obstacles to his integration in Afghanistan given that he had left as
       a young child and given the situation in that country. As was said in
       Ogundimu (Article 8, new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60, the enquiries
       were to go beyond social, cultural and family issues.

   15. In relation to  matters  raised  under  s.117B  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act the appellant speaks good English and
       will in the future be able to support himself financially  given  the
       nature of the studies he is doing and the qualifications he is in the
       process of  acquiring.  He  should  be  seen  as  a  person  who  has
       integrated into British society. The appellant's status should not be
       seen as precarious as discretionary leave could lead to settlement if
       granted for six years, and was not a type of leave (for instance like
       that as a student) for which there  was  no  expectation  of  staying
       permanently.

   16. Mr Shilliday said that it was not relevant that no tracing  had  been
       carried out in the appellant's case. It was  not  possible  to  argue
       that the appellant had no family network to return to as I was  bound
       by the previous two determinations under Devaseelan (second  appeals,
       ECHR, extraterritorial effect) [2002] UKAIT 702 and so  had  to  find
       this existed. (I drew Mr Shilliday's attention to  my  error  of  law
       decision in which I said that the  finding  that  the  appellant  had
       family in Afghanistan was preserved from the determination  of  Judge
       Stokes but it was a matter for submissions as to the  nature  of  the
       current relationship, if  any,  that  the  appellant  had  with  that
       family.) Mr Shilliday said there was insufficient evidence  that  the
       appellant had no family contact, and  two  previous  Judges  had  not
       believed that the  appellant  had  no  contact  with  his  family  in
       Afghanistan. The appellant would be seen as an  adult  as  in  Afghan
       culture, so he should be seen as an adult being returned. It  was  in
       the best interests of the appellant to be brought up in  his  culture
       with his family, see EA (Article  8  best  interests  of  the  child)
       Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315.

   17. Mr Shilliday maintained that  Article  8  ECHR  as  embodied  in  the
       Immigration Rules at Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE  was  what  I
       should apply to the appellant's case. He said this was  the  case  as
       the transitional arrangements whereby applications made prior to  9th
       July 2012 were dealt with under the general law did not apply in this
       case as the appellant had not made "an application".  This  could  be
       seen to be the case from paragraph A277 inserted in  the  Immigration
       Rules by HC 194 which means that  the  transitional  provisions  only
       apply to applications made under part 8 of the Immigration Rules. The
       appellant's application had  not  been  made  under  part  8  of  the
       Immigration Rules, even though it had been made  prior  to  9th  July
       2012, so the transitional provision did not apply.

   18. Mr Shilliday  maintained  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
       requirements of paragraph 276ADE on the basis of his private life  as
       he could not show that there were very significant obstacles  to  his
       re-integration on return to Afghanistan. The point of this  Rule  was
       that people should not be removed to a  place  where  they  would  be
       destitute. This would not be the case for the appellant. He had spent
       a lot of his childhood in Afghanistan and so had ingrained  knowledge
       about the culture. Things might be difficult  for  the  appellant  on
       return but the test was higher than this. More than inconvenience was
       needed. The appellant had not had seven years in the UK as  a  child,
       he had not been in the UK half of his life and  could  not  meet  the
       high threshold of private life Article 8 ECHR. Whilst it was  to  the
       appellant's credit he was in education, as was said in EV Philippines
       v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 the UK could not  educate  the  world.  In
       relation to CDS (PBS Available Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 305  and
       the fact the appellant was part way through  a  course  Mr  Shilliday
       argued that Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25  was  wrongly
       decided in maintaining CDS Brazil had any current relevance,  but  in
       any case this case should be seen differently as  the  appellant  was
       not a points based migrant.

   19. The appellant could not meet the Immigration Rules at Appendix FM  as
       his foster mother was not a parent, and he was not under the  age  of
       18 years. Even  if  looked  at  outside  of  Appendix  FM  (which  Mr
       Shilliday argued was not necessary or the correct thing to do) it was
       not the case that there was a family life  relationship  between  the
       appellant and his foster mother. Kugathas meant  that  there  was  no
       family life between the appellant and Ms A so Article 8 ECHR was  not
       engaged in this case on the basis of family life.   In  any  case  it
       would not  be  a  disproportionate  to  interference  to  remove  the
       appellant even if there were found to be a family life  relationship.
       The appellant no longer lived with Ms A and he could keep in  contact
       with her from Afghanistan.

   20.  In  relation  to  the  issues  raised  by  s.117B  of   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act I should not determine this issue  at
       this point in time as  there  would  be  a  reported  Upper  Tribunal
       authority on precariousness shortly.  Mr  Shilliday  argued  strongly
       that the appellant's discretionary leave should be seen as precarious
       as the appellant had no proper expectation of further leave  of  this
       nature after he was seventeen and a  half.  Precarious  leave  should
       mean any leave that was not indefinite leave to remain, and for which
       directions can be given  under  s.10(1)(a)  of  the  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 1999. Precarious obviously did not mean those who were  in
       the UK unlawfully as they are dealt with separately in s.117B of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum 2002 Act. It was also speculative
       that the appellant would earn money in the future.

   21. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions

   22. I must first determine whether  the  appellant's  case  needs  to  be
       assessed against the Immigration  Rules  as  currently  in  force  or
       whether it is covered by transitional provisions in HC 194, and  thus
       that it is the general law relating to Article 8 ECHR  which  applies
       in this appeal. It is accepted by both sides that the application was
       made prior to 9th July 2012 when Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  276ADE
       were introduced; it is the extent of the transitional provisions that
       is in dispute.

   23. I  find  that  in  accordance  with  Edgehill  at  paragraph  32  the
       transitional provisions are  to  be  given  the  natural  and  normal
       meaning of the words and that they are statement of the Secretary  of
       State's policy not to apply the new Rules to applications made  prior
       to 9th July 2012. The argument  put  forward  by  Mr  Shilliday  that
       Article 8 ECHR applications prior to 9th  July  2012  were  not  made
       under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  so  were  not  covered  by   the
       transitional provisions was put forward by Counsel for the  Secretary
       of State in Edgehill and was specifically rejected.

   24. I find it clear therefore that it is  the  general  law  relating  to
       Article 8 ECHR against which the appellant's  case  must  be  judged.
       Ultimately in relation to this appellant's claim  to  remain  on  the
       basis of his private life this may however make little difference:  I
       understood Ms Iqbal to  be  arguing  that  the  appellant  should  be
       allowed to remain, in part  at  least,  given  the  very  significant
       difficulties the appellant would  have  in  reintegrating  in  Afghan
       society.

   25. I proceed to establish the position with respect to  the  appellant's
       family in Afghanistan. As Mr Shilliday has submitted, I am  bound  by
       Devaseelan principles in relation to the  findings  of  the  previous
       First-tier Tribunal Judges on this matter. This means that  I  am  to
       take  previous  judges  determinations  as  the  starting  point  and
       authoritative of the position at the time when they were made.  I  do
       not have the determination of the Immigration  Judge  made  in  2009,
       however references are made to  it  in  the  determination  of  Judge
       Stokes,  which  I  have  preserved  in   relation   to   the   asylum
       determination.

   26. The evidence of the appellant before  both  of  these  Tribunal,  and
       before me, was that he had had  no  contact  with  his  family  since
       leaving Afghanistan. He had tried to ring his mother's mobile  number
       but that this no longer connected. He had talked to  Social  Services
       and the Red Cross about tracing but  this  had  not  been  done.  The
       Secretary of State accepted that she had not initially fulfilled  her
       legal duty to trace either but has now made enquiries which evidently
       have produced no further material.

   27. It is recorded at paragraph 30 of Judge  Stokes'  determination  that
       the 2009 Immigration Judge had found however that:  "there  would  be
       reception facilities by members of the appellant's family if he  were
       returned to Afghanistan". I have not preserved Judge Stokes' findings
       about reception conditions. However, in relation to the asylum  claim
       Judge Stokes did find that the appellant: "has not demonstrated  that
       he has no family remaining there. He will not on  return,  therefore,
       fall into the category of a street child.", see paragraph 41  of  his
       determination. This latter finding is preserved.

   28. I have no new evidence on the issue of family in Afghanistan from the
       appellant. Looking at the evidence as a whole before me I  find  that
       the appellant has family in Afghanistan who may theoretically be able
       to help him but accept his consistent evidence that he has no current
       contact with them.

   29. My conclusion on this matter  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  the
       respondent stated in the refusal letter dated  17th  June  2014  that
       they realised that they had tracing obligations to the appellant  and
       had contacted the FCO  office  in  Kabul  to  carry  these  out.  The
       solicitor's representations at page  50  of  the  appellant's  bundle
       indicate these FCO enquiries were put in motion in February 2014. The
       refusal  letter  indicated  that  the  respondent  would  inform  the
       appellant of any response with information regarding the location  of
       his family. Clearly the respondent  has  not  found  the  appellant's
       family, who were last said to be in Kabul prior  to  his  leaving  in
       2008,  despite  eleven  months  having   elapsed   since   commencing
       enquiries. The  respondent  has  also  not  responded  with  anything
       indicating that  the  appellant  has  provided  inadequate  or  false
       information in relation to these enquiries to thwart this process.  I
       find that the position I should take is therefore that the  appellant
       will have to survive initially without family support, but  with  the
       possibility that this may become available in the medium term  if  he
       were on the ground able to do more extensive face to face enquiries.

   30. In accordance with JS (Former unaccompanied child - durable solution)
       Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 568 I find given the appellant is no longer a
       child and in an Article 8 ECHR  assessment:   "all  relevant  factors
       must be taken into  account  including  age,  background,  length  of
       residence in the UK, family and general circumstances  including  any
       particular vulnerability and whether an appellant will have family or
       other adult support on return to his home country appropriate to  his
       particular needs." I note in relation to the appellant being 19 years
       old that: "the risks to unattached  children  in  the  light  of  the
       reminder in KA (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 in the judgment of Maurice Kay LJ  at
       [18] that there is no bright line across which the risks to  and  the
       needs of a child suddenly disappear."

   31. I now consider whether the appellant has family and private  life  in
       the UK or just private life. I have had regard to the  case  law  the
       representatives have referred to in their submissions. I  start  from
       the position that in the case of a 19 year old any family  life  that
       existed prior to his 18th birthday would not cease  to  exist  simply
       because of crossing the line to adulthood. The  appellant  had  lived
       with his foster carer  from  January  2009,  when  it  is  clear  she
       attended the appellant's asylum interview with him.  It  is  accepted
       that he ceased to live with her when  he  became  18  years  old  and
       funding to his foster mother for being his carer ended. Ms A did  not
       give evidence before me or before Judge Stokes.  Her  letter,  whilst
       extremely complementary about the appellant, does not  indicate  that
       she sees the appellant as a family member or has  a  strong  bond  of
       love with him. There is nothing  in  the  appellant's  own  statement
       which indicates he has this level of emotional bond with Ms A either.

   32. In the circumstances I find it appropriate to treat the bond  between
       Ms A and the appellant as a significant part of his private life ties
       to the UK. I accept that she actively supported  him  through  school
       and college, and is clearly very proud of his  academic  progress.  I
       accept the evidence of the appellant that since leaving her  home  he
       sees her every two or three weeks for a visit, and that she continues
       to provide him with some financial and emotional support. I find  the
       relationship  which  could  not  be  replicated  through   occasional
       telephone contact.

   33. I find that the appellant has spent a very significant period of  his
       life in the UK. He has grown up from  being  a  child  who  had  just
       turned 13 years to a young adult in this country.  His  age  was  not
       contested by Social Services or  the  respondent  at  any  point.  My
       attention has been drawn to EA  (Nigeria)  which  states:  "During  a
       child's very early years, he or she will be primarily focused on self
       and the caring parents or guardian. Long residence once the child  is
       likely to have formed ties outside  the  family  is  likely  to  have
       greater impact on his or her well -being."

   34. I find that this strengthens the importance of the five years of time
       spent in the UK by the appellant between 13 and 18 years. These  were
       ones where private life ties are made particularly  strongly  by  the
       young person, to prepare them for  their  transition  to  independent
       life. The appellant clearly threw himself in to full participation in
       school and social life. Letters from his  teachers  at  [  ]  Academy
       indicate a student who was fully engaged with adults and  peers,  who
       worked from a starting point of a complete beginner in English to one
       who sat for eight GCSEs. One of his British citizen friends (Mr L  A)
       wrote a letter in support of his remaining in the UK and attended the
       Tribunal before Judge Stokes, and indicated that he had a full social
       life with friends in the UK, and again emphasised that he was  highly
       ambitious to build a career in civil engineering in the UK.

   35. I do find it of some significance that  the  appellant  is  part  way
       through his BTEC civil engineering course. The appellant started  his
       BTEC whilst lawfully present having discretionary leave to remain and
       is able to meet the fees (which are waived  in  his  case),  and  has
       built up a private life worthy of respect as is set out above. I have
       noted what was said in Nasim however and find that alone this is  not
       a factor which could lead to his succeeding in his appeal.

   36. I thus find that the appellant has private life requiring respect  in
       the UK as set out above and that to remove  him  from  the  UK  would
       significantly interfere with  that  private  life.  The  interference
       would be in accordance with the law as the appellant cannot meet  any
       of the Immigration Rules as they stood on 8th July 2012 and it  would
       be for a legitimate purpose, namely the economic well-being of the UK
       through the upholding of a consistent system of immigration  control.
       There is no contention by the respondent that this  appellant  has  a
       criminal record or is otherwise not of good character.

   37. It remains to consider whether the significant interference with  the
       appellant's private life rights that  refusal  of  further  leave  to
       remain represents is justified as proportionate, and a  fair  balance
       between the competing considerations of the appellant's private  life
       and the respondent's desire to maintain economic order by applying  a
       consistent system of immigration control.

   38. In favour of the respondent's position is as follows. I  accept  that
       the appellant has shown himself to be an intelligent and polite young
       man capable of academic learning. It is not contended that he has any
       health  problems.  As  stated  above  I  accept  he  has  family   in
       Afghanistan whom he may find in the medium term. I accept that he has
       Dari language skills, and thus is proficient in a language spoken  in
       Afghanistan. I find that his cultural understanding however  will  be
       considerably diminished given his significant absence of  six  years,
       and his having left Afghanistan as a twelve year old child, and given
       that his foster placement was not with an ethnically Afghan family.

   39. In accordance with s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
       Act 2002 I also note in the respondent's favour is that it is in  the
       public interest to uphold immigration controls.  I  accept  that  the
       appellant is  not  currently  able  to  be  financially  independent,
       although I also accept that through his studies in civil  engineering
       he is pursuing the goal of integration in UK  society  and  financial
       independence, which is likely to be met in his early twenties  if  he
       is allowed to remain in the UK.

   40. I do not find the appellant's status  in  the  UK  became  precarious
       until he was refused leave to remain on 19th  June  2014.  I  am  not
       aware of any forthcoming case giving guidance on this issue from  the
       Upper Tribunal in the very near future and have not  been  instructed
       to wait for any such  guidance  before  determining  appeals  by  the
       Tribunal. I interpret precarious  leave  to  equate  to  continuation
       leave once a person has been refused on an application and whilst  an
       appeal is conducted: clearly at this point an appellant is aware that
       he or she may not be allowed to  remain  and  that  their  status  is
       precarious. I therefore find  the  private  life  the  appellant  had
       between his arrival in December 2008 and his refusal in June 2014 was
       not formed  during  precarious  leave,  and  thus  that  all  of  the
       appellant's private life ties were formed whilst his status  was  not
       precarious.

   41. In favour of the appellant is that he has grown  up  in  the  UK  and
       formed very strong private life bonds with this country over the past
       six years. He is part way through a BTEC engineering course  in  this
       country. His cultural references are now very largely  those  of  the
       UK, having had his entire teenage  and  young  adult  years  in  this
       country. His private life ties ought to be given due weight  as  they
       were not formed  during  precarious  leave.  The  appellant  is  well
       integrated into British society with a significant relationship  with
       his English foster mother, able to speak good  English  and  pursuing
       studies which will ultimately lead to it being most unlikely he would
       be a burden on the British tax payer. Indeed I find it likely that he
       will contribute positively to the UK economy in the future.  This  is
       clearly also the view of his foster mother and his friend Mr  A,  who
       have provided letters in his support.

   42.  The  situation  to  which  the  appellant  will  be   returning   in
       Afghanistan, I find can be accurately described as one  which  places
       significant obstacles in the way of his integration,  and  definitely
       obstacles which are a lot more serious than inconvenience. I  do  not
       find  that  "significant  obstacles"  equates  to  a  test  requiring
       destitution which is what Mr  Shilliday  has  contended:  significant
       obstacles to integration implies real  difficulties  in  establishing
       some semblance of normal life.  I note the research carried out by Ms
       Bryony Norman and Mr Abdul Ghafoor of  the  Refugee  Support  Network
       into those who  were  returned  to  Afghanistan  having  spent  their
       teenager years in the UK with discretionary leave to remain, set  out
       in an article by Ms Bowerman dated 30th September 2014 at pages 15 to
       17 of the appellant's newest bundle.

   43. Ms Bowerman notes three recurring themes  from  the  interviews  with
       returnees: issues of a deterioration in  safety  and  security  since
       2013; the harsh economic environment  was  worsening  and  they  were
       forced to adopt a survival mentality simply looking for the means  to
       survive rather than pursuing any studies or  having  regular  work  -
       with even temporary work very hard to find;  "not  being  known"  and
       thus being treated  as  foreign  and  finding  it  difficult  to  re-
       integrate due to the changes that Afghanistan has gone through  since
       their departure. Only 43% of these young  people  in  the  study  had
       managed to connect with family members.

   44. This research is in line  with  the  material  in  UNHCR  Eligibility
       Guidelines for Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-
       seekers from Afghanistan dated 6th August 2013 at pages 278 to 407 of
       the appellant's original bundle, see particularly sections D and E at
       pages 294 and 295. 40% of all returning refugees have been unable  to
       reintegrate in  their  home  communities  and  60%  had  difficulties
       rebuilding their lives, with many ending up as IDPs in  urban  areas.
       "Urban IDPs are more vulnerable than the non-displaced urban poor, as
       they are particularly affected by  unemployment,  limited  access  to
       adequate housing, limited access to water and  sanitation,  and  food
       insecurity." Humanitarian indicators are in any case  critically  low
       in Afghanistan with 36% of the population living  below  the  poverty
       line and 34% being food insecure.

   45. In the light of the country of  origin  materials  I  find  that  the
       appellant will on the balance of  probabilities,  as  he  claims,  be
       returned to a situation where he struggles to find sufficient work to
       feed and house himself in a  situation  where  he  is  treated  as  a
       foreigner  and  lives  outside  normal  Afghan  society  due  to  the
       difficulties of re-integration.

   46. This is a finely balanced case however  I  conclude  that  given  the
       strength of the appellant's private life ties to the UK  built  since
       the age of 13 years; the lack of currently contactable family support
       on return to Kabul; and  the  current  socio-economic  situation  for
       young forced returnees that this would make the appellant's removal a
       disproportionate interference with  his  right  to  respect  for  his
       private life.

Decision

   47. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   48. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal under Article 8 ECHR  is  set
       aside  (although  the  decision  dismissing  the  asylum  appeal   is
       preserved).

   49. The decision is re-made allowing the appeal under Article  8  of  the
       ECHR.




Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

2nd February 2015


Fee Award

       In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in the appeal  by
       allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award (rule  23A
       (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005
       and section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
       2007). I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee
       Awards in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).  I  have  decided  not
       make a fee award as I was not asked  to  do  so  by  the  appellant's
       representative and a large amount  of  supporting  documentation  was
       produced during the appeal process.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

2nd February 2015
Annex A

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 10th November 1995.
       He first came to the UK on 21st December  2008.  His  initial  asylum
       claim was refused on 20th March 2009. He  was  granted  discretionary
       leave to remain from 20th April 2009 to 20th April 2012.  His  appeal
       against refusal of asylum was dismissed after a hearing on  9th  June
       2009. The appellant applied for further leave to remain on 19th April
       2012. His application was refused on 17th June 2014 and he  appealed.
       His appeal was dismissed in a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Stokes following a hearing on 26th August 2014.

    2. On 27th October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford found that
       there was an arguable error of law in the determination of the appeal
       under Article 8 ECHR because of the  application  of  s.117B  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    3. The matter  came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    4. Mr Turner submitted that he relied upon the grounds of appeal.  There
       were two  errors:  firstly  an  error  of  fact  creating  unfairness
       regarding the appellant's age and secondly an error with  respect  to
       the fact that he had leave to remain from 2009 to 2012.  He  did  not
       pursue the argument in the grounds about the duty to trace.

    5. Judge Stokes had started his conclusion sections of the determination
       at  paragraph  35  by  setting  out  that  in  accordance   with   KA
       (Afghanistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 and JS (Former unaccompanied child
       - durable solution) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00568 that there  was  no
       bright line when the needs of a child suddenly disappear and that  he
       was proceeding on the notional basis that the appellant was under the
       age of 18 years. However Judge Stokes then in determining the  appeal
       looks at the appellant as a 20 year old (see paragraph 45 and 52).

    6. Judge Stokes states at paragraph 60 of  the  determination  that  the
       appellant's private life should be given little weight in  accordance
       with s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  as
       his status has been precarious. This was not accurate. Precarious was
       not an appropriate way of  describing  the  discretionary  leave  the
       appellant had held from April 2009 to April 2012.

    7. I asked Mr Turner to address  me  on  Judge  Stokes'  conclusions  on
       family life. Mr Bramble objected to this as he said this  was  not  a
       ground of appeal. I clarified to Mr Bramble that I was interested  in
       Mr Turner's submissions on this point as I felt it may be relevant to
       whether any errors with respect to the age of the appellant  and  the
       nature of his leave to remain were material errors of law  as  oppose
       to just errors. I also indicated to Mr Bramble that it was open to me
       to take note of any Robinson obvious errors of law with respect to  a
       human rights matter. (Indeed as is set out in  Nixon  (permission  to
       appeal: grounds) [2014] UKUT 00368 at paragraph 7 there is a duty for
       me to do this when important human rights are engaged).

    8. Mr Turner submitted that it was not clear whether  Judge  Stokes  had
       found that the appellant had family life in the UK: at  paragraph  55
       he states that he has family life in the UK with his foster carer but
       at paragraph 57.1 he indicates this is not the case. He made it clear
       that he did not wish to apply  to  vary  his  grounds  of  appeal  to
       include this point however and that this submission  went  simply  to
       the materiality of the other errors in the grounds of appeal.

    9. Mr Bramble argued that Judge Stokes had been aware of the appellant's
       correct age as he referred to the appellant returning to  Afghanistan
       as a 20 year old at paragraph 45 of his determination.  Further  even
       if there was a miscalculation of  the  appellant's  age  (Mr  Bramble
       accepted he was 18 years old at the date of hearing) then this was  a
       very narrow issue. Likewise he  argued  that  the  appellant's  leave
       could be seen as precarious and that it was only a matter that  Judge
       Stokes had born in mind so this was not a material error  of  law  in
       the context of the other matters which led to the conclusion that any
       Article 8 ECHR interference was proportionate.

   10. Mr Turner submitted in reply that s.117B of Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 and the  precarious  nature  of  the  appellant's
       leave was a matter Judge Stokes said he had  taken  into  account  in
       coming to his decision at paragraph 60 of the determination.  It  was
       not only something he had borne in mind. As a  result  little  weight
       had been given to the private life the appellant had in the  UK.  The
       definition of precariousness argued for by Mr Bramble would mean  all
       private life had little weight unless the person had indefinite leave
       to remain and could not be correct.  There  had  also  been  repeated
       references to the appellant  returning  as  a  20  year  old  in  the
       determination which was a material error as it would  be  appropriate
       to have seen the appellant as someone who came as a child, had  leave
       as a child and was not cut off from such consideration as a child  by
       any bright line.

   11. Mr Turner submitted that this  appeal  could  and  would  succeed  if
       remade under Article 8 ECHR particularly given that there  were  some
       positive findings at paragraph 58 of the determination and  the  fact
       that the lack of weight to private life  had  led  to  other  matters
       (such as the appellant's achievements and  assimilation  in  the  UK)
       being given insufficient weight.

   12. At the end of the hearing I told the parties that I found that  Judge
       Stokes had erred in law in the  determination  of  the  appeal  under
       Article 8 ECHR. My reasons are set out below. I informed the  parties
       that I was setting the part of the determination dealing with Article
       8 ECHR aside. The appellant was not at the  Tribunal  and  Mr  Turner
       applied to have the re-making hearing adjourned. Mr Bramble  did  not
       object to this adjournment, and I agreed that this should happen.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   13. I do not consider the grant of permission by First-tier Tribunal Ford
       as one which limited the grant  simply  to  the  ground  relating  to
       s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  He  does
       state that the "remaining grounds are not arguable" but  he  did  not
       follow the procedure to limit the grounds of  appeal  or  state  that
       permission was refused on them as  is  required  by  Ferrer  (Limited
       Appeal Grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT 304. Mr Bramble did not argue  that
       the appellant was only limited to  arguing  the  ground  relating  to
       s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

   14. When the determination is read as a  whole  it  appears  that  whilst
       Judge Stokes had directed himself in accordance with  KA  and  JS  to
       consider the fact that the appellant may have the  same  needs  as  a
       child as he was only 18 years old at the time  of  hearing,  he  then
       addressed his position on return to Afghanistan on the basis that  he
       would be  20  years  old.  There  are  references  to  the  appellant
       returning as a 20 year old at paragraphs 41, 45 and 52.  Judge Stokes
       was obliged to consider all grounds of appeal for this  appellant  as
       of the date of hearing and the appellant was in no way a 20 year  old
       at that point. I find this to be a  significant  error  of  fact  for
       which the appellant and  his  advisers  were  not  responsible  which
       impacted on the fairness  of  the  assessment  of  his  appeal  under
       Article 8 ECHR.

   15. In addition Judge Stokes, at paragraph 60 of his determination, takes
       into consideration in coming to his decision on Article 8  ECHR  that
       the appellant's immigration status is precarious  and  little  weight
       should be given to his private life as this was the case.  This  does
       not give consideration to the three  years  discretionary  leave  the
       appellant held between 2009 and  2012  which  I  find  could  not  be
       described as "precarious" leave. It follows logically  that  positive
       matters (such as his wide circle of friends and good friends and  his
       studies leading to qualifications - referred to  at  paragraphs  57.2
       and 57.4 of the determination) and his lawful presence in the UK as a
       child between the ages of 13 and 16 years have erroneously been given
       little weight.

   16. I am satisfied that  these  two  errors  suffice  to  mean  that  the
       determination must be set aside and re-made as it cannot be said that
       had  they  not  been   made   the   outcome   when   conducting   the
       proportionality assessment under Article  8  ECHR  would  necessarily
       have been the same.

   17. I find it appropriate to set aside the determination with respect  to
       Article 8 ECHR in its entirety in the light of these errors and  also
       because it is entirely unclear whether Judge Stokes  found  that  the
       appellant had family life in the UK. At paragraph 55  he  finds  that
       the appellant has family life with his foster mother and her  family.
       Whereas at paragraph 57.1 Judge Stokes finds that applying Kugathas v
       SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31 that there is not. It is clearly a matter  of
       importance to understand whether  this  is  a  case  only  about  the
       appellant's private life in the UK or one  which  also  concerned  an
       interference with family life in the UK as well.

   18. The finding, which is an integral part  of  the  unchallenged  asylum
       determination, that  the  appellant  has  family  in  Afghanistan  is
       retained but it is open to either party to apply  to  adduce  further
       evidence (if done in accordance with the Procedure  Rules)  and  make
       further submissions as to the nature of the appellant's  relationship
       with that family.


Decision

    1. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  the  determination  of  the
       appeal under Article 8 ECHR
    2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal under Article 8 ECHR  is
       set aside.
    3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  the  asylum  and
       humanitarian protection appeals is retained.


Directions

    1. The article 8 ECHR appeal is to be remade de novo before me  on  30th
       January 2015.
    2. The hearing is listed for 2 hours.
    3. Any new evidence that the parties wish to adduce should be filed with
       the Tribunal and  served  on  the  other  party  in  accordance  with
       paragraph 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 at least seven days prior to the hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 28th November 2014

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
