
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05272/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 8 March 2016                       |On 5 April 2016                       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    j r m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp (the judge), promulgated on 8 December 2015,
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.  The  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal had been against the Respondent's  decision  of  13
    March 2015 to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom  by  way  of
    directions under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. In essence, the Appellant's protection claim was based upon a suspicion
    by the Sri Lankan authorities that he had been involved  in  the  well-
    documented murder of the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister on 12 August 2005.
     The Appellant claimed that he had  been  detained  shortly  after  the
    incident, accused of being involved, mistreated and then released  upon
    payment of a bribe.  The Appellant stated that he then left the country
    illegally in October 2006 and returned to Sri Lanka to visit family  in
    June 2007.  Whilst there he was again detained, essentially on the same
    basis as before. Again he was interrogated and mistreated and again  he
    was released upon payment of a bribe.  He then left Sri  Lanka  legally
    on 15 July 2008.  He claimed asylum in this country in January 2014.

 3. A central plank of his case was that there is an extant arrest  warrant
    against him in Sri Lanka and this of itself places him at risk in light
    of the current country guidance case of GJ and Others (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).


Hearing before the judge

 4. The judge's findings start at paragraph 52 of his decision. In  respect
    of the Appellant's initial detention it is said that his  evidence  was
    inconsistent with the country information relating to the murder of the
    foreign minister.  The judge goes on to find that  it  was  implausible
    that the Appellant, being suspected of the  serious  crime  of  murder,
    would have been released even on payment of a bribe  and  that  it  was
    implausible that he would  have  been  allowed  to  leave  the  country
    through normal immigration channels  if  he  was  of  interest  to  the
    authorities.

 5. At paragraph 59 the judge turns to the issue  of  the  arrest  warrant.
    Having  dealt  with  the  submissions  on  this  point  made  by   both
    representatives the judge at paragraph 70 ultimately concludes that she
    preferred the  evidence  contained  within  the  Respondent's  document
    verification report to the effect that the arrest  warrant  was  not  a
    genuine document.

 6. At paragraphs 71 to 72 the judge concludes that the  Appellant's  delay
    in claiming asylum in this country was adverse to his credibility.

 7. The conclusions are summarised in paragraphs  76  and  77  wherein  the
    judge states that he was rejecting the core of the Appellant's  account
    relating to arrest and detention and it followed that the Appellant was
    not at risk in light of GJ and Others.

 8. The claimed activities in the United Kingdom are dealt with briefly  at
    paragraph 78 and it is concluded that no risks arose therefrom.


The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The grounds of appeal are twofold.  Ground 1  asserts  that  the  judge
    failed to have regard to country  information  accepted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in GJ  and  Others  when  assessing  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's claimed releases from detention and  legal  departure  from
    Sri Lanka.

10. Ground 2 relates to the judge's assessment of the arrest warrant. It is
    said that the judge erred in failing to deal with the evidence of a Sri
    Lankan lawyer who had produced two letters relating to the authenticity
    of the warrant.

11. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zucker on 19 January 2016.

The hearing before me

12. Ms Anzani identified the two  lawyer's  letters,  both  of  which  were
    before the judge.  The first is dated 5 June 2015  and  the  second  17
    November 2015.  A copy of each is on file.  Ms  Anzani  submitted  that
    the  judge  erred  at  paragraph  64  in  finding   that   there   were
    discrepancies in relation to the contact details of the lawyer.  Having
    regard to pages 1 and 2 of the  Appellant's  supplementary  bundle  and
    page  8  of  the  Appellant's  main  bundle  there  were  in  fact   no
    inconsistencies in respect of  the  lawyer's  residential  address  and
    telephone  number.   The  judge  therefore  had  factually  erred.   In
    addition Ms Anzani submitted that these concerns had not been raised by
    the judge at the hearing and therefore the Appellant  had  not  had  an
    opportunity to address the points at that hearing.  She submitted  that
    the judge had failed to look at the  lawyer's  evidence  correctly  and
    failed to address the point raised in the second lawyer's  letter  that
    he (the lawyer) had in fact attended the relevant court and obtained  a
    copy of the warrant himself: this was direct evidence and needed to  be
    addressed by the judge.  The issue of the arrest warrant  was  core  to
    the assessment of risk on return in light of GJ and Others.

13. In respect of the second ground of appeal, Ms Anzani referred me to her
    skeleton argument and the grounds  of  appeal  which  cited  particular
    paragraphs of GJ and Others relating to country information on  release
    by payment of a bribe and departure through the airport.

14. Ms Isherwood accepted that the  judge  had  erred  in  respect  of  the
    lawyer's evidence but she stated that it was not  material  because  of
    what is contained at paragraphs 66 to 70 of the judge's decision.   She
    relied in addition in particular on the last sentence of paragraph  68.
    She submitted that the judge had looked at the Appellant's claim in the
    round and had assessed the relevant evidence.


Decision on error of law

15. I find that the judge has materially erred in law.  My reasons for this
    conclusion are as follows.

16. The judge failed to assess the lawyer's  evidence  adequately.   It  is
    clear that the judge factually erred in  paragraph  64.   I  accept  Ms
    Anzani's submissions in respect  of  the  contact  details  and  having
    carefully  considered  documents  myself  there   were   in   fact   no
    inconsistencies on the face of the evidence.  Therefore the basis  upon
    which the judge appears to have reduced the weight to  be  attached  to
    the lawyer's evidence was wrong.

17. In addition, I also accept Ms  Anzani's  submission  that  the  judge's
    concerns, albeit misconceived, were not raised at the hearing  as  they
    should have been, given that the Presenting Officer had not  challenged
    the standing of the lawyer himself.

18. I appreciate what Ms Isherwood says  about  the  findings  and  reasons
    contained in paragraphs 66 to 70 as they relate to the arrest  warrant.
    However the judge has failed to properly examine  or  engage  with  the
    lawyer's second letter dated 17 November 2015 in  which  he  states  in
    terms that: "I confirm that I personally visited the record room of the
    Chief Magistrates' Court and obtained the copy of the  warrant".   That
    is direct evidence from a lawyer to the effect that he had  obtained  a
    copy of the core document in the Appellant's case.  The judge makes  no
    reference to this element of the lawyer's letter at all.   If  she  was
    implicitly rejecting it because of what she said at paragraph  64,  she
    was clearly wrong in so doing given what I have  said  previously.   If
    she was rejecting this evidence for any other reason clear findings and
    reasons would have had to have been  provided.   I  bear  in  mind  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ  1011
    in which a similar issue arose.  Direct  evidence  from  lawyers  whose
    standing has not  been  challenged  is  significant  and  needs  to  be
    addressed with particular care.  This has  not  occurred  in  the  case
    before me.

19. In my view the judge's error in respect of the lawyer's letter  infects
    the entirety of her consideration of the arrest warrant  and  therefore
    the error is material to this issue notwithstanding what else  is  said
    in paragraphs 66 to 70.  In turn, and because of the centrality of  the
    arrest warrant to the Appellant's claim as a whole,  I  find  that  the
    error made on this issue infects the entirety of the judge's  decision.
    On this basis alone therefore the decision must be set aside.

20. In respect of the other ground of appeal I am also satisfied  that  the
    judge has materially erred.  The issues of  release  by  payment  of  a
    bribe and departure from the country  were  specifically  addressed  in
    expert and country evidence before the Upper Tribunal in GJ and  Others
    and having regard to the  various  paragraphs  to  which  I  have  been
    referred that evidence was accepted by the Upper Tribunal  and  applied
    to the individual cases before it (see for example, paragraphs 394  and
    424).  Although it is somewhat unclear as  to  whether  the  judge  was
    specifically referred to the specific paragraphs of GJ  and  Others,  I
    accept that the submission was made on behalf of the Appellant  to  the
    effect that it was plausible that people would be released  on  payment
    of a bribe and also be able to leave  the  country  notwithstanding  an
    ongoing interest in them.  The judge failed to engage with the issue of
    corruption and bribery and its claimed application to  the  Appellant's
    case (see for example, his evidence at Q29 of the asylum interview). On
    this basis too the judge's decision must be set aside.

Disposal

21. Both representatives were agreed that if I were to find material errors
    of law in the judge's decision the appeal would have to be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Having regard to paragraph 7 of the  Practice
    Statement I conclude that this must  be  the  appropriate  route.   The
    adverse credibility findings made by the  judge  are  unsustainable  in
    light of the errors of law.  This appeal needs to be heard afresh  with
    no preserved findings of fact.  I therefore remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and issue relevant directions below.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties:

         1. The remitted hearing will  be  a  complete  re-hearing  with  no
            preserved findings of fact;


         2. Any further evidence relied on by either  party  must  be  filed
            with the First-tier Tribunal and served upon the other party  no
            later than fourteen working days prior to the next hearing;


         3. Both parties must comply with any further directions  issued  by
            the First-tier Tribunal.


Directions to Administration:

         1. This appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
            heard at Sheldon Court hearing centre on a date to be  fixed  by
            that centre;


         2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Boylan-Kemp  shall  not  rehear  this
            appeal;


         3. A Tamil interpreter is required;


         4. There will be  a  three-hour  time  estimate  for  the  remitted
            hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 22 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
