
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05792/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27 November 2014                             |On 3 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

               THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING DBE
                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL BIRRELL

                                   Between

                                     T V
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                                 Ex tempore

 1. This is an appeal from  a  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 25 September 2014.  At the onset, we correct  a  mistake
    at the end of that determination. The Tribunal said that  no  anonymity
    direction was  being  made,  in  circumstances  where  earlier  in  its
    decision the Tribunal had made such a direction.  We  direct  that  the
    appellant should be anonymous.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shimmin.
    In his grant of permission to appeal he said that the grounds of appeal
    were that the judge had erred in finding that  the  appellant  was  not
    credible.  The judge proceeded on the mistake of fact, namely that  the
    appellant did not mention he had been burnt with iron  rods.   In  fact
    the appellant when questioned in his asylum interview had claimed this.
     The appellant argue that there  was  no  foundation  for  the  adverse
    credibility finding.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Shimmin  observed  that  the  appellant  had
    claimed to have been burnt with iron rods, and that the judge  appeared
    to have placed considerable reliance on  this  apparent  inconsistency.
    It was arguable that this disclosed an error of law. The other  grounds
    of appeal remained open.

 4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal records that the appellant is a
    Sri Lankan man born on 12 November 1966 that he was married  with  four
    children and that one of them, sadly, had been killed in Sri Lanka.  It
    went  on  to  say  that  the  appellant  did  not  currently  know  the
    whereabouts of his wife and other  children.  He  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 18 November 2013, arriving by  air.  He  said  that  he  had
    travelled through Nairobi, Dhaka  and  Lisbon.  He  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival in the United Kingdom and underwent a  screening  interview  on
    the same day.  He attended for a formal asylum interview on 8 July 2014
    and his claim was dismissed by the Home Office in  a  letter  dated  28
    July 2014, for the reasons set out in that letter.  He then appealed.

 5. The Tribunal then summarised the basis of the  appellant's  claim  from
    the responses to questions put to him during his  two  interviews,  and
    from a further statement prepared for the  hearing.    The  appellant's
    case was that he was a Hindu Tamil Sri Lankan.  He had been employed as
    a subsistence farmer and he left Sri Lanka because he lost his wife and
    family there and was subjected to harsh treatment by  the  authorities.
    He was helped in coming to the United Kingdom and used a false  Maltese
    passport to enter the United Kingdom. He had said in his interview that
    the reason he came here was that he has family here. He claimed that he
    was arrested at the end of the civil war and detained for a  period  of
    one and a half years by the government.

 6. It then set out the appellant's history. He claimed that his  wife  had
    been a member of the  political  wing  of  the  LTTE.  Members  of  the
    organisation used to visit his house and he was introduced  to  M,  who
    was head of the logistical division. She had become  a  member  of  the
    LTTE before he married her. His claim was that he used to see the  LTTE
    when they visited and accordingly he started  working  for  them  at  a
    place called Anbu Muham Kitchen in Vattakatchi.  He said that this  was
    some 12 km away from his home. It took him 45 minutes to travel  there.
    He worked every day from 9.30 until 6 pm.  He said that he  had  worked
    for the LTTE until 2008.  The war had  then  started.  The  army  came,
    separated the civilians from those who were suspected of involvement in
    the LTTE, and he was placed with the latter as someone had pointed  him
    out to the army.  His wife was not arrested, as the LTTE had put her on
    a ship but he was taken to Omanthias camp in Vauniya.  He was  detained
    in a small  room  on  his  own  for  one  and  a  half  years.  He  was
    interrogated about his involvement in the LTTE and was beaten and  made
    to sign a document in Sinhalese.  He did not  know  what  the  document
    said because he could not understand it. He said he was threatened with
    death if  he  did  not  sign  it.  His  claim  was  that  he  had  been
    interrogated  and  tortured  every  other  day  and  asked  about   the
    whereabouts of weapons.  He was given rice and lentils to eat  but  not
    on the days when he was tortured.

 7. He claimed that he had been released in  December  2010  when  the  CID
    collected him from his cell,  drove  for  about  30  minutes  and  then
    released him. He discovered that his relations had bribed  the  CID  to
    release him. His uncle then put him  on  a  lorry  which  took  him  to
    Puttalam.  The appellant claimed that his uncle told him that "this  is
    temporary release. After that if you keep him here and  we  arrest  him
    again we will not keep him alive".  The appellant said  that  his  wife
    was more politically active and she used to be collected by the LTTE to
    address meetings regarding their political agenda.  While  he  did  not
    actively support the LTTE's aims he  agreed  that  Tamils  should  have
    their own independence.

 8. He told interviewing officers  that  his  son  had  been  killed  by  a
    government shell on 25 April 2009 in Mullivaikkal.  The appellant  said
    that after he went to stay in Puttalam with his uncle's friend  he  was
    told to stay in the house and not to leave. The  person  was  a  Muslim
    friend of his uncle's and was doing the uncle a favour by  letting  him
    stay. That friend  took  him  to  the  agent  and  the  agent  prepared
    documents to bring him to the UK.

 9. He claimed that before he joined the  LTTE  he  was  a  farmer  on  his
    uncle's land, had been unable to continue farming  because  he  injured
    his back and could not turn over.  He had said that the  LTTE  did  not
    make him do any training because his wife was in  the  political  wing,
    and because he had to look after the children.

10. The Tribunal set out the relevant legal provisions in paragraphs  8  to
    12 of the determination, directed  itself  correctly  in  paragraph  13
    about the burden and standard of proof and then summarised the evidence
    from both sides in paragraphs 14 to 16 and 19 to 26.

11. In paragraph 21  of  the  determination  the  Tribunal  summarised  the
    questioning of the appellant about his scars as follows:

         "With reference to the photographs of the scars, he was  asked  why
         he had not mentioned the  scars  to  anyone  prior  to  the  expert
         report, but that he had mentioned being kicked, slapped and  beaten
         with several bland [sic] objects.  His response to this was that he
         had not been asked.  Mr Brooks noted that he had not  mentioned  it
         in his witness statement either; initially he said that he did  not
         understand what he was being asked, but when he was shown a copy of
         his statement he said that he now  understood  what  he  was  being
         asked, and the fact was that as he had already mentioned it to  the
         doctors he did not  see  the  need  to  put  in  into  his  witness
         statement."

12. The Tribunal made findings of fact and in relation  to  credibility  at
    paragraphs 29 to 34 of the determination and the Tribunal's  conclusion
    was that it not satisfied that the appellant was a reliable witness  or
    that his account of his problems in Sri Lanka was true.

13. In paragraph 29 of the determination the Tribunal referred to  a  claim
    by the appellant that he had scars as a result of ill-treatment that he
    had received at the hands of the Sri Lankan authorities and to what the
    Tribunal considered was  a  discrepancy  between  his  account  and  an
    account given by Dr Martin that he had been burnt with a hot  iron  rod
    during his detention.  What the Tribunal said was that

         "It appears from the interview record  that  he  had  been  legally
         represented at the interview. This is significant  because  nowhere
         during the course of his interview does  he  mention  that  he  has
         scars on his body as result of the ill-treatment that  he  received
         at the hands of the Sri  Lankan  authorities.   The  appellant  has
         provided photographs of quite extensive [sic] when he was examined.
         He told Dr Martin that the scarring was caused by 'being burnt with
         a hot iron rod during his detention in 2009'. Dr  Martin  concludes
         that the appellant's explanation is a likely cause of his injuries,
         as he says that the scars are 'mature' which means  that  they  are
         likely to be over two years old."

14. The Tribunal went on to say in paragraph 30:

         "However it is incredible that the appellant should  mention  being
         slapped, held under  water,  beaten  but  should  omit  to  mention
         torture by burning with a hot iron rot [sic], which is likely to be
         been the most painful of all the other forms  of  torture.  I  also
         note that he told the interviewing officers that he used to work as
         a farmer but stopped because of  problems  with  his  back.  It  is
         strange that he could remember  that  but  not  the  burn  injuries
         inflicted on his back by torture during his interview. It  is  even
         more so when one takes into account the fact that the appellant was
         legally represented at the time of his interview and  at  the  time
         that he prepared his statement in response to  the  refusal  letter
         and it is highly likely that  a  reasonably  competent  immigration
         advisor will have asked him if he has scars."

15. The Tribunal then referred to difficulties  in  dating  the  scars  and
    said,

         "......I must  make  the  decision  as  to  whether  I  accept  the
         appellant's scarring was caused in the way that he  claims.   There
         is no detailed account of how the injuries were caused as there was
         in KV. The sponsor was not sympathetic  to  the  LTTE  although  he
         claims that his wife was political member. ... It is a  matter  for
         me in the context of the  whole  of  the  appellant's  evidence  to
         assess whether the scars were caused as a  result  of  torture.  In
         assessing that evidence I have to pay due  regard  to  the  medical
         evidence and to bear in mind that doctors are independent and  that
         appropriate weight must be given to their evidence."

16. The Tribunal then referred to the  decision  in  the  case  of  KV  and
    concluded that it was not satisfied the appellant's scarring was caused
    in the manner described.  The Tribunal referred to Dr  Martin's  report
    and said

         "I note that Dr Martin does not rule out the possibility that these
         could be SIBP [that is "self-inflicted  by  proxy  injuries"],  but
         prefers the appellant's explanation as  he  finds  no  evidence  to
         support the former.  I disagree with Dr Martin because I  have  had
         the benefit of hearing from the appellant and  his  account  is  no
         more detailed than it was when the respondent first considered it."

17. Mr Tufan, representing the Secretary of State today,  accepts  that  in
    these passages of the determination the Tribunal misdirected itself. In
    short it is  clear  from  the  appellant's  asylum  interview  that  at
    question 2, he was asked "Can you tell me what these documents are  and
    how they support your asylum claim". Among other things  he  said  "And
    this is photos regarding my torture".  At  paragraph  4  he  was  asked
    "Have you been diagnosed with any medical conditions?"  and he  replied
    "All I was beaten by the army so I have problems in  walking.   Because
    they have beaten me on the back and they also burnt me behind.  Because
    they have beaten me behind and burnt me behind with iron rods."

18. At question 97 of the interview he was asked "How  did  you  manage  to
    leave detention"?  He answered "1  and  a  half  years  it  was  severe
    torture for me. You  want  me  to  tell  you  about  my  torture"?  The
    questioner replied "No".  It is also clear from Dr Martin's report,  to
    which we were referred by Mr Muquit in his  submissions  this  morning,
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred when summarising the effect of
    Dr Martin's evidence against the guidance given in the case of  KV.  Dr
    Martin had said "There were no presenting facts making it more  than  a
    possibility that the injuries were self-inflicted injuries  by  proxy".
    He meant that there were no clinical signs to show that these were SIBP
    injuries.

19. It seems to us that Mr Tufan was right to  concede  that  the  Tribunal
    erred in its assessment in these two paragraphs. The  Tribunal  appears
    to have ignored the fact that the appellant had referred to being burnt
    with iron rods during  his  detention  very  early  on  in  his  asylum
    interview, had volunteered further information about the  torture,  and
    been  told that that would not be necessary.  It  is  also  clear  from
    paragraph 14 of the Secretary of State's refusal letter, as it is  from
    question 2 of the asylum interview, that the appellant had submitted at
    an early stage photographs of scarring in support of his claim. So  our
    view is that Mr Tufan was right to accept that the Tribunal misdirected
    itself in its assessment of the appellant's credibility.

20. The real question is not whether there is an error of law here,  as  it
    seems to us that there is, but whether this error of law  is  material,
    or not. Mr Tufan submits, basing his submission on the  recent  country
    guidance decision of this Tribunal in GJ  and  Others  (Post-civil  war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 which has been approved by  the
    Court of Appeal recently in NP (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 829 that the risk  profile  which  will
    entail a conclusion that a person is at real  risk  of  persecution  or
    Article  3  ill  treatment  on  return  to  Sri   Lanka   has   changed
    significantly as a result of changes in the political  climate  in  Sri
    Lanka and changes in the priorities of the authorities there.

21. We have been referred to, and have read, the  recent  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal and it is apparent to us that  that  is  so.   We  have
    considered whether it would be right to  dismiss  this  appeal  on  the
    basis that there is no possibility under the current  country  guidance
    case, as considered by the Court of Appeal, that this  appellant  could
    satisfy a Tribunal that he was at risk of Article 3  ill  treatment  or
    persecution on Refugee Convention grounds.  We have not found  this  an
    easy question to decide  but  it  does  seem  to  us  that  taking  the
    appellant's case at its highest there is enough in his past profile  to
    mean that he could be perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities currently
    to be a person of interest to them and thus to be a person who  was  at
    such risk.

22. Mr Muquit submits that the  following  factors  are  relevant.  On  the
    appellant's case he had been identified by somebody and interned  as  a
    result of that. He was detained for one and a half years. On  his  case
    he suffered serious  abuse.  On  his  case  his  wife  had  high  level
    involvement with the LTTE and had been removed  from  Sri  Lanka  on  a
    ship.  He had been questioned while in detention about his knowledge of
    the LTTE and their activities and his knowledge  about  ammunition.  He
    had not been released because he was perceived to have no  profile  but
    because of a payment of a bribe and a warning had been issued  when  he
    was released.

23. He had given evidence that further enquiries had been made about him in
    Sri Lanka after his release and he had engaged in sur place activities.



24. It is true that the Tribunal  in  paragraphs  32,  33  and  38  of  its
    determination made adverse findings  about  the  credibility  of  other
    aspects of the  appellant's  account  apart  from  the  source  of  his
    scarring, and in particular adverse findings about his  claim  to  have
    engaged in demonstrations organised by Tamil  diaspora  activists.   We
    have considered anxiously those findings, standing on  their  own,  and
    coupled with the new approach to risk which is evident in  the  country
    guidance case and the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal.   Can  we  be
    confident that the First-tier Tribunal's conclusion that there  was  no
    real risk can stand?

25. On balance we have concluded that  that  conclusion  cannot  stand.  It
    seems to us  in  particular  that  the  assessment  of  the  sur  place
    activities was infected by the Tribunal's approach to  the  appellant's
    credibility which was largely founded on its mistaken assessment of his
    claims about the cause of his scars. In particular  the  Tribunal  said
    the photographs were self-serving and  intended  to  embellish  a  weak
    claim. We also consider that the assessment of the credibility  of  the
    remainder of his claims in paragraphs 32 and 33 of the determination is
    likewise infected by the error which really was at  the  foundation  of
    the Tribunal's assessment of credibility.

26. The appellant was entitled to have his claim  considered  with  anxious
    scrutiny at first instance. We do not consider  that  it  received  the
    anxious scrutiny which it should have received at first  instance.  For
    that reason we cannot be  confident  that  the  error  of  law  was  an
    immaterial error of law. It follows that this appeal succeeds we  remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.


Decision

Appeal allowed - Appeal remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Signed                              Date 1/12/2014


Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE


