

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:         AA/05431/2014
                                                               AA/05432/2014
                                                               AA/05433/2014
                                                               AA/05434/2014
                                                               AA/05435/2014
                                                               AA/05436/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 31 March 2016                             |On 15 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     MB
                                     ME
                                     OB
                                     AB
                                     DB
                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/2698) I make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the Appellants.  This  direction
      applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.

Introduction

   2. The appellants are a family of Libyan nationals comprising  a  husband
      and wife (the first and second appellants)  and  their  four  children
      aged at the date of the First-tier hearing 17, 7, 15 and 16  years  of
      age respectively.  The first and second appellants also  have  another
      daughter,  aged  19  years  of  age,  whose  claim  for   asylum   and
      international  protection  is  the  subject  of  a   separate   appeal
      (AA/07751/2015) which, as a result of an error of law decision made by
      the Upper Tribunal on 16 March 2016, awaits a resumed  hearing  before
      the Upper Tribunal to remake the decision in respect of her.   In  the
      light of the decision I make in these  appeals,  the  appeals  of  the
      whole family should continue linked together in the Upper Tribunal.

   3. The appellant's come from Benghazi  in  Libya.   The  first  appellant
      completed  a  PhD  at  Swansea  University  between  2008  and   2013.
      Thereafter, on 30 October 2013 he returned to Libya.

   4. As a result of the security situation in Libya,  the  first  appellant
      together with the other appellants came to the UK via Turkey  in  June
      2014 and claimed asylum.  On 13 July  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State
      rejected each of  the  appellants'  claims  for  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and reliance on their human rights, in particular Article 8
      of the ECHR.  On 15 July 2014, the Secretary of State refused to  vary
      the leave of each of the appellants (which they had as  visitors)  and
      made decisions to remove them under s.47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
      and Nationality Act 2006 to Libya.

The Appeals to the First-tier Tribunal

   5.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
      determination promulgated on 30 January 2015, Judge Britton  dismissed
      each of their appeals on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
      rights grounds.

   6. First, the Judge rejected the appellants' claims to asylum based  upon
      the first appellant's account that he had been targeted whilst working
      in his office when someone (whom he did not know) shot a single bullet
      into  the  office.   The  Judge  found  the  appellant's  account   of
      persecution to lack credibility and be a fabrication.

   7. Secondly, in relation to humanitarian protection and Article 15(c)  of
      the Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC)  the  Judge
      held, applying the country guidance decision in AT and Others (Article
      15(c); Risk Categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT  00318  (IAC),  that  the
      security situation in Libya was not such as to establish  for  any  of
      the appellants substantial grounds to believe that they were  at  risk
      of serious harm as  a  consequence  of  indiscriminate  violence.   In
      reaching that decision, Judge Britton concluded  that  the  background
      material relating to Libya since AT and Others  was  decided  did  not
      justify a departure from that decision.

   8. Thirdly, the Judge found that it was in the  best  interests  of  each
      child appellant to be with their parent and to return with them  as  a
      family to Libya.  The Judge found that the appellants'  removal  would
      not breach Article 8.

   9. Thus, he dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Appeals to the Upper Tribunal

  10. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      against the Judge's dismissal of the appeal on asylum  grounds,  under
      Article 15(c) and under Article 8 of the ECHR.  On 20  February  2015,
      the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kamara)  granted   the   appellants
      permission to appeal on all grounds.

  11. On 19 March 2015, the Secretary of State  filed  a  rule  24  response
      seeking to sustain the Judge's decision.

  12. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

  13. Mr Dieu, who represented  the  appellants,  sought  to  challenge  the
      Judge's dismissal of the appeal on asylum  grounds,  for  humanitarian
      protection and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

  14. In summary his submissions were as follows.

  15. First, in relation to the rejection  of  the  asylum  claim,  Mr  Dieu
      submitted that the Judge's reasons at  paragraph  50  and  51  of  his
      determination for disbelieving the appellants' claim were inadequate.

  16. Secondly, as regards Article 15(c) Mr Dieu submitted  that  the  Judge
      had failed properly to take into account  two  expert  reports  by  Dr
      George dated 27 September 2014 and 19 January  2015  in  reaching  his
      decision that the present  circumstances  in  Libya  did  not  justify
      departure from AT and Others.  Further, Mr  Dieu  submitted  that  the
      Judge had not properly taken into account the news report that he  had
      cited at paras 44 and 46 by merely recognising that a cease  fire  had
      been agreed in Libya in early January 2015.  Finally, in  relation  to
      Article 15(c), Mr Dieu submitted that the Judge  had  failed  to  take
      into account the circumstances of the other appellants, in  particular
      that the second appellant had  a  heart  problem  and,  therefore,  he
      submitted her ability to avoid or evade  indiscriminate  violence  was
      decreased and, in relation to the  fourth  appellant,  the  judge  had
      failed to take into account the  evidence  from  his  school  that  he
      suffered from nightmares.

  17. Thirdly, in relation to Article 8 Mr Dieu submitted that the Judge had
      failed to take into account, in assessing the best  interests  of  the
      children, that they had been in the UK for  five  years  and  had  not
      placed that in the balance when considering proportionality.

  18. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State, first submitted that
      the Judge's reasons in paragraphs 50 and 51 were sufficient to sustain
      his adverse credibility findings on the asylum claim.

  19. Secondly, in relation to Article 15(c),  Mr  Richards  submitted  that
      whilst the Judge did not perhaps delve deeply into  the  evidence,  he
      referred to Dr George's report  at  paras  47  and  48.   Mr  Richards
      submitted that Dr George's report was by no means  conclusive  in  the
      appellant's favour and, although at para 67 (page 23 of the bundle) Dr
      George identified that whilst the first appellant  would  be  at  risk
      from intermittent violence, his view was that the risk  would  not  be
      "high".  He submitted that Dr George's second report placed  the  risk
      to the first appellant travelling to Libya  as  presently  no  greater
      than that confronting any other air traveller.  Mr Richards  submitted
      that there was nothing in the evidence to lead the Judge  to  reach  a
      different conclusion from AT and Others.

  20. In respect of the  position  of  the  second  appellant,  Mr  Richards
      submitted that there was some medical evidence but nothing in the  way
      of an expert report showing or identifying any adverse effects to  the
      second appellant returning to Libya as a result of her heart condition
      such that the risk to her under Article 15(c) was greater.   Likewise,
      there was little information in relation to the fourth appellant apart
      from a letter from his school.

  21. Finally, Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had taken account of the
      children's best interests as a primary  consideration  and  there  was
      nothing wrong in his conclusion that  their  best  interests  were  to
      return as a family.

Discussion

  22. I deal first with the asylum claim.

  23. The first appellant's claim is set out essentially at paragraphs 7 and
      8 of the Judge's determination.  The first appellant's claim was  that
      in April/May 2014 whilst he was in his office a single shot was  fired
      into the office.  He did not know if it was directed at  him  and  the
      first appellant's evidence was that it may have  been  random.   There
      was no-one else in the office at  the  time.   The  first  appellant's
      evidence was that apart from that there had been no direct threats  to
      him personally or his family.  The remainder of matters raised by  the
      first appellant concerned the general security situation and  violence
      in Libya, in particular in Benghazi where the family lived.

  24. The Judge did not accept the appellant's  account  that  he  had  been
      targeted.  At paras 50-51 he gave the following reasons:

           "51.  The  appellant  had  studied  in  this  country  and  then
                 returned to Libya in 2013.  He started working in  his  own
                 business and also at the university  although  he  had  not
                 formally been appointed.  After a relatively short time  he
                 came back to this country.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the
                 appellant   was   targeted.    The   situation   was    not
                 deteriorating to the extent that he did not  wait  for  his
                 daughter to have a visa because she remained in Libya  with
                 her grandmother for another two months.  I find the area of
                 Benghazi was safe  because  he  would  not  have  left  his
                 parents and his daughter there.  He would  have  made  sure
                 they were safe before he left Benghazi.

           52.   The appellant said he  did  not  claim  asylum  in  Turkey
                 because the children did not like it as  they  could  speak
                 the  language.   If  the   appellant   was   in   need   of
                 international protection he would have  claimed  asylum  in
                 the first safe country.  He went to Turkey as  he  did  not
                 need a visa to enter Turkey.  I find  it  a  feeble  excuse
                 that the children did not like it in  Turkey  because  they
                 did not speak the language when  he  said  he  was  fleeing
                 persecution.  Likewise the excuse for not going to  Tunisia
                 to claim asylum  was  because  they  spoke  French  in  the
                 schools.  The appellant  did  not  need  a  visa  to  enter
                 Tunisia.  In Tunisia Arabic is the official language and it
                 would have been an obvious country for him and  his  family
                 to have gone.  I find if he was in  need  of  international
                 protection he  would  have  claimed  asylum  at  the  first
                 opportunity.  However, I  find  he  came  to  this  country
                 because he has been to this country and enjoyed living here
                 and wanted an excuse to live  here  permanently.   Also  he
                 failed to go  to  Tripoli  where  his  brother  was  living
                 although the appellant said his brother had  gone  back  to
                 Benghazi.  Because there are no direct flights to Libya  it
                 does not mean to say that the appellant cannot go  back  to
                 Libya because he can return the same way that he came  here
                 via Turkey. I find the appellant is not at risk on return."



  25. Whatever the strength of these reasons, which I am not persuaded  were
      inadequate to justify the Judge's finding, the fact of the  matter  is
      that the first appellant's own evidence even  if  believed  could  not
      establish that he was targeted and therefore would be at risk of being
      targeted by unknown individuals on return.   His own evidence was that
      this was a single shot, he did not know who fired it and that it might
      well have been random.

  26. The first appellant's asylum claim (and those of  his  family  as  his
      dependents) had no realistic prospect of  success  on  this  evidence.
      Even, therefore, if I accepted Mr Dieu's submissions that the  Judge's
      reasoning was inadequate there would be no proper  basis  for  setting
      aside the decision on asylum grounds since the appellants  could  not,
      in my judgement, have any realistic prospect of a positive outcome.

  27. I turn then to the central part  of  the  appellants'  claims,  namely
      Article 15(c).

  28. The position before the Judge was that the country guidance case of AT
      and Others was adverse to the appellants' claims.  That decision which
      dealt with the position in Libya until November 2013 (no  more  recent
      material are recorded in the appendix) concluded that:

           "There is not such a high risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
           Libya, within the meaning of Article 15(c) of Council  Directive
           2014/83/EC ("the Qualification Directive") so as  to  mean  that
           substantial grounds exist for believing that any  person  would,
           solely by being present there, face a real risk  that  threatens
           his or her life or person."

  29. The appellants sought to displace that conclusion by reference to more
      recent background evidence and the expert reports of Dr George.

  30. Dr George is a recognised expert in  relation  to  countries  such  as
      Libya and, indeed, his evidence was before  the  Tribunal  in  AT  and
      Others.  Dr George, in  his  first  report  dated  27  September  2014
      summarised his view of the  security situation especially in  Benghazi
      at para 67 of his report as follows:

           "I would observe that the security  situation  -  especially  in
           Benghazi, but elsewhere  too  -  has  deteriorated  severely  in
           recent weeks.  In this regard I refer to my Report above, and in
           particular to Paragraphs 37-46, 51 and 60.   Persons  uninvolved
           in the fighting have been killed, but  apparently  not  in  very
           great numbers in relation to the size of the  towns  and  cities
           involved.  In my opinion, (the first appellant) would be at risk
           from the intermittent violence, although in my  view  this  risk
           would not be high." (my emphasis)

  31. Dr George reaches that conclusion by reference back to  earlier  parts
      of his report.

  32. In Dr George's second report  dated  19  January  2015,  he  noted  at
      paragraph 2 that in his original report he had outlined

           "the sharp deterioration of  the  security  situation  in  Libya
           during 2014.  The fundamental situation remains much as  it  was
           at the date of that Report, with the country locked in a complex
           civil war with multiple fronts, with periodic surges of  intense
           but mainly localised armed conflict."

  33. At paragraph 6, Dr George notes the ceasefire announced on 16  January
      2015 by Libya Dawn but also notes that they added "that this would  be
      maintained only if its  antagonists  also  respected  the  truce".   A
      ceasefire was announced by the army on 18 January 2015.

  34. In his determination, Judge Britton dealt  briefly  with  Dr  George's
      report at paragraphs 47 and 48 in the following terms:

           "47.  The appellant relies on two papers enclosed in his  bundle
                 from Dr Alan George who has extensive  knowledge  of  Libya
                 and the Arab surrounding area.  He now  works  on  his  own
                 account as a journalist  consultant  and  researcher.   The
                 papers are dated 27 September 2014 and 19 January 2015.

           48.   Dr George states  that  the  Libyan  airports,  local  and
                 international  flights  are  being  operated  to  and  from
                 Tripoli, Benghazi, Misrata and Tubruk.  Dr George sets  out
                 the problems Libya has faced in recent years."

  35. With respect, that does little to summarise the detail of Dr  George's
      report, in particular the earlier one.

  36. In relation  to  the  news  items,  the  Judge  dealt  with  those  in
      paragraphs 44-46 as follows:

           "44.  A document was submitted from the New York Times dated  19
                 January 2015 and Reuter's report of 20 January 2015  states
                 there is a ceasefire in Libya and  UN  backed  negotiations
                 were taking place.

             45.  During  the  hearing  there  was  a  dispute  between  the
                 appellant and the respondent as to whether  the  University
                 of Benghazi was still open.   The  document  at  E1  stated
                 Benghazi University reopened on 2 August 2014.  I told  the
                 parties in the circumstances I would make my own enquiries.
                  However, I could find no conclusive evidence  one  way  or
                 the other.

             46. The BBC News Africa dated 20 January 2014 stated  that  the
                 Libyan army has agreed a partial ceasefire with militias, 2
                 days after some of the  militias  based  in  Western  Libya
                 announced a unilateral truce.   The  UN  Mission  to  Libya
                 welcomed  the  announcement  calling  it   a   "Significant
                 Contribution" to the country's peace process.  It stated it
                 would co-ordinate with both sides "regarding  tackling  any
                 breaches" and that  the  truce  would  allow  the  flow  of
                 humanitarian aid to those who fled the fighting."

  37. Then at paragraph 49 Judge Britton notes:

           "The latest news is that the ceasefire is generally  holding  in
           Libya."

  38. The reports are, of course, news items and are contained in  a  bundle
      (I  was  told  prepared  by  the  respondent)  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.

  39. It is far from clear to me that this material would  necessarily  lead
      to a departure from AT and Others on the basis that there  were  "very
      strong grounds supported by cogent evidence" to do so (see SG (Iraq) v
      SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 at [47]).  However, the evidence is  relevant
      and it is clear to me that the Judge has failed sufficiently  to  take
      into account Dr George's report as a whole and,  in  relation  to  the
      news items, appears to have extracted little more that  a  "ceasefire"
      was in place in early January 2015.  As regards the latter, the  Judge
      makes no reference to the evidence which pointed up, in  effect,  that
      it was early days and it was not clear  whether  the  ceasefire  would
      hold.  Also, the New York Times article at page 2 notes:

           "It is not clear whether the truce will control the fighters  on
           the ground.  For example, neither side's ceasefire pledge seemed
           to apply to Benghazi, the city where the bloodiest  battles  had
           taken place in recent months." (My emphasis)

  40. That of course, is a reference to the appellants' home area.

  41. In my judgement, in failing properly to consider  Dr  George's  report
      and fully to consider the news items the Judge's finding  in  relation
      to Article 15(c) and whether he should depart from AT  and  Others  is
      flawed and cannot stand.

  42. In the light of that, it is unnecessary for me to say more  than  this
      about the additional points made by Mr Dieu in relation to the  second
      appellant's health condition and the fact that the fourth appellant is
      said to suffer from nightmares.  I would conclude,  agreeing  with  Mr
      Richards' submissions, that whilst there is evidence that  the  second
      appellant has a heart condition there is no expert report  that  casts
      any light on the impact that would have upon her so as to heighten the
      risk  of  suffering  indiscriminate  violence  under  Article   15(c).
      Likewise, the evidence from the fourth appellant's school does not, in
      my view, reflect on any heightened risk either.

  43. Nevertheless, for the reasons I have given, the  Judge's  decision  to
      dismiss each of the appeals under Article 15(c) is flawed and must  be
      remade.

  44. Finally, I turn to the issue of  the  children's  best  interests  and
      Article 8. The Judge's treatment of the children's  best  interest  is
      limited to paragraph 53 of his determination where he said this:

           "The 'best interest' of the children is a primary  consideration
           in determining whether it  was  proportionate  for  them  to  be
           removed from this country (ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC  4).
           The children are citizens of Libya.  The best interest  for  the
           children is to be with both parents.  As both  parents  will  be
           returned to Libya together, the children will be  returned  with
           them as a family."

  45. Whilst there was limited material before the Judge, there was evidence
      relating to the children's time spent in the UK - over  five  years  -
      and evidence in relation to  the  fourth  appellant  from  his  school
      concerning the impact upon him of events in Libya.

  46. While I do not consider that this evidence is particularly  strong,  I
      am less than  confident  that  the  Judge  has  fully  considered  the
      appellants' Article 8 rights  including  (in  relation  to  the  child
      appellants) their best interests.  The Judge's  consideration  of  the
      children's  best  interests  in  paragraph  53  is  brief  as  is  his
      consideration of Article 8 in paragraph 56; namely that the appellants
      will be returning to Libya as a family.  They have not  lived  in  the
      country for 20 years and any interference with their private  life  is
      proportionate.  I do not suggest that the  appellants  have  a  strong
      Article 8 claim but I am not satisfied that the Judge  has  adequately
      dealt with Article 8 even if ultimately those claims may not  succeed.



Decision

  47. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  each
      of the appellant's appeals on asylum grounds stands.

  48. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss each of the  appellant's
      appeals on humanitarian protection grounds (Article 15(c))  and  under
      Article 8 of the ECHR involved the making of a material error  of  law
      and those decisions cannot stand.

  49.  Those  decisions  are  set  aside  and  must  be  remade.    In   the
      circumstances, including the fact that the appeal  of  the  first  and
      second appellants' other daughter (AA/07751/2015)  is  pending  before
      the Upper Tribunal, these appeals will be linked  together  with  that
      appeal for a resumed hearing before the Upper Tribunal.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
