
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05965/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:   Columbus House, Newport  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On:  16 June 2015                    |On 5 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Bayoumi, Counsel instructed by Hoole & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1.  This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State   against   the
        determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cresswell  in  which  he
        allowed the appeal of KH, a  citizen  of  Afghanistan,  against  the
        Secretary of State's decision to refuse to vary his leave to  remain
        and to remove him to Afghanistan.  We  shall  refer  to  KH  as  the
        Applicant, although he was the Appellant in the proceedings below.

     2. The application for variation of leave to remain was  refused  on  6
        August 2014.  The Applicant exercised his right  of  appeal  to  the
        First-tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal  which  came  before  Judge
        Cresswell on 23  October  2014  and  was  dismissed  on  asylum  and
        humanitarian protection grounds but allowed on human rights  grounds
        by reference to Article 8 ECHR.  The Secretary of State applied  for
        permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
        granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on 11 November 2014 in
        the following terms

            "The grounds seeking permission submit the Judge erred  in  law
            by failing to consider  the  public  interest  requirements  of
            section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
            2002.

            The Judge set out section 117B but failed to make findings.

            The ground is arguable. Permission is granted."

     3. At the hearing before us Ms Bayoumi appeared for the  Applicant  and
        submitted a written skeleton argument. Mr Richards  represented  the
        Secretary of State and did not submit any additional documents.

   Submissions

     4. For the Secretary of State, Mr Richards said that  the  grounds  are
        concise and the issue is narrow. Clearly  the  main  focus  for  the
        Judge in allowing  the  appeal  was  the  relationship  between  the
        Applicant and the child whose mother had no interest in  caring  for
        her along with a  number  other  issues  including  the  Applicant's
        relationship with Ms B. That relationship was established  when  the
        Applicant was in the United Kingdom with  precarious  status.  There
        was no finding on the  Applicant's  ability  to  speak  English  and
        evidence was given with the use of  an  interpreter.  There  was  no
        consideration of the fact that he is  not  financially  independent.
        These considerations played no part in  the  Judge's  decision.  The
        Judge was required to have regard to such matters by section 117B of
        the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Referred by us  to
        section 117B (6) Mr Richards said that the child was not a qualified
        child because the Judge specifically made no finding as  to  whether
        the child was a British citizen.  There  was  no  birth  certificate
        before the First-tier Tribunal.

     5. For the Applicant, Ms Bayoumi referred to her skeleton argument  and
        to the decision in Dube [2015] UKUT 90. It is plain that  the  Judge
        had the requirements of section 117B in mind. He refers  to  section
        117D at paragraph 21(xv) and sets out  the  provisions  of  sections
        117A-D at paragraph 32. At paragraph 39 he makes  an  assessment  of
        the best interests of  the  child.  Ms  Bayoumi  accepted  that  the
        interests of the Applicant's second child, unborn at the time of the
        First-tier Tribunal proceedings, could not then have  properly  been
        taken into account.  The  sections  117A-D  considerations  are  not
        different to the Article 8 considerations; sections 117A-D  are  not
        exhaustive. The Judge was right to use them as a starting point.

     6. We reserved our decision.




   Discussion

     7. The Applicant arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 December 2008 as an
        unaccompanied minor and claimed asylum. His application was  refused
        on 19 March 2009 but he was granted discretionary  leave  to  remain
        until 1 July 2011  in  accordance  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
        policy. On 30 June 2011 the Applicant made an  in  time  application
        for further leave to remain and this is  the  application  that  was
        refused on asylum and human rights grounds on  6  August  2014.  The
        Applicant does not challenge the dismissal of his appeal  on  asylum
        and humanitarian protection grounds so the only issue before  us  is
        the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
        decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds.

     8. The Applicant's claim to remain on human rights grounds concerned  a
        complicated factual matrix but one that is not challenged before us.
        The Applicant is 21 years old and has  been  living  in  the  United
        Kingdom since he was 14. He has a child, A, born on 10 January 2014.
        The Applicant is no longer in a relationship with the mother of that
        child. The child is in foster care and at the time of the First-tier
        Tribunal hearing there were family proceedings before  the  Brighton
        County Court and the Applicant was being  assessed  as  a  potential
        long term carer for the child and a  contact  order  had  just  been
        made. The Judge was unable to make  a  finding  that  the  child  is
        British and at the time of the hearing and before us  there  was  no
        evidence put forward that would have enabled an  assessment  of  the
        child's nationality. The Applicant has  established  a  relationship
        with Ms B (the couple married on 2  July  2014)  who  is  a  Latvian
        national and has formed a family unit with Ms B and her infant  son.
        At the time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing  Ms  B  was  pregnant
        with the Applicant's child and by the time of the hearing before  us
        that child had been born. The Secretary of State does not doubt that
        the relationship between the Applicant and Ms B  is  subsisting  and
        does not challenge the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that
        it would be unreasonable to expect Ms B to relocate  to  Afghanistan
        with her infant son (and now with the couple's new born  child)  nor
        that  there  is  no  prospect  of  the  Applicant's  elder  child  A
        relocating to Afghanistan since he does not have sole custody.

     9. The grounds of appeal assert that the Judge, having quoted  sections
        117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 failed to
        have regard to the factors outlined in sections 117A-D in making his
        decision and  as  such  misdirected  himself  when  considering  the
        proportionality assessment under Article 8. It must be  implicit  in
        these grounds that the Secretary of State also asserts that  if  the
        Judge had given due regard to the factors outlined in sections 117A-
        D he would have reached a different  conclusion.  The  Secretary  of
        State does not suggest that the Judge was wrong to consider  Article
        8 outside the terms of the Immigration Rules nor that there  is  any
        fault by the Judge, other than  the  one  outlined,  in  making  his
        proportionality assessment.




   Decision

    10. In considering whether the Judge erred in law  we  are  assisted  by
        there being no dispute over any of the  factual  findings.  We  have
        outlined these above. In summary the Applicant is a 21 year old  man
        in a subsisting relationship with an EEA national established  at  a
        time when he held lawful status in the United Kingdom  and  who  now
        has two children and one step child in the United  Kingdom  none  of
        whom are known to be British. The Applicant has been in  the  United
        Kingdom for seven years, completed his education here and is of good
        character. The Secretary of State accepts that he has established  a
        private and family life in this country and  that  his  family  life
        cannot continue in  Afghanistan  (see  paragraph  21  (xiv)  of  the
        decision).

    11. In his decision the Judge made his factual findings (paragraph  21),
        he then went on to recite sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act (paragraph
        32) immediately following his recital of Article 8. At paragraph  35
        the Judge properly self-directed that his  proportionality  decision
        involved  striking  a  fair  balance  between  the  rights  of   the
        individual and the interests of the community noting that  decisions
        taken in pursuance of the lawful operation  of  immigration  control
        will be proportionate in all save a small  minority  of  exceptional
        cases identifiable only on a case by case basis. He went on to self-
        direct further by reference to a variety of authorities. Having made
        what can only be described  as  extensive  and  comprehensive  self-
        direction the Judge began his application of the facts as  found  to
        the law as self-directed at paragraph 40. He  did  not  specifically
        address each fact to the relevant legal principles just  quoted  and
        nor, in our judgment, was the Judge bound to do so. It is abundantly
        clear that he had in mind the self-direction referring first to  the
        best interests of the children, then to Ms B seeking to  rejoin  the
        job market after  the  birth  of  their  child,  then  to  it  being
        unreasonable to expect either Ms  B  or  the  children  to  move  to
        Afghanistan. In paragraph 41 the Judge moved on to  considering  the
        public interest and the fact that the Applicant had no promise of an
        unlimited stay when making an unsustainable asylum claim.

    12. Ms Bayoumi is correct in her submission that sections 117A-D are not
        an exhaustive list of requirements. If we  examine  what  the  Judge
        would have concluded on an individual basis if he had examined  each
        fact against sections 117A-D the following is apparent. First of all
        he would have found that the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
        control is in the public interest. Indeed he essentially  made  this
        specific finding at paragraphs 35 and 41.  Secondly  he  would  have
        found that the Applicant speaks English because despite  giving  his
        evidence through an interpreter, as was his  right,  the  supporting
        evidence from his school and his  foster  carer  shows  that  having
        arrived in the United Kingdom  at  the  age  of  14  he  had  a  92%
        attendance record at school between March 2009 and June 2011  during
        which he studied for and took GCSEs in English, Maths, Science, Art,
        IT and Islam. There  was  no  evidence  given  about  his  financial
        independence or otherwise. There is no evidence as  to  whether  his
        partner is a qualifying partner for  the  purposes  of  the  Act  or
        whether his elder child is a qualifying child and indeed there is no
        evidence put forward to enable an assessment of whether his partner,
        who it is accepted is an EEA national, is exercising treaty  rights.
        However his relationship with his partner was formed at a time  when
        he was lawfully present  in  the  United  Kingdom  (and  so  section
        117B(4) does not apply) and his elder child,  with  whom  he  has  a
        parental relationship, has no prospect of living outside the  United
        Kingdom.

    13. In our judgement there can be  little  doubt  that  making  specific
        reference of the  facts  to  sections  117A-D  would  have  made  no
        difference to the Judge's decision. This is the epitome  of  a  case
        that falls to be decided on its  specific  and  unusual  facts.  Put
        simply the Applicant has a private and family  life  in  the  United
        Kingdom and the family life aspects derive from two separate  family
        units both involving very young infant  children  neither  of  which
        could be continued in Afghanistan.  The  removal  of  the  Applicant
        would involve the destruction of his paternal role  in  both  family
        units which would not be proportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
        immigration control. Having had regard to sections 117A-D  there  is
        no other possible conclusion. We are not satisfied  that  the  Judge
        erred in law because we are satisfied that he  did  have  regard  to
        sections 117A-D and  having  had  due  regard  made  the  inevitable
        decision to allow this appeal.

    14. It is perhaps pertinent to note that where an appeal is  allowed  by
        reference to Article 8 the decision as to what period  of  leave  to
        remain to grant as a result of the allowed appeal is left  with  the
        Secretary of State. The decision on appeal speaks for the  situation
        pertaining as at the date of that decision. Where that situation  is
        fluid this is a factor that the Secretary of State  is  entitled  to
        take into account when deciding what period of leave  to  remain  to
        grant to put into effect the decision to allow the  appeal.  In  the
        case  before  us  it  is  clear  that   the   Applicant's   paternal
        relationship with A is in its early  stages  with  a  contact  order
        giving only limited contact in being at the time of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's decision. The Applicant's partner  was  pregnant  at  the
        time of the First-tier Tribunal's decision and although  that  child
        has now been born and the married relationship with Ms B is accepted
        to be a continuing one the question of  whether  she  is  exercising
        treaty rights may become a factor that will be  taken  into  account
        when the permanency of the Applicant's residence is later assessed.

   Conclusion

    15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
        of a material error of law.  The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is
        dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow  this
        appeal by virtue of Article 8 stands.



Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
