
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/05772/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                         | Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 8th March, 26th April, 6th June       | On 27th July 2016                  |
|and 21st July 2016                       |                                    |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              Mykhailo Chornyi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     on 8 March and 26 April, Mr D Byrne; on 6 June, Mr  A
Devlin; and on 21 July Mr J Bryce; Advocates, instructed by  Berlow  Rahman,
Solicitors

For the Respondent:    on 8 March, Mrs S Saddiq; on 26 April  and  21  July,
Mr M Matthews; and on 6 June Mrs M O'Brien; Senior Presenting Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ukraine,  born  on  7th  July  1966.   He
    sought asylum in the UK on or around 17th September 2014.  He  has  not
    sought an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant has not disputed the summary of his claim set out in  the
    respondent's refusal letter dated 13th March 2015, which is  along  the
    following lines.  He undertook a year's military service in 1984 (while
    the Ukraine was still part of the Soviet Union) which ended for  health
    reasons.  He continued to attend  weekly  military  training  while  at
    university.  In 1990, on completion of his studies, he became a reserve
    military officer.  Over the period 1995 to 1998 he became  a  Jehovah's
    Witness.  He was required to report to  the  military  in  May  and  in
    August 2014.  In spite  of  explaining  his  religious  beliefs,  which
    include conscientious objection to military service, he was  told  that
    he might be called up for service when necessary.  While on a visit  to
    the UK he learned of Russia sending troops into  Ukraine.   He  thought
    that increased the risk of his being mobilised.  He sought asylum.

 3. The respondent refused the claim, giving  the  following  reasons.   At
    first sight, the respondent was unable to decide  whether  or  not  the
    appellant is a Jehovah's Witness (paragraphs 17 to 20).  His claim that
    he might be mobilised was contradictory and implausible (paragraphs  21
    to 28).  Delay in stating the claim was adverse to credibility in terms
    of section 8 of the 2004 Act (paragraphs 29 to 31).  Returning  to  the
    question whether the appellant is a Jehovah's Witness,  the  respondent
    therefore declined to give him the benefit of the doubt (paragraphs  32
    to 36).  It was not accepted that he was in any genuine subjective fear
    (paragraph 38), or  that  as  a  reservist  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    mobilisation, given that he has no combat experience.  Coupled with his
    age and previous release from military service, he was found not be  at
    risk if returned to Ukraine (paragraph 39).  While it was accepted that
    the claim was related to the appellant's religion and imputed political
    opinion  (paragraph  42)  he  had  shown  no   well-founded   fear   of
    persecution.

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  His form of  appeal
    notice states that his grounds are to be  found  in  a  "paper  apart".
    There does not appear to be anything which might properly be  described
    as a statement of grounds, but there is a commentary by  the  appellant
    running to 46 paragraphs over eight pages, partly a  statement,  partly
    citation of background  evidence,  and  partly  disagreement  with  the
    refusal decision.  At the end the appellant says that in Ukrainian  law
    if he refuses mobilisation he might be imprisoned for a term of two  to
    five years, as has happened to another Jehovah's Witness.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Clough heard the appeal  on  6th  July  2015.
    The appellant was represented by Ms J  Berlow-Rahman,  Solicitor.   The
    respondent was not represented.  The appellant and two  witnesses  gave
    evidence.

 6. In her decision dated 29th  October  2015  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant is a Jehovah's Witness and now a member of a congregation  in
    Glasgow; that he was conscripted into the then Russian Army in 1984  to
    1985; that he left after a year for  health  reasons;  and  that  after
    attending  university  he  was  in  1990  given  the  rank  of   senior
    lieutenant.

 7. At paragraph 13 the judge narrated the  appellant's  evidence  that  he
    attended in response to a summons in May  and  August  2014,  and  that
    despite explaining a health problem he was told he was  being  enlisted
    in a defence battalion.  He was to stay at  home  and  to  attend  when
    needed.  She notes the appellant's evidence that he had not since  been
    called up.  At paragraph 15, she goes on:

         Having accepted that the appellant is a Jehovah's  Witness  I  also
         accept that his faith will prevent him serving in the army and that
         he would be faced with imprisonment if he  refused.   However,  the
         fact that the appellant has not been called  up  strongly  suggests
         that the situation in  the  Ukraine  ...  has  calmed  down  and  I
         consider ... there is no real  risk  that  the  appellant  will  be
         called to  serve  in  the  armed  forces  [or]  that  he  would  be
         considered  a  deserter  because  of  his  stay  in  the  UK.   The
         appellant's asylum claim therefore falls ...

 8. The appellant's grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  complain
    firstly of a lack of reasoning for the conclusion  that  the  appellant
    will not be called to serve or be considered a deserter.   The  grounds
    go  on  to  refer  to  background  evidence  regarding  punishment   of
    deserters, and state that there is still a real risk that the appellant
    might be called upon to serve.

 9. On 30th November 2015 permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    granted, on the view that the judge arguably gave insufficient  reasons
    for concluding that there was no real risk of being required to  serve,
    and so failed to address the consequences of the appellant's  departure
    from the Ukraine and refusal to serve on account of his religion.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 23rd December 2015 the  respondent  submits
    that the judge  gave  "a  perfectly  good  reason  for  concluding  the
    appellant did not face a  real  risk  ...  the  judge  notes  that  the
    appellant has not been called up ... as the evidence suggested that the
    military situation had calmed down".  The implicit point was  that  the
    fear "remains speculative rather than a real and present risk".

11.  Mr  Byrne  submitted  that  the  reasoning  in  paragraph  15  of  the
    determination was inadequate, and that the determination should be  set
    aside.  The judge's findings that the appellant is a Jehovah's  Witness
    should be retained.  There should be a further hearing,  restricted  to
    the question whether the appellant was likely  to  be  called  upon  to
    serve in the military, if returned to the Ukraine.  He said that  there
    was evidence, which had  been  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  that
    punishment for refusal to serve or  for  desertion  went  further  than
    imprisonment and included provision that deserters might be shot.

12. Mrs Saddiq said that it was unfortunate that  the  respondent  had  not
    been represented in the First-tier Tribunal and that there appeared  to
    have  been  no  reference  to  the  respondent's  Country   of   Origin
    Information Report.  The report dealt with the legal  provisions  which
    exist  in  the  Ukraine  for  recognising  conscientious  objection  to
    military service, including objection on religious grounds.  Mrs Saddiq
    conceded,  however,  that  paragraph  15  of   the   determination   is
    inadequate.  The only reason the  judge  gives  for  finding  that  the
    military situation in the Ukraine has calmed down is that the appellant
    has not been called up.  That is not a logical basis for the conclusion
    reached, which should have turned on background evidence about what was
    going on in Ukraine.  The judge failed  to  deal  with  the  background
    evidence, some of which was referred to in  the  refusal  decision  and
    some of which was filed by the appellant.  The judge had not given good
    reasons for finding that the appellant would not be called up.  Even if
    he were liable to be called up, that would not be the end of the  case.
    The factual and legal consequences of the call  up  would  have  to  be
    explored.  There appeared to be possible exemptions for  the  appellant
    not only on conscientious objection but on health grounds.

13. Mr Byrne in response pointed to the evidence which had been before  the
    judge,  from  the  appellant   and   from   two   witnesses,   entirely
    uncontradicted, to justify her finding that he is a Jehovah's Witness.

14. My decision on error of law and directions  for  further  hearing  were
    issued along the lines of paragraphs 15 - 28 which  follow  (reproduced
    not word for word, but in substance).

15. The grounds of appeal to the UT identify an error, as conceded  by  the
    respondent.  The finding that the appellant was not likely to be called
    up was not underpinned by a sensible reason.  The absence of a  further
    call-up did not logically show that any military need had gone away and
    that no future call-up was likely.  Any finding  of  a  change  in  the
    military situation should have been based on the background evidence.

16. If the appellant was not likely to be called up (for  whatever  reason)
    that was the end of his case.  The respondent in her decision dated  13
    March 2015 found that he was not likely to be called up,  and  did  not
    choose to analyse the case in the alternative.

17. The appellant had so far assumed that if he were likely  to  be  called
    up, then he had to show no more, or very little more,  to  qualify  for
    asylum.  That was a mistaken assumption.

18. It was far from sufficient for the appellant to prove that he is liable
    to serve in the military, and that there is punishment  for  deserters.
    There is no general right  to  international  protection  against  such
    possibilities, which are provided  for  in  the  law  of  most  if  not
    virtually all the countries of  the  world.   States  are  entitled  to
    require  compulsory  military  service  of  their  nationals,  and   to
    prosecute and punish non-compliance.

19. Parties were referred, as a starting point, to the general  discussions
    in Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice 9th ed., vol 1,  paragraphs
    12.77 to 12.79 and in Symes and Jorro, Asylum  Law  and  Practice,  2nd
    ed., paragraphs 3.35 to 3.43.  The appellant had not yet  attempted  to
    show with any clarity why his claim  might  fall  within  a  protection
    category, as explained in these outlines.

20. It was plain, even from brief reference to the background materials  on
    the file, that the law of Ukraine recognises conscientious objection to
    military service on religious grounds.  If the appellant fell into  the
    category  of  persons  who  might  avail  themselves  of   such   legal
    protection, that would be the end of his claim.

21. The appellant as a young man  engaged  health  grounds  so  as  not  to
    complete his year of military  service.   He  says  that  he  mentioned
    inability on health  grounds  when  summonsed  in  2014.   He  had  not
    specified his past or  current  health  grounds  are.   The  background
    materials, on a brief  perusal,  include  reference  to  exemptions  on
    health grounds.  If the appellant were exempt on such grounds, that was
    another answer which would be the end of the case.

22. On one view, the error by the First-tier Tribunal  was  not  one  which
    merited the decision being set aside, because  the  appellant  had  his
    chance, and failed to set out a case whereby he might  be  entitled  to
    asylum.  However, I thought that the preferable view was  that  he  had
    said (just) enough to merit a fully considered further decision.

23. I saw no reason why the setting aside of the decision should extend  to
    the judge's findings at paragraph 12.  Although  the  refusal  decision
    declined to give the appellant the benefit of the doubt on  whether  he
    is a Jehovah's Witness, he made an ample  case  at  the  hearing.   The
    respondent did not suggest in her rule 24  response  to  the  grant  of
    permission that she sought to rely upon any grounds on  which  she  had
    been unsuccessful.  There was no good reason why these  matters  should
    be put back into dispute.

24. The evidence about whether the appellant is a Jehovah's Witness did not
    need not be revisited.  Nor did his military history up to the point in
    1990 when he was given a reserve rank  appear  to  be  subject  to  any
    serious dispute.

25. There might be a need to  reach  further  conclusions  on  whether  the
    appellant was, as he says, put  on  notice  of  liability  to  possible
    further service in a territorial defence battalion.

26. Since the decision needed to be remade not entirely afresh,  but  on  a
    restricted basis, it was suitable for retention in the Upper  Tribunal.
    The further answer seemed likely to depend less on disputes of  primary
    fact than on background evidence and legal analysis.

27. If the appellant could find a viable argument  based  on  conscientious
    objection he should be able to outline it (in writing,  in  advance  of
    the next hearing) by reference to the  background  evidence  and  legal
    principles.  If he failed to do so, he might expect his claim to fail.

28. I also indicated that it would also be  useful  if  the  SSHD  were  to
    outline in writing, in advance  of  the  next  hearing,  any  argument,
    similarly  referenced,  that  the  appellant,  taking  his  claim   "at
    highest", did not qualify for international protection on the basis  of
    conscientious objection on religious grounds.

29. The case next came before me  on  26  April  2016.   Mr  Byrne  and  Mr
    Matthews concurred in requesting a  further  adjournment  in  order  to
    research and bring materials before the tribunal  on  (a)  whether  the
    civil war in Ukraine involves participants on the  government  side  in
    acts contrary to the rules of human conduct  and  (b)  whether  country
    guidance, stating that prison conditions in Ukraine breach article 3 of
    the ECHR, remains valid.

30. No further formal directions were given after that hearing, but it  was
    anticipated that parties would exchange any further written submissions
    and be ready to proceed without delay.

31. Mr Devlin was instructed not long before the hearing on  6  June  2016.
    By reference to cases noted below, he added a new  argument.   He  said
    that while the House of Lords held in Sepet  and  Bulbul  v  SSHD  that
    there was as yet no authority for the contention that the imposition of
    any sanctions for conscientious objection might infringe article  9  of
    the ECHR, and thereby amount to persecution, such  authority  does  now
    exist.

32. The written submission provided by the respondent for the hearing on  6
    June 2016 was based on Sepet and Bulbul, as expressed through a current
    Asylum Policy Instruction, to the effect  that  "punishment  for  draft
    evasion or desertion on conscientious grounds does not,  without  more,
    amount to persecution".

33. Mrs O'Brien asked for time to consult and to make a further  submission
    on this new point.  Mr Devlin  readily  agreed  that  the  request  was
    reasonable.  Directions were made for further written submissions.

34. Final written submissions from both sides were before me by 21 July.  I
    reserved my further decision.

35. The core positions finally taken by  the  parties  are  in  outline  as
    follows.

36. For the appellant:

              . Risk of persecution arising from religious belief is to  be
                determined by whether the appellant might be  compelled  to
                undertake actions contrary to the rules of human conduct or
                conditions of punishment for draft evasion are so harsh  as
                to amount to persecution.

              .  The  conflict  in  the  Ukraine  meets  the  standard  for
                establishing an armed conflict contrary  to  the  rules  of
                human  conduct,  based  on  a  New  Zealand  authority,  AB
                (Ukraine) [2015] NZIPT 800742, and on UNHCR reports.

              . Any active military service in Ukraine gives rise to a real
                risk of participating  in  executions,  torture  and  human
                rights abuses.

              . A UNHCR report of 2015 states  that  although  the  law  in
                Ukraine provides for conscientious objection,  the  beliefs
                of those "summoned in the  course  of  waves  of  emergency
                mobilization...are reportedly often ignored by conscription
                offices".

              . The  appellant  "has  made  out  his  case  that  he  is  a
                conscientious objector to a conflict which perpetrates acts
                contrary to the law of human conduct,  the  respondent  has
                failed to rebut the case with cogent evidence that he would
                in fact be eligible for an  exemption  that  would  obviate
                that risk".

              . An application for alternative service  might  have  to  be
                submitted in advance of call up, and so might  not  now  be
                available to the appellant.

              . The House of Lords held in Sepet and Bulbul v  SSHD  [2003]
                Imm AR 428 at  paragraph  17  that  there  was  as  yet  no
                authority  for  the  contention  that  the  imposition   of
                sanctions might infringe article 9 of the ECHR [and thereby
                amount to persecution], but such authority does now  exist:
                Bayatyan v Armenia ECtHR 23459/03, 7 July 2011, Shepherd  v
                Federal Republic of Germany, CJEU [2015] QB 799, and AN and
                another v Refugee Appeals Tribunal [2014] IEHC 388.

              . Despite the  existence  of  an  alternative  to  compulsory
                military service, there was a real  risk  on  the  evidence
                that  a  conscientious  objector  who  refused  to  perform
                military service would be subjected to imprisonment of  one
                to five  years.   The  existence  of  such  a  penalty  was
                contrary to the right of conscientious  objection  and  was
                designed to cancel or  nullify  the  appellant's  right  to
                freedom of conscience.  Removal to Ukraine would breach his
                rights under Article 1A of the refugee Convention,  Article
                9 of the Qualification Directive and Articles 3  and  9  of
                the ECHR.

37. For the respondent:

              . Having left the army in 1985 for health reasons and  having
                had nothing to do with the army since, save for being given
                the rank of second  lieutenant  in  1990  after  completing
                university, it is unlikely that the appellant is a "reserve
                officer" for purposes of mobilisation.

              . The background evidence is that the appellant is not liable
                to conscription or mobilisation on grounds both of age  and
                of exemption after graduation.

              . Any wave of mobilisation which might have  applied  to  the
                appellant has come to an end.

              .  Alternatives  on  conscientious  objection   grounds   are
                available.  There is some evidence of those entitled  being
                refused, but that is challengeable in the courts.

              . Even if the appellant has evaded call-up, so have  tens  of
                thousands of others.  There is no real likelihood of action
                being taken, or that he would be  prosecuted,  rather  than
                dealt with administratively.

              . AB does not establish violations of  the  laws  of  war  in
                Ukraine on a widespread and systematic basis  or  that  the
                appellant would be required to be an active participant.  A
                decision by a  single  judge  in  New  Zealand  was  of  no
                authority.

              . The background evidence  did  not  reach  the  standard  of
                showing that the appellant might be compelled to take  part
                in an  armed  conflict  contrary  to  the  rules  of  human
                conduct.

              . PS (prison conditions; military service) Ukraine CG  [2006]
                UKAIT 00016 found no question of persons  in  the  military
                being required to perform acts  contrary  to  international
                law, and that conditions of military service did  not  give
                rise to a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3.

              .  The  maximum  punishment  for  draft   evasion   was   not
                disproportionately harsh.

              . Most cases were dealt with by fines or suspended sentences.

              . PS had found that prison conditions were likely  to  breach
                Article 3.  However, if the appellant did show a real  risk
                of imprisonment, the evidence of  improved  conditions  was
                cogent enough to depart from that guidance.

              . The cases cited for the appellant do not show that there is
                yet international consensus on a right to  refuse  military
                service which might bind the UK to  an  approach  different
                from that taken in Sepet and Bulbul.





The decision remade.

38. The only point which it  is  necessary  to  consider  as  a  matter  of
    credibility is whether the appellant was subject to notice of liability
    to  possible  further  service  in  a  territorial  defence   battalion
    (paragraph 25 above).

39. The appellant produced in an inventory of productions in  the  FtT  (at
    page 31) a translation of an undated notice of  his  liability  to  the
    draft.  Paragraph 13 of the FtT decision refers.

40. The respondent argued that the appellant was not likely  even  to  have
    been put on notice of possible service.   However,  the  appellant  was
    found to be a generally credible witness and I see  no  reason  not  to
    accept, as did the FtT, at  least  a  realistic  possibility  that  the
    notice is genuine.

41. Paragraph 14 of the FtT decision records that the appellant  said  that
    he had not been called up as at the date of the hearing,  which  was  6
    July 2015.  He has not sought to introduce any further evidence on  the
    point.  He insisted somewhat vaguely that the notice might be  followed
    by mobilization.  The respondent was more specific.

42. The respondent's Country Information and  Guidance,  Ukraine:  Military
    Service, was updated in November 2015.  Paragraphs 4.2.2 -  4.2.7  cite
    evidence of various waves of mobilisation.  By way of (a) age  and  (b)
    rank having conferred by  graduation  (rather  than  by  service),  the
    appellant is exempt.

43. The appellant does not fit into any of  the  categories  likely  to  be
    called up unless as a last resort.  There is no indication  that  stage
    has been reached or is likely to be reached.

44. The FCO advised the respondent on  17  November  2015  that  obligatory
    mobilization had been stopped, and only conscripts obliged to serve for
    1.5 years were currently mobilized.

45. The evidence is that although the appellant  may  have  been  put  upon
    notice, the Ukraine's military mobilization is unlikely  to  touch  him
    further.

46. The law  in  Ukraine  respects  religious  freedom,  and  provides  for
    conscientious objection to military service on religious grounds.   The
    appellant's case was not that there no such provisions, but  that  they
    might not be respected in practice.

47. At his interview (Q/A75-76) the appellant said that he was  aware  from
    the internet of a fellow believer being prosecuted for refusal to  join
    the army.  This appears to be the case  of  which  details  have  since
    emerged, noted below.

48. The US State Dept International Religious Freedom  Report  for  Ukraine
    for 2014 says at pages 10 - 11:

         In August the military called  up  three  Jehovah's  Witnesses  for
         military  service  following   military   mobilisation.   Jehovah's
         Witnesses reported  that  V  Shalaiko  ...  [and  two  other  named
         persons] were denied  the  right  to  conscientious  objection  and
         accused of evading the military call up, a claim punishable by five
         years in prison. Jehovah's Witnesses stated that each had  reported
         to  the  military  office  on  the  day  specified  and  had  filed
         applications for alternative civilian service. On November 14,  the
         Novomoskvosk district court acquitted Shalaiko. At the end  of  the
         year pre-trial investigations continued in the other two cases.

49. The following is excerpted from a  report by the  Jehovah's  Witnesses,
    Jw.org,  "Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania":

         Ukraine Courts Recognise Right To  Conscientious  Objection  During
         Military Mobilisation.

         Civil unrest and war  in  eastern  regions  of  Ukraine  moved  the
         President to decree a partial military mobilisation in  the  summer
         of 2014. V Shalaiko, a former soldier in the Ukrainian army and now
         one of Jehovah's Witnesses, answered his summons issued  under  the
         decree.  Appearing  before  the  local  military  commissariat,  Mr
         Shalaiko stated that he was a conscientious objector and  expressed
         his willingness to perform alternative non-military service.

         The military office rejected Mr Shalaiko's claim to  the  right  of
         conscientious objection and pressed criminal  charges...  This  was
         the first indictment in Ukraine for objection to mobilisation based
         on religious convictions...

         On November 13, 2014 the Novomoskovsk district court ... heard  the
         criminal charge... The court determined that Mr Shalaiko  "has  the
         right to substitution of military duty, including military  service
         during mobilisation, for alternative service, because it belongs to
         a religious organisation whose religious teachings do not allow the
         use of arms."

         Additionally, the district court confirmed that Mr Shalaiko's right
         to alternative  service  is  "guaranteed  by  the  constitution  of
         Ukraine". It further acknowledged that the European  Convention  on
         Human Rights and the judgements of  the  European  Court  of  Human
         Rights  protect  religious  freedom.   The   judge   acquitted   Mr
         Shalaiko... The prosecutor filed an appeal.

         In his appeal, the prosecutor argued that the  constitutional  duty
         to defend the country overrides the right to religious freedom  and
         to alternative non-military service. He reasoned that the  relevant
         decisions of the ECHR did not apply during periods of mobilisation.

         On February 26, 2015, the Appeal Court of the D  region  determined
         that "objection to mobilisation for conscientious  reasons  is  not
         avoidance of mobilisation without valid reasons"... The court  took
         note of Mr Shalaiko's religious convictions and  referred  to  ECHR
         judgement stating that  "such  religious  convictions  attract  the
         guarantees of article 9... to freedom of thought,  conscience,  and
         religion".

         The court concluded that Ukraine's law on the right to  alternative
         service applies even during times of mobilisation.

         ...

         Nonetheless  the  prosecutor  has  appealed,  providing  the   High
         Specialised Court of Ukraine for civil and criminal cases with  the
         same arguments examined and dismissed by the appeal court. On April
         30, 2015, legal counsel for Mr Shalaiko  filed  objections  to  the
         prosecutor's appeal.

         Mr Shalaiko is one of thousands of Ukrainian  Witnesses  called  up
         for military service. They respectfully respond to the summons  and
         request alternative service  that  does  not  conflict  with  their
         deeply  held  religious  beliefs.  These  requests  are   generally
         respected, and few Witnesses have faced prosecution. It is  now  in
         the hands of Ukraine's High Court to provide assurance that Ukraine
         will honour the witnesses request for recognition as  conscientious
         objectors.

50. The evidence above comes from a concerned source, with good  reason  to
    know what is going on, and with no  reason  to  minimise  any  problems
    faced by Jehovah's Witnesses in Ukraine.  I consider it to be a  source
    anxious to tell the truth.

51. I am satisfied on all the evidence that Ukraine upholds  the  right  to
    conscientious  objection  in  general,  and  the  rights  of  Jehovah's
    Witnesses in particular.  There have been  many  claims  to  exemption,
    mainly granted without much demur, and a tiny number  of  prosecutions,
    or attempted  prosecutions.    Full  details  are  known  of  only  one
    instance of prosecution.  It  was  unsuccessful  at  the  district  and
    regional levels of jurisdiction.  Whether it went any further  than  an
    attempted further appeal is unknown, but it is clear that legal  rights
    may be vindicated through the courts.   There  are  in  the  background
    evidence  some  references  to  Jehovah's  Witnesses  as  conscientious
    objectors meeting with disapproval and harassment, but  no  details  of
    any instances of persecution.

52. The appellant's case does not succeed because (a) his  mobilisation  is
    not likely and (b) if  he  were  to  be  mobilised,  his  conscientious
    objection to military service on religious grounds will be respected.

53. Either of those reasons would be enough, so I may state my  conclusions
    on the  other  issues  raised,  interesting  though  they  were,  quite
    briefly.

54. On the nature of the civil conflict, there is evidence of  abuses,  but
    they have been much worse on the rebel side.  In my opinion, the  judge
    in AB reached the view  too  readily,  and  on  a  flimsy  basis,  that
    violations of human  rights  were  sufficiently  widespread  as  to  be
    occurring across most, if not all, Ukrainian military units (paragraphs
    78 and  79).   The  appellant  failed  to  show  that  service  on  the
    government side might involve him in such systematic violation  of  the
    rules of war as to entitle him to protection.

55. I do not think that the law outside the UK has reached a stage where  a
    tribunal might decline to follow Sepet and Bulbul.

56. The appellant did not show that he might be imprisoned, but if the case
    had come to  turn  on  prison  conditions,  the  respondent's  detailed
    evidence would have justified a finding that those conditions  did  not
    by themselves entitle the appellant to protection under Article 3.

57. The decision of the FtT has been set aside, but the fresh  decision  is
    to the same effect: the appeal is dismissed.


                           [pic]


                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                           25 July 2016.
