
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA055712015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 June 2016                              |On 17 June 2016               |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     QA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Coventry Legal Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


I consider it appropriate to make an anonymity order in the  Upper  Tribunal
under Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the  disclosure  or  publication  of
any matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  respondent.
 To give effect to this order the respondent is to be  referred  to  by  the
initials above.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes that was  promulgated  on
    17 July 2015.

 2. Judge Parkes was required to  determine  whether  the  appellant  could
    relocate to Kabul.  This was the only issue in the appeal  because  the
    Home  Office  accepts  the  appellant  has  a  well-founded   fear   of
    persecution in his home area in Afghanistan and proposes  he  would  be
    able to live safely in Kabul.

 3. The appellant argues that Judge Parkes failed to apply the correct  law
    and  therefore  his  finding  that  the  appellant  could  relocate  in
    Afghanistan was legally flawed.  The grounds of appeal are detailed and
    identify the relevant legal principles that apply.

 4. Having discussed Judge Parkes's decision and reasons statement with  Mr
    Pipe and Mr Mills I reach the conclusion that the appellant is  correct
    and as a result the decision would have to be set aside.  There  are  a
    number of intertwined reasons for my decision.

 5. Judge Parkes  does  not  identify  the  legal  principles  relating  to
    internal relocation.  Although in his second  to  fifth  paragraphs  he
    references general provisions relating  to  the  assessment  of  asylum
    claims, his self-direction stops at paragraph 339N of  the  immigration
    rules.  The provisions relating to internal relocation are in paragraph
    339O.  Paragraph 339O  provides  a  reasonable  test.   It  draws  from
    article 8 of the Qualification Directive (2004/83/EC) which in turn  is
    derived from extensive British and European jurisprudence, perhaps most
    notably Januzi v SSHD and others [2006] UKHL 5.

 6. Of itself the failure to specify relevant legal  principles  is  not  a
    legal error.  It is often the case that  the  application  of  relevant
    principles is implicit in a decision.  Unfortunately, I  am  unable  to
    find where Judge Parkes applies such  principles.   Mr  Mills  suggests
    there were elements of a balancing  exercise  in  paragraph  12,  which
    suggests an assessment of reasonableness has been undertaken.

 7. In our discussion,  Mr  Mills  and  Mr  Pipe  acknowledged  that  Judge
    Parkes's conclusions in paragraph 12 were problematic because of a lack
    of clarity over what standard of proof he was applying to the  evidence
    he  was  balancing  which  undermines  the  quality  of  any  balancing
    exercise.

 8. At paragraph 2 of his decision, Judge Parkes correctly identifies  that
    the lower standard of proof applied to the assessment  of  evidence  in
    relation to the appellant's asylum case.  Judge Parkes refers to a real
    likelihood test, which is a good descriptor of how the evidence  should
    be approached in such cases.

 9. At paragraph 8 Judge Parkes makes findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    medical issues and concludes that the appellant's  evidence  failed  to
    establish that he could benefit from  article  8  on  medical  grounds.
    This and is not (and never  has  been)  contested.   In  assessing  the
    evidence in this context Judge Parkes  correctly  refers  to  the  high
    threshold that must be applied in medical cases.

10. At paragraph 12, where Mr Mills suggests Judge Parkes  was  considering
    reasonableness, Judge Parkes draws on his findings at paragraph 8  when
    assessing the reasonableness of  internal  relocation.   In  so  doing,
    Judge Parkes  inadvertently  applies  a  higher  threshold  test  in  a
    situation where he has to apply a real likelihood test of the evidence.
     This undermines his assessment.  I conclude  that  the  assessment  of
    reasonableness of internal relocation undertaken by Judge Parkes failed
    to apply relevant legal principles.

11. At this juncture it is appropriate to indicate  that  this  failure  is
    compounded by the fact Judge Parkes fails to follow guidance  given  by
    the Upper  Tribunal  about  what  factors  should  be  considered  when
    considering the reasonableness of internal relocation.  Mr  Christopher
    Lane who represented  the  appellant  before  Judge  Parkes  settled  a
    skeleton argument and it is  unfortunate  that  Judge  Parkes  did  not
    appreciate the assistance it provided.

12. In light of the lack of  detail  in  the  decision  and  the  error  of
    approach identified, I am unable to infer that Judge Parkes has applied
    the relevant guidance at any stage or that he has applied  the  correct
    legal test of reasonableness.

13. I informed Mr Pipe and Mr Mills of my decision and discussed with  them
    how the decision might be remade.  Mr Pipe indicated that he wished  to
    advise the appellant to obtain up to date medical and other evidence so
    that the next judge could make findings at the date of hearing.

14. Mr Mills agreed that remittal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  be
    appropriate, particular if controversial evidence came to light as  the
    appellant prepared for the further hearing.  Mr Pipe had indicated that
    he had concerns that the appellant may have suffered  sexual  abuse  in
    Afghanistan and if so that added to his case  that  he  is  in  a  very
    different situation from others of a similar age.  Mr Pipe acknowledged
    that the Home Office might change its reasons for refusal in  light  of
    any new matters that are presented in evidence.

15. I decided remittal is the best course of action, bearing  in  mind  the
    Senior President of Tribunal's practice statement and the  issues  that
    will have to be reconsidered.  No findings (other  than  those  arising
    from the concessions given by both parties) can be preserved.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed because the decision and reasons  statement  of  Judge
Parkes contains an error of law.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  hearing  afresh.   No
facts are preserved other than those conceded by the parties.

The remitted appeal can be heard by  any  judge  other  than  Judge  Parkes.
Directions  for  the  remitted  appeal  should  be  set  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


                      Signed                               Date  17th  June
                      2016


                      Judge McCarthy
                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

