

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05552/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  8 January 2015                            |On 15 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               FAYCAL BOUAOUD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Counsel, instructed by South Yorkshire
Refugee Law.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, HOPO.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal came before Judge Law on 7 October 2014 at  Manchester.
         He dismissed it on asylum grounds, not accepting that the appellant
         was at risk of persecution for  political  reasons  in  Algeria  as
         claimed.

      2. It is the appellant's case that his son was kidnapped by terrorists
         and that the police  would  not  protect  him  on  account  of  his
         political opinion. He believed that his son had been interviewed by
         the respondent and, on a previous occasion, successfully sought  an
         adjournment so that the interview  record  could  be  obtained.  He
         renewed the application at the hearing.

      3. At that date, the position was that the representatives had written
         to the presenting officer's unit but had received no reply.

      4.  It appears that although some  form  of  conversation  between  an
         immigration officer and the appellant's son took place,  no  record
         was in fact taken.

      5. The judge made no reference  to  the  renewed  application  for  an
         adjournment nor to any interview in his determination. He  did  not
         believe the story of the kidnapping and dismissed the appeal.

      6. The appellant argues that  there  has  been  procedural  unfairness
         because, had the presenting officer's unit told him that no  record
         was available, a witness statement would have  been  obtained  from
         the child.

      7. I am persuaded that there has been a deprivation of an  opportunity
         to produce relevant evidence which might  have  a  bearing  on  the
         outcome of the appeal.

      8. Accordingly the decision of Judge Law is set aside.  It  should  be
         remade by a judge other than  Judge  Law  at  Manchester  with  all
         issues at large.



Signed        Date 13/01/2015


                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
