
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05000/2012
                                                               AA/05002/2012
                                                               AA/05003/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 5 March 2015                      |On 10 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 28 May 2015              |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    A. R.
                                    M. A.
                                    K. K.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Draycott, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The First and Third Appellants are husband and wife, and citizens  of
       Pakistan and the Ukraine respectively.  Their  daughter,  the  Second
       Appellant has dual Pakistani and Ukrainian nationality, and  she  was
       born in the UK in August 2009.

    2. The First and Third Appellants entered the UK illegally, and say that
       they did so in April 2009. They claimed asylum together  on  29  June
       2009. Their asylum application was refused on  3  May  2012,  and  in
       consequence decisions to remove all three Appellants from the UK were
       made.

    3. The appeals against those decisions were first heard by the  Tribunal
       on 17 July 2012, when they were dismissed in a  decision  promulgated
       on 12 August 2012. The Appellants appealed successfully to the  Upper
       Tribunal, so that the decision of the First  Tier  Tribunal  was  set
       aside, and the appeals were remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal  for
       hearing afresh.

    4. The appeals then came before Judge Fisher for hearing on 6  September
       2013. The  Appellants  were  represented  by  Mr  Draycott  (who  has
       continued subsequently to represent them).  The  appeals  had  to  be
       adjourned part heard for lack of court time. They were relisted on 14
       January 2014, and  they  were  then  dismissed  by  way  of  decision
       promulgated on 27 January 2014.

    5. Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton refused the Appellants  permission  to
       appeal that decision on 19 February 2014. At that stage  the  grounds
       had raised two  challenges  to  the  decision,  and  were  relatively
       briefly expressed. The first challenge was to the procedural fairness
       of the appeal process. The delay between the  date  upon  which  oral
       evidence had first been heard, and the promulgation of the  decision,
       was said to render that appeal process unfair. The  second  challenge
       was to the approach taken to  the  medical  evidence  concerning  the
       mental health of the Third Appellant  which  was  said  to  offer  an
       explanation for the manner in which her evidence had been given,  and
       to explain that she posed a real risk of  suicide  in  the  event  of
       removal from the UK.

    6. Undeterred the Appellants renewed their application for permission to
       appeal to the Upper Tribunal relying upon additional grounds. It  was
       now asserted in addition;

       i) that the Judge had overlooked oral evidence given on  6  September
          2013 by the Appellants,

      ii) that the Judge had overlooked oral evidence given on  6  September
          2013 by a witness, Ms Z, and,

     iii) that the Judge had failed to approach the evidence "holistically".

    7. On 17 March 2014 it  is  said  that  the  Appellants  lodged  amended
       grounds, which essentially amounted to a wholescale  rewrite  of  the
       grounds originally lodged with  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  which  in
       addition asserted that the Judge;

          (i) had failed to have proper regard to the content of the  expert
          report of Ms Mooen of 13 July 2012,

          (ii)    had failed to have proper regard to  the  content  of  the
          expert reports of Mr Chenciner of 9 July 2012, and 22 August 2013,

          (iii) had failed to consider that  an  assault  sustained  by  the
          First Appellant in Ukraine constituted past persecution,  and  had
          failed to make  any  finding  that  there  were  good  reasons  to
          consider that this persecution would not be repeated, and,

          (iv) had overlooked or misunderstood the evidence of Dr  Kumar  in
          rejecting the suggestion that the  Third  Appellant's  psychiatric
          condition was relevant to the manner in which she had  given  oral
          evidence, and in rejecting the submission that she  posed  a  real
          risk of suicide.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  on
       26 March on the basis that it was arguable the Judge  had  overlooked
       evidence which was relevant to the  credibility  of  the  Appellants.
       Whilst it was considered that there  was  less  merit  in  the  other
       grounds, permission was granted in relation to them too.

    9. The Respondent filed no Rule 24 Notice.

   10. Thus the matter comes before me.

   The amended grounds

   11. The amended grounds of 17 March 2014 were not on the  Tribunal  file,
       and there is no reference to their numbered paragraphs  within  Judge
       Rintoul's decision, which raises at least  the  suspicion  that  they
       were not actually before him when he made his decision. Indeed it was
       only towards the end of the hearing before me when  a  reference  was
       made to these amended grounds by Mr Draycott at the conclusion of his
       submissions that I became aware of their existence. Thus they did not
       constitute the core of his arguments, and  at  first  sight  had  the
       appearance of the litany of  forensic  criticism  deprecated  in  VHR
       (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 367. A copy was produced,
       and Mr Dewison was then able to formally accept that  the  Respondent
       had at some stage been served with the amended grounds.

   12. In the circumstances, and after some discussion and  reflection,  the
       parties invited me to deal with the appeal on the  basis  that  Judge
       Rintoul had granted permission upon  the  re-amended  grounds  of  17
       March 2014, which I do.




   The delay argument

   13. It is common ground that Judge  Fisher  was  placed  in  a  difficult
       position on 6 September 2013,  through  no  fault  of  his  own.  The
       Appellants  had  failed  to  identify  at   the   CMR   hearing,   or
       subsequently, the likely length of the appeal hearing. Thus with  the
       benefit of hindsight it is now obvious that  wholly  inadequate  time
       was allocated to the appeals on 6  September  2013.  When  it  became
       obvious that the hearing of the appeals could  not  be  completed  on
       that occasion, the Judge made arrangements  that  same  day  for  the
       appeals to be relisted at the convenience of  all  parties.  He  then
       anticipated the appeals would be completed on 24 September 2013,  and
       if they had been, then no complaint of delay could have arisen.

   14. The Judge records in his  decision  simply  that  for  a  variety  of
       reasons the anticipated hearing on 24 September 2013 could  not  take
       place. Again he records baldly that  the  appeals  were  then  listed
       administratively for 13 November 2013 - a date when  he  was  not  in
       fact available, and so they had to be relisted once  again.  Although
       no explanation was offered for this either, and it is not clear  what
       attempts were made to force the issue, Mr Draycott was  said  not  to
       have been available during the  month  of  December  2013.  Thus  the
       appeals were not listed until 14 January 2014.

   15. The Appellants requested in writing on  30  December  2013  that  the
       appeals be heard afresh in the light of the delay, which  application
       was refused by the Judge in writing. The application was renewed on 8
       January 2014, and it was refused again by the Judge in  writing.  The
       reasons given were then set out by the Judge  in  his  decision  [2],
       although they had of course already been communicated to the  parties
       by the Tribunal as part of the decisions to refuse the requests.

   16. Mr Draycott accepted before me that did  not  renew  the  application
       orally before the Judge  on  14  January  2014.  Whilst  it  was  not
       suggested  that  the  Judge  did,  or   said,   anything   that   was
       inappropriate on 14 January 2014, Mr Draycott explained that he  felt
       that renewing the application once more would  be  a  waste  of  time
       given that he would be doing so to the same  Judge  who  had  already
       refused the application twice. In my judgement Mr  Draycott's  stance
       was an error of judgement. He should in fairness to the Judge, and to
       the  Respondent,  have  made  his  position  clear  by  renewing  his
       application, however briefly,  rather  than  simply  waiting  to  see
       whether  the  Appellants  were  successful  in  their   appeal.   His
       application could  for  example  very  easily  have  been  maintained
       throughout  his  submissions  on  the  issues  the  Judge  needed  to
       determine, and the evidence that he prayed in aid upon those issues.

   17. Despite his decision not to make such an application,  Mr  Draycott's
       argument is essentially that the Judge should not have proceeded with
       the hearing and then taken the decisions that he did.  It  is  argued
       that the Judge should have taken the decision to start afresh of  his
       own motion either at, or after the hearing on 14  January  2014  when
       preparing his decision. Mr Draycott argued that the  Judge  ought  to
       have formed the view that in all the  circumstances  of  this  appeal
       fairness required him to take such a course.

   18. The grounds, as drafted, rely heavily upon the principles set out  in
       the decisions in Sambasivam v SSHD  [1999]  IAT  RF  1999/0419/4  and
       Mario [1998] Imm AR 281.

   19. Mr Draycott accepted before me that the chronology of this appeal was
       not similar to that which had faced the Courts  in  either  of  those
       appeals, but he prayed  in  aid  the  principles  set  out  as  being
       applicable to the situation faced by the Judge.

   20. In Mario HHJ Pearl had referred to situations where  there  had  been
       delays of 20 months, 8 months, and 5 months between the oral evidence
       being heard and the judgement being delivered,  in  which  the  trial
       judge had been censured by the Court of Appeal. He said this;

          "In an area  such  as  asylum,  where  evidence  requires  anxious
          scrutiny, the Tribunal  will  usually  remit  a  case  to  another
          adjudicator where the period between the hearing and the dictation
          of the determination is more than 3 months."

   21. In Sambasivam the Court of Appeal considered  that  the  decision  in
       Mario was;

          "... no more and no less than a useful statement  of  guidance  to
          practitioners upon the usual attitude and likely decision  of  the
          IAT in a case where an issue essential to the disposition  of  the
          claim  for  asylum  depends  upon  a  careful  weighing   of   the
          credibility of the applicant and yet it  appears  that  the  delay
          between the hearing date and the preparation of the  determination
          exceeds  3  months.  In  the  absence  of  special  or  particular
          circumstances, that is plainly a useful and proper rule  of  thumb
          which, in the experience of the Tribunal, it is  broadly  just  to
          apply, for the twin reasons that substantial delay between hearing
          and preparation of the determination  renders  the  assessment  of
          credibility  issues  unsafe,  and  that  such  a  delay  tends  to
          undermine  the  loser's  confidence  in  the  correctness  of  the
          decision once delivered." [16]

   22. In this case, the Appellants are correct to  identify  a  passage  of
       over four and a half months between the occasion upon which the Judge
       heard their oral  evidence,  and  the  date  that  he  completed  his
       decision and submitted it for promulgation; 6 September  2013  to  23
       January 2014. However this was not an instance  of  simple  delay  in
       excess of three months. In the intervening period, albeit after  over
       four months had elapsed  since  the  occasion  upon  which  the  oral
       evidence had been heard, there had  been  a  further  hearing  on  14
       January 2014.

   23. It was obviously open to the Appellants at the hearing on 14  January
       2014 to seek the Tribunal's permission to call any  further  evidence
       that had come to light in the intervening period. That was not  done,
       and it is not suggested that it needed to be done.

   24. It is accepted by the Appellants that Mr Draycott  as  their  Counsel
       also had the opportunity at the hearing on 14 January  2014  to  make
       whatever submissions he  considered  appropriate.  Those  could  have
       included whatever references to the evidence (both oral and  written,
       lay and expert) that  he  considered  necessary.  No  guillotine  was
       placed upon him, or threatened, and thus he accepts that he could  do
       so at whatever length he considered proper, either by written or oral
       submissions, or by way of a combination of them  both.  There  is  no
       suggestion that the Judge sought to curtail his  submissions  at  any
       point, or to prevent him from making any point in the manner that  he
       considered best.

   25. If  Mr  Draycott  had  chosen  not  to  prepare  a  detailed  written
       submission for the hearing on 14 January 2014, referencing all of the
       points he considered relevant, and placing all of the evidence into a
       coherent structure, then that was a matter for his  own  professional
       judgement. He did not need a formal direction from  the  Tribunal  in
       order to do so. He had prepared lengthy written submissions  for  the
       hearing on 6 September 2013, and it was open to him to update  those,
       or annotate them as he saw fit. He chose not do so.

   26. Accordingly, as he accepted, Mr Draycott's core  argument  before  me
       was a very simple one. It was  that  the  very  complexity  of  these
       appeals, coupled  with  the  significant  passage  of  time  since  6
       September 2013, was such that no matter the opportunities that he had
       enjoyed to make whatever  detailed  submissions  he  saw  fit  on  14
       January 2014, the damage was already done.  The  appeal  process  was
       already procedurally unfair, and was not capable of  salvage  by  the
       hearing on 14 January 2014, not least because the  loser  would  have
       lost faith in the decision.

   27. The real issue is therefore whether the hearing on  14  January  2014
       was sufficient to render safe the assessment of  the  oral  evidence,
       and/or should have been objectively sufficient to restore the loser's
       confidence in the correctness of the  decision.  (I  accept  for  the
       purposes of this decision that I should assume that the confidence of
       these Appellants in the judicial process was already lost before  the
       14 January 2014, as demonstrated by the applications that  were  made
       on 30 December 2013 and subsequently, notwithstanding  Mr  Draycott's
       failure to renew the application on 14 January 2014.)

   28. The pressures on the Tribunal's administration as  a  result  of  its
       workload are obvious  to  all  who  work  in  this  field.  Both  the
       Appellants' solicitors and Counsel are specialists in this field  and
       will be all too familiar with the  problems.  What  happened  in  the
       listing of these appeals is an illustration  of  what  is  likely  to
       happen once judicial control of the listing of an  adjourned  hearing
       is lost, and the parties fail to take the  initiative  in  recovering
       that control.

   29. It is plain that the Judge believed at the initial  hearing  that  he
       had initially adjourned the matter to 24 September 2013, and if  that
       had occurred it is clear that  there  could  have  been  no  possible
       complaint by the losing party. It is not at  all  clear  to  me  what
       happened after 6 September 2013, but the suspicion is that the  Judge
       was not given the opportunity to control the attempts to  relist  the
       appeals, and was not given the opportunity to issue  suitably  robust
       directions to ensure that the hearings were  resumed  as  quickly  as
       possible. That would probably  have  required  other  appeals  to  be
       adjourned to create space in his list, but there  will  be  occasions
       when that course has to be taken.

   30. The  subsequent  administrative  failure  to  successfully  list  for
       hearing the appeals either within September or October 2013, and then
       the decision to try to list the appeals on a date when the Judge  was
       not physically available to hear them in November 2013 clearly lie at
       the root of the lost opportunity to have the hearing of these appeals
       concluded within a reasonable period of time from 6  September  2013.
       The inability of Mr Draycott to make himself available for a  hearing
       in December 2013 simply rendered inevitable what ultimately occurred.
       It is not necessary for the purposes of this decision for me to enter
       into any sort of  enquiry  as  to  what  ultimately  lay  behind  the
       inability to list the appeals  into  either  September,  October,  or
       November 2013.

   31. I have considerable sympathy for the stance that the Judge took,  and
       the position in which he was placed. It is plain that  he  sought  to
       avoid the waste of public resources. Faced with  the  situation  that
       was presented to him on 30 December  2013  he  sought  to  avoid  any
       unfairness to the parties resulting from the passage of time by  dint
       of devoting his own time to  re-reading  his  notes  of  evidence  in
       preparation  for  the  hearing  on  14  January  2014.  There  is  no
       suggestion from Mr Draycott that he did not do so. His decision is  a
       lengthy one, and one which must have demanded a  considerable  amount
       of his time in its preparation. Nevertheless, having reflected on the
       matter at some length, and not without some considerable  hesitation,
       I am ultimately not satisfied that it can  be  said  with  confidence
       that the analysis of the  evidence  is  safe,  and  that  the  losing
       party's criticisms of his findings are simply an unfounded expression
       of disappointment at the decision.

   32. I have in these circumstances considered whether or not to remit  the
       appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard,  without  any
       findings of fact preserved, as requested by the Appellants.  In  the,
       hopefully unique, circumstances of these appeals I am satisfied  that
       this is the correct approach, and I note that  Mr  Dewison  does  not
       seek to suggest otherwise should my decision on the  effects  of  the
       passage of time be as expressed  above.  In  circumstances  where  it
       would appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
       considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of  that  error  of
       law has been to deprive the Appellants of the opportunity  for  their
       case to be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal;  paragraph
       7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.  Moreover  the
       extent of the judicial fact finding  exercise  is  such  that  having
       regard to the over-riding  objective,  it  is  appropriate  that  the
       appeal should be remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph
       7.2(b) of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.

   33. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of the  parties  I
       make the following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeals is set aside and the appeals are
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal.

         ii) The appeals are to be listed as soon as practicable given  the
             delays that have occurred to date.

        iii) The appeals are not to be listed before either Judge Hands, or
             Judge Fisher. The appeals are to be listed  at  North  Shields
             allowing two full days for the hearing.

         iv) An Urdu and a Russian interpreter must both be booked for that
             hearing.

          v) The Appellants are to file  one  consolidated,  paginated  and
             indexed bundle of documents for the hearing  of  the  appeals,
             which is to be prepared after liaison with the  Respondent  so
             that all relevant documents to which either  party  wishes  to
             refer are to be found in one bundle. The bundle is to be filed
             no less than 5 working  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
             appeals.

         vi) The Appellants are to file a skeleton  argument,  which  shall
             make appropriate reference to the bundle of documents for  the
             sources of the points raised. It shall set out in detail  each
             of the different limbs of  the  Appellants'  case  upon  their
             safety in the event of their return to either Pakistan, or the
             Ukraine, and to  any  Article  8  appeal  that  they  seek  to
             advance.

        vii) The Anonymity Direction previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal is preserved.

Decision


   34. The Determination promulgated on 27  January  2014  did  involve  the
       making of an error of law  and  accordingly  the  decision  upon  the
       appeals is set aside. The appeals are  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
       Tribunal with the following directions;

          i) The decision upon the appeals is set aside and the appeals are
             remitted to the First Tier Tribunal.

         ii) The appeals are to be listed as soon as practicable given  the
             delays that have occurred to date.

        iii) The appeals are not to be listed before either Judge Hands, or
             Judge Fisher. The appeals are to be listed  at  North  Shields
             allowing two full days for the hearing.

         iv) An Urdu and a Russian interpreter must both be booked for that
             hearing.

          v) The Appellants are to file  one  consolidated,  paginated  and
             indexed bundle of documents for the hearing  of  the  appeals,
             which is to be prepared after liaison with the  Respondent  so
             that all relevant documents to which either  party  wishes  to
             refer are to be found in one bundle. The bundle is to be filed
             no less than 5 working  days  prior  to  the  hearing  of  the
             appeals.

         vi) The Appellants are to file a skeleton  argument,  which  shall
             make appropriate reference to the bundle of documents for  the
             sources of the points raised. It shall set out in detail  each
             of the different limbs of  the  Appellants'  case  upon  their
             safety in the event of their return to either Pakistan, or the
             Ukraine, and to  any  Article  8  appeal  that  they  seek  to
             advance.

        vii) The Anonymity Direction previously  made  by  the  First  Tier
             Tribunal is preserved.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 28 May 2015
