
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05128/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th February 2016                     |On 15th March 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     w U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Burns of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 6th July 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male  Afghan  citizen  born  1st  January  1997  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom in July 2009  and  claimed  asylum.   His
    application was refused although because of  his  age  he  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until  4th  November  2012.   His  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant applied for further leave to remain on 30th October 2012,
    and his application was refused on 6th March 2015.   He  appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by the FTT  on  23rd  June  2015  and
    dismissed on all grounds.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds which may be briefly summarised as  follows.
    Firstly the FTT erred in failing to give full reasons for  findings  of
    fact, and erred in finding that the Appellant would not be at  risk  of
    forced recruitment  from  the  Taliban,  in  his  home  area  in  Logar
    Province.  It was contended that the FTT  had  misread  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report, and had not appreciated that when Dr Giustozzi was referring to
    economic factors as being the main challenge to the Appellant, this was
    a reference to conditions in Kabul and not Logar Province.

 5. Secondly the FTT  had  erred  in  considering  internal  relocation  by
    failing to engage with material  evidence  and  failing  to  give  full
    reasons for findings of fact.  The FTT had not engaged with  background
    evidence submitted on behalf of the Appellant.

 6. Thirdly the FTT erred when considering paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and when considering very significant obstacles, had
    failed to engage with material  evidence  and  give  full  reasons  for
    findings of fact.

 7. Permission to appeal was  initially  refused  by  Judge  Plumptre,  but
    following a renewed application permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Warr in the following terms;


         "It is said that the First-tier Judge misinterpreted the report  of
         Dr Giustozzi and in the light of the points  made  in  the  renewed
         grounds of appeal the point is perhaps arguable.
         All the grounds of appeal may be argued."

 8. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Appellant's Submissions

 9. Mr Neale relied upon his skeleton argument dated  15th  February  2016.
    In brief summary Mr Neale made the following points.

10. In relation to the first ground of appeal it was apparent that the  FTT
    had placed particular weight on  Dr  Giustozzi's  report,  but  it  was
    clear, when  the  report  was  read  as  a  whole,  that  the  FTT  had
    misinterpreted the report.  In paragraph 14 when Dr Giustozzi commented
    that "finding a  job  will  probably  be  his  greatest  challenge"  Dr
    Giustozzi was referring to Kabul, and not conditions in the Appellant's
    home area in Logar Province.  It was submitted that  the  FTT  had  not
    given any other reasons for rejecting the UNHCR view that there  was  a
    real risk of forced recruitment in Taliban controlled  areas,  and  the
    Appellant's home area was controlled by the Taliban.  While the FTT was
    not bound by this view, it was bound to give full reasons for rejecting
    it.

11. In relation to the second ground the FTT accepted  that  the  Appellant
    had no family in Kabul and had never lived there.  It  was  speculation
    by the FTT to comment in paragraph 49 that there was the possibility of
    the Appellant resuming contact with his uncle.  The FTT failed to  take
    into account background country evidence submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant such as the reports by Schuster and Majidi contained at pages
    13-32 of the  Appellant's  supplementary  bundle  of  country  evidence
    before the FTT, and a report by Catherine Gladwell a pages  121-122  of
    the same bundle.  These reports indicate the difficulties that would be
    faced by returnees, and while it was acknowledged that the FTT was  not
    required to refer exhaustively to every piece of evidence, in this case
    the FTT had  disregarded  two  vital  pieces  of  evidence  which  were
    specifically put forward and drawn to its attention which supported the
    submission that the Appellant would  be  at  risk  of  destitution  and
    homelessness in Kabul, which would amount to unduly harsh conditions.

12. The FTT commented that the Appellant had displayed an ability to  adapt
    to life in the United Kingdom, but had not taken into account  that  he
    had the assistance of social services in so doing.

13. Mr Neale submitted that the third ground  was  similar  to  the  second
    ground, in that the FTT had not taken into account relevant  background
    evidence, and had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that
    there would  be  no  very  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
    reintegration.  The FTT had  erred  at  paragraph  57  by  taking  into
    account section 117B when considering paragraph 276ADE(1) and  reliance
    was placed upon Bossade [2015] UKUT 00415 (IAC) as  authority  for  the
    contention that this was wrong.

The Respondent's Submissions

14. Mr Richards confirmed that no response  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 had been submitted,  but
    contended that the decision of the FTT disclosed no error of law.

15. I was asked to accept that the FTT had set out all  the  evidence  that
    was considered, and I was referred in particular to paragraph  3.   The
    FTT could not be expected to refer to each individual piece of evidence
    and need only mention evidence that was considered to  be  particularly
    pertinent.

16. Mr Richards submitted that when reading paragraph 14 of Dr  Giustozzi's
    report, it was not clear that he was referring to conditions  in  Kabul
    when commenting that finding a job would be  the  Appellant's  greatest
    challenge.  It was submitted that the FTT's conclusions on this  report
    were open to it.

17. With reference to the Gladwell article relied upon  by  the  Appellant,
    which made reference to difficulties encountered by returnees who  were
    viewed as 'westernised outsiders', and made  reference  to  some  being
    mugged due to a perception that being returned from  Europe  must  mean
    returning with money and referred to one individual being kidnapped and
    held to ransom, Mr Richards pointed to paragraph 13 of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report which directly contradicted this view and stated;

         "13. Westernised attitudes are quite common in Kabul,  particularly
             in  the  wealthiest  neighbourhoods.   Wearing  western  style
             dresses is quite common for example, and even  consumption  of
             alcohol is quite frequent, although never in public.   Mr  U's
             westernised attitude would only be a problem if he settled  in
             rural areas or in the most conservative areas of the  country,
             such as southern Afghan cities."

18. Mr Richards submitted that the FTT had  considered  all  the  evidence,
    attached what weight was thought appropriate to that evidence, and  the
    grounds amounted to a disagreement with findings that had been properly
    made.

The Appellant's Response

19. Mr Neale reiterated that if Dr Giustozzi's report was read as a  whole,
    it was clear that he was referring to Kabul when talking about economic
    difficulties.

20. Whilst the FTT was not bound to set out every piece  of  evidence,  the
    FTT must engage with the main submissions and  make  findings  thereon.
    This the FTT had failed to do.  The FTT had not explained  why  it  was
    not accepted that the Appellant  would  be  unable  to  find  work  and
    employment which would lead to destitution.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

Ground 1

22. Dr Giustozzi commences his  report  by  setting  out  evidence  of  his
    expertise, which includes listing his publications on Afghanistan,  and
    his visits to Afghanistan.  In the second paragraph he confirms that he
    has been asked by the Appellant's representatives to prepare a  report,
    and sets out the documents that he received.   Dr  Giustozzi  does  not
    confirm what specific issues he was asked to comment upon.  It  appears
    from the report that Dr Giustozzi has dealt with risk on return to  the
    Appellant's home area in Logar Province, and also dealt with the option
    of relocation to Kabul.  I set out below the  concluding  paragraph  of
    the report;

         "14. In sum, Mr U would face considerable levels of violence in his
             home province of  Logar  if  returned  there.   The  level  of
             violence in the  country  as  a  whole  is  still  increasing,
             although it is much lower than the average in Kabul.   Finding
             a job will probably be his  greatest  challenge.   The  Afghan
             government has had to admit that  the  economic  situation  is
             deteriorating to the point where a major social  crisis  might
             be in the making."

23. In paragraphs 10-13, Dr Giustozzi  concentrated  on  the  situation  in
    Kabul and commented upon the deteriorating economic situation in Kabul,
    and the difficulties of finding accommodation and employment.  It is my
    view, that in making the comment that "finding a job will  probably  be
    his greatest challenge", Dr Giustozzi was  referring  to  Kabul  rather
    than Logar Province.

24. I do not however accept that the FTT erred materially in interpretation
    of this report.  It is correct that in  paragraph  31  the  FTT  placed
    particular weight on the report when considering the Appellant's  claim
    that he would be at risk of enforced recruitment by the Taliban in  his
    home area.  What I find relevant, and as noted by the FTT, is  that  Dr
    Giustozzi did not raise forced recruitment as an issue in  his  report.
    If there had been a risk of  forced  recruitment  by  the  Taliban,  Dr
    Giustozzi would have included this in his report.

25. Therefore the FTT was entitled to place weight on the absence from  the
    report of any reference to forced recruitment and it was  open  to  the
    FTT to conclude that taking into account the lower standard  of  proof,
    there was no real risk that the Appellant would  be  recruited  by  the
    Taliban against his will if returned to Logar Province.

Ground 2

26. As rightly conceded by Mr Neale, the FTT cannot be expected to refer to
    every individual piece of evidence.  The Upper Tribunal  in  Budhathoki
    [2014] UKUT 00041 (IAC) gave some guidance on  this  point,  confirming
    that it was generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  FTT  judgments  to
    rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case, but it  was  necessary
    for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they have won or lost.

27. Dealing with the issue of internal relocation  to  Kabul,  the  FTT  at
    paragraph 46 specifically refers to paragraph 243 of AK Afghanistan  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC), relied upon by the  Appellant.   It  is  clear
    that the FTT considered that case, which gave guidance on the situation
    in Kabul and for ease of reference I set out below paragraph  B(iv)  of
    the headnote;

         "Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article  15(c)  in
         which the Respondent asserts that Kabul  City  would  be  a  viable
         internal relocation alternative,  it  is  necessary  to  take  into
         account (both in assessing safety and reasonableness) not only  the
         level  of  violence  in  that  city  but  also   the   difficulties
         experienced by that  city's  poor  and  also  the  many  Internally
         Displaced Persons (IDPs) living there,  these  considerations  will
         not in general make return to Kabul unsafe or unreasonable."

28. The FTT took into  account  the  submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant which are set out in paragraph 47,  and  in  which  there  is
    further reference to Dr Giustozzi's  report.   The  FTT  refers  to  an
    article relied upon by the Appellant, although this  is  considered  in
    paragraph 62  when  considering  very  significant  obstacles.   It  is
    correct that the article referred to is in fact by Nassim Majidi  which
    relates to shortcomings in assistance for deported Afghan youth, rather
    than the article by Liza Schuster  and  Nassim  Majidi,  which  is  the
    article for which the FTT is criticised for not making reference to, as
    well as not making  reference  to  an  article  by  Catherine  Gladwell
    contained in the Appellant's bundle.

29. I do not accept that the FTT has ignored any  of  the  articles  relied
    upon by the Appellant.  In paragraph 3 of the decision, the  FTT  lists
    the evidence that was produced, noting that three separate bundles were
    produced on behalf of the Appellant, and confirming that this  evidence
    has been considered together with the  skeleton  argument  which  makes
    reference to background country evidence relied upon, and having  taken
    into  account  oral  submissions   from   both   representatives.    AK
    Afghanistan CG, remains a country guidance decision and  therefore  the
    FTT was entitled to conclude that generally conditions in  Kabul  would
    not make a return  to  that  city  unsafe  or  unreasonable.   The  FTT
    considered  the  submissions  made  on  the  Appellant's  behalf,  that
    conditions had deteriorated since AK Afghanistan CG was published.  The
    FTT found that the Appellant had no family ties in Kabul and had  never
    lived there, but that he had no specific risk characteristics.  The FTT
    remarked that there was  the  possibility  of  the  Appellant  resuming
    contact with his uncle, but did state that this was not known, and I do
    not find this to be a material error.

30. There is no country guidance case law which confirms that an individual
    such as the Appellant would be at risk if returned to Kabul.  So far as
    internal relocation in Kabul is concerned,  Dr  Giustozzi's  conclusion
    was that finding a job would be the Appellant's greatest challenge.

31. In my view the FTT has demonstrated that it considered all the evidence
    produced by both parties, and considered that evidence  in  the  round.
    The FTT was  entitled  to  conclude  at  paragraph  49,  that  although
    economic conditions in Kabul are difficult and there is a risk of  some
    violence, relocation to Kabul would not be unduly harsh.  The  FTT  did
    not err in commenting  that  the  Appellant  had  shown  "a  degree  of
    resilience in coping with life in the United Kingdom",  as  that  would
    appear to be the case, although there has been assistance  and  support
    from social services.

Ground 3

32. The FTT erred, as contended by Mr Neale, in  considering  section  117B
    when considering paragraph 276ADE(1).  Section 117B considerations  are
    relevant when Article 8 is considered outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However this error  is  not  material,  as  it  was  not  section  117B
    considerations that caused the FTT to conclude that the  Appellant  had
    not proved that there are very significant obstacles  to  reintegration
    if he left the United Kingdom.

33. On this  issue,  the  same  argument  is  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, as was advanced in the issue of internal relocation, in that
    it is contended that the FTT did not take into account all the relevant
    background evidence.  I have already rejected that argument, concluding
    that the FTT did take into account all the relevant evidence.

34. With reference to the issue of very significant obstacles,  I  conclude
    that the FTT was entitled to find, on the evidence,  that  there  would
    not be very significant obstacles  to  the  Appellant's  reintegration.
    The FTT at paragraph 62 again made reference to Dr Giustozzi's  report,
    and the difficult economic conditions.  In my view the FTT was entitled
    to take into account the Appellant had the benefit of  education  which
    he received in the United Kingdom, and was entitled  to  conclude  that
    his ability to read and write  and  speak  English  would  be  of  some
    assistance.

35. I do not find that the FTT disregarded any material evidence,  or  took
    into account and gave weight to any immaterial matters.  In my view the
    FTT made findings which were open to  it  on  the  evidence,  and  gave
    adequate reasons for those findings.

36. The grounds submitted on behalf of the Appellant which have  been  very
    carefully argued, display a strong disagreement with the findings  made
    by the FTT, but they do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  I continue that order  pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date 26th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date 26th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
