

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: AA/05798/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision promulgated         |
|on 19 July 2017                               |on 7 August 2017             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     OPF
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss Dhaliwal instructed by Genesis Law Associates Ltd

For the Respondent: Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Ford promulgated on 27 February 2017 in which the  Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a national of  Nigeria  born  on  [  ]  1974.  The
        appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2004 lawfully as a student,
        with leave extended until it expired in early 2006. The appellant's
        wife entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2006. The appellant
        and his wife met  after  she  entered  the  United  Kingdom.   They
        started their relationship after the appellant's leave had expired.
     3. The appellant's first child E was born in the UK on [ ] 2007, their
        second child EI was born in the UK on [ ] 2010, their  third  child
        EIO was born in the UK on [ ] 2013, and their fourth child OOF  was
        born in the UK on [ ] 2016.
     4. An application to regularise the appellant's status was made on  25
        November  2011,  seeking  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  and
        humanitarian protection grounds, which was refused on 22 May  2012.
        On 7 June 2013, the appellant applied for leave to remain on  human
        rights grounds with his wife and children as named  dependents.  On
        21 August 2013, the appellant applied for asylum with his wife  and
        children as dependents. The applications made in 2013 were  refused
        in a decision dated 18 March 2015  which  is  the  subject  of  the
        appeal before the Judge.
     5. Having considered the evidence with the required degree of  anxious
        scrutiny the Judge sets out her findings of fact from [39] to  [79]
        of the decision under challenge, which can  be  summarised  in  the
        following terms:


   i. The appellant delayed significantly in making this  claim  for  asylum
      waiting from 2006 until 2011 until he made his  first  application  to
      regularise his stay following the birth of his children [39].
  ii. This is not a case that turns on credibility  issues.  The  respondent
      delayed in  the  decision-making  process  but  no  prejudice  to  the
      appellant or his wife was made out as they benefited from the  support
      given within the education system in the UK for children with  special
      educational needs and  for  health  care  provided  by  the  NHS.  The
      appellant has made no  financial  contribution  to  the  cost  of  his
      children's care or their education and nor have he or  his  wife  made
      any financial contribution to the cost of her four caesarean  sections
      or for the support she has received for all her pre-or postnatal  care
      [40].
 iii. The appellant worked illegally in the United Kingdom from 2006 onwards
      and only stopped working when it became clear to his employer  he  had
      no permission to do so [41].
  iv.  The  appellant  and  his  wife  has  secured  additional  educational
      qualifications in the UK including accountancy qualifications,  health
      and social care NVQs and additional qualifications  for  the  security
      industry [42].
   v. The appellant's wife is a qualified primary school teacher in  Nigeria
      [43].
  vi. It was accepted neither the appellant's family nor his  wife's  family
      in Nigeria are accepting of their two older sons who have autism [44].
 vii. It was not accepted either the appellant's family or his wife's family
      intended to do any harm to the autistic children but if they did there
      was no real risk they would achieve their intentions [45].
viii. The appellant and his wife are caring parents who are very  supportive
      of their children and intent upon meeting the children's  needs.  They
      have learned a lot about the  support  of  their  two  sons  who  have
      autism. E suffers  from  severe  autism  requiring  a  high  level  of
      educational support which he receives in a special school  he  attends
      in the UK [45].
  ix. There was no estimate of how much E's placement costs the public purse
      although the Judge has judicial  knowledge  from  sitting  in  another
      jurisdiction that the cost of such specialist placement runs into tens
      of thousands of pounds per annum [46].
   x. EI attends mainstream school and there  is  insufficient  evidence  to
      establish he has been assessed as needing a specialist placement.  The
      child receives additional teaching assistance at  school  as  well  as
      input from a special education needs teacher and speech  and  language
      therapy services. There is no up-to-date evidence from the  school  as
      to how they are coping with his special education needs  and  progress
      he is actually making [47].
  xi. In relation to EIO, the Judge was not satisfied he has a diagnosis  of
      autistic spectrum disorder at the present  time.  The  child  uses  an
      inhaler. The Judge  was  not  satisfied  on  the  evidence  that  such
      medication was not available in Nigeria [48].
 xii. In relation to OOF, the Judge was not  satisfied  the  medication  she
      requires is not available in Nigeria [49].
xiii. The appellant's wife suffers from depression. In  late  December/early
      January 2017 she decided to leave the two younger  children  on  their
      own in the family  home  when  she  went  to  collect  the  two  older
      children.  As a result, social services became involved  although  the
      outcome  of  their  investigation  was  that  there  were  no  ongoing
      protection concerns [50]
 xiv.  Whilst  accepting  the  appellant's  wife  has  been  in  receipt  of
      antidepressants there was no evidence to conclude such medication  was
      not available in Nigeria [51].
  xv. The appellant claimed asylum asserting the family face a real risk  of
      persecution in Nigeria because the  two  older  children  suffer  from
      autism and also claim to be at real risk of persecution on account  of
      their religious beliefs as Christians [52].
 xvi. The appellant's wife lived in Lagos before coming to the UK and claims
      her former husband threatened her after  he  learned  she  had  fallen
      pregnant by the appellant after coming for a visit in 2006 [53].
xvii. Few details of threats have been provided [54].
xviii. The appellant grew up in Ibadan, Oyo State where he  studied  in  the
      local polytechnic [55].
 xix. The appellant and his wife have family members in Nigeria [56].
  xx. The move to Nigeria will be contrary to the best interests  of  E  and
      have a detrimental impact upon him causing him distress,  anxiety  and
      upset. As a severely autistic child changes to his  routine  might  be
      distressing. A move to Nigeria will mean his special educational needs
      will not be as well supported as they are in the UK [57].
 xxi. E will not only have to face changing his schooling, his home and  his
      community, but also be removed from the only society has  known  since
      birth in the UK. E has some understanding of Yoruba and the Judge  was
      not  satisfied  that  his   understanding   of   this   language   was
      significantly worse than his understanding of English [58].
xxii. E has an understanding of  Yoruba  as  both  his  parents  speak  this
      language [59].
xxiii. EI has less severe autism but also severe delay in his  understanding
      of language  and  social  communication  skills.  The  Judge  was  not
      satisfied on the evidence that he requires a placement  in  a  special
      school [60]. EI's best interests are to be permitted to remain at  his
      present school in his present home and community without  disturbance.
      He was born in the UK and has lived here throughout his life [61].
xxiv. None of the children have lived in the UK for  seven  years  prior  to
      the date of application [62].
 xxv. Neither the appellant nor his wife or children can be returned  safely
      to the north-east of Nigeria or the Niger Delta or to Akwa Ibom  State
      where they would face an unacceptably high level of risk due to  their
      religious beliefs and the children's autism in these areas [63].
xxvi. The Judge was not satisfied the same level of  risk  exists  elsewhere
      in Nigeria. Whilst the appellant provided evidence a  placement  at  a
      specialist autism school in Abuja was unaffordable he had not provided
      evidence to show a placement  at  Pacific  School  in  Lagos  will  be
      unaffordable or of equal cost to the special school in Abuja.  Nor has
      he provided evidence to contradict  what  is  stated  in  the  refusal
      letter that the appellant and his wife could seek assistance from  the
      Zamarr Institute in Abuja who provide specialist autism associates, or
      to show that they could not be accessed for advice and support [63].
xxvii. It is wrong to  compare  what  is  available  in  Nigeria  with  that
      available in the UK, and to consider what is available within  Nigeria
      when looking at the question of internal relocation and whether it  is
      reasonable for this family to locate internally [64].
xxviii. The appellant and his wife are intelligent  qualified  people  which
      can be used on return to Nigeria. The appellant can secure  employment
      if he takes his family to an urban area outside the named areas  where
      risk is too high [65].
xxix. The Judge finds the appellant's wife could secure  employment  as  she
      has qualifications as a primary school teacher although she will  need
      to dedicate herself to the care of the two oldest children, but  would
      not be without support in doing so as the  refusal  letter  identifies
      NGOs and voluntary groups who work in  supporting  those  with  autism
      [65].
 xxx. The Judge accepts the family will be without support from  members  of
      their extended family due to their ostracism of the autistic  children
      [66].
xxxi.  The  appellant  and  family  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      immigration rules for leave to remain in any category [67].
xxxii. The decision to remove the appellant and his family  is  contrary  to
      the best interests of the two older children. The two  other  children
      will not be adversely affected by the removal. The appellant  and  his
      wife will continue to care for all the children and will  not  abandon
      them and will protect them within the community. The issue in the case
      is one of proportionality [67].
xxxiii. The appellant and his wife have a  very  poor  immigration  history,
      having formed a relationship with his wife and having married and  had
      two children before making a human rights application in  summer  2013
      followed by an asylum application in August 2013 [67].  The  appellant
      has worked in the UK without permission and studied in the UK  without
      permission. Little weight is attached to the private life he  and  his
      family have formed when they had no permission to be here [68].
xxxiv. The appellant and his wife are Yoruba  who  lived  in  Nigeria  until
      adulthood. The appellant's wife lived in Lagos and the Judge finds  it
      reasonable  to  expect  the  appellant  and  his  family  to  relocate
      internally to Lagos where the appellant lived before leaving  to  come
      to the UK. Lagos is the appellant's wife's home area [69].
xxxv. Educational opportunities for the two younger  children  will  be  the
      same as they are for every child in Nigeria with entitlement  to  free
      primary school education. Educational opportunities are  available  to
      the  two  older  children  although  significantly  worse  than  those
      available in the UK.  The  two  older  children  will  be  faced  with
      societal discrimination although their parents are willing and able to
      protect them and such discrimination will not amount to a real  threat
      of violence  or  real  risk  of  persecution.  There  is  an  internal
      relocation option available to avoid any risk and citizens of  Nigeria
      are free to move to different areas enabling the appellants to  reduce
      the risk due to autism but also due to religious beliefs by relocating
      [70].
xxxvi. The appellant's wife's mental  health  difficulties  do  not  make  a
      difference to the outcome of the appeal [71].
xxxvii. The family have been a burden on the public purse not  only  in  the
      provision  of  health  services  but  also  education  including   the
      placement at a special autism school. The family speak English but are
      not and have not been self-supporting for several  years.  When  self-
      supporting it was due to working without permission [72].
xxxviii. The appellant and his wife entered into a relationship  at  a  time
      they both knew there were problems with their immigration  status  and
      had children knowing their situation was precarious [73].
xxxix. The Judge did not accept E or EI faced torture on return  to  Nigeria
      as the country information provided as to the appalling  treatment  of
      autistic children relates  to  children  who  have  been  disowned  or
      rejected by their families and who do not  have  families  to  protect
      them [74].
  xl. At [75 -76] the Judge writes:
                  75.  I have looked  carefully  at  the  individual  issues
                      relating to [E], [EI],[EIO] and [OOF]  the  Appellant
                      and his wife. But having looked  at  the  issues  for
                      each individual in the family and for the family as a
                      whole, and balancing their needs against  the  public
                      interest in immigration control and the protection of
                      the public purse, I have reached the conclusion  that
                      this  decision  is  a  proportionate  one.   I   have
                      considerable  sympathy  for  the  Appellant  and  his
                      family given the burden of care placed upon  them  by
                      having two autistic children and another child with a
                      congenital disorder. But even taking into account the
                      children's best  interests,  when  this  is  balanced
                      against the public interest  in  immigration  control
                      and in protecting public finances,  I  am  unable  to
                      find that this  decision  is  outside  the  range  of
                      proportionate responses  open  to  the  Secretary  of
                      State in this case.


                  76.  In summary, although I am satisfied that  in  certain
                      parts of Nigeria the families  of  autistic  children
                      and autistic children face a real risk of persecution
                      by reason of their membership of a particular  social
                      group, this family is able  to  avoid  that  risk  by
                      reasonable internal relocation. Similarly,  any  risk
                      of persecution on  the  grounds  of  their  Christian
                      beliefs can be avoided by internal  relocation  to  a
                      predominantly Christian area or indeed to Lagos where
                      the population is split 50/50 Christian and Muslim. I
                      have looked at these risks not only individually  but
                      together.


 xli. The Judge was not satisfied the appellant had established a real  risk
      of torture on  return  for  any  member  of  the  family  because  the
      appellant and his wife had  shown  they  are  able  to  protect  their
      children and fully intended to do so in the future [77].
xlii. In assessing the issue of proportionality, the  Judge  considered  the
      factors set out in Section 117A and B of the 2002  Act  together  with
      all other  relevant  factors  including  the  best  interests  of  the
      children. The Judge concluded there will be no breach of  a  protected
      article 8 right. The family will be removed as a unit and  can  choose
      where they wish to live in Nigeria on  return.  Whilst  the  level  of
      education will fall well short of what is available to them in the  UK
      this does not render the decision disproportionate when taken with the
      evidence as a whole. The Judge takes into account the length  of  time
      the appellant and his children have lived in the UK and in  particular
      that the children do not know any other society  as  they  have  lived
      here since birth. The Judge notes the family have lived in both London
      and Birmingham despite concerns about how E in particular  would  cope
      with change. E appears to have moved successfully  from  a  mainstream
      school in London to a special school in Birmingham.  Whilst  no  doubt
      requiring a high level of support, the Judge accepts the same level of
      support will not be available to E in Nigeria but did  not  find  this
      rendered the decision disproportionate [78].
xliii. The Judges states she wishes it to be made clear  that  she  has  not
      analysed individual strands of the evidence in isolation  but  instead
      viewed the evidence as a whole when looking at the proportionality  of
      the decision [78].
xliv. The Judge finds the appellant will be in  a  position  to  financially
      support his family and so will be able to access  the  necessities  of
      life on their return to Nigeria [79].


     6. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The operative section  of
        the grant being in the following terms:


             "There is no appeal against that part of the decision  of  the
             learned to Judge relating to the asylum claim. The  appeal  is
             confined to the decision relating to article 8 protection. The
             thrust of the challenge is that,  whereas  the  learned  Judge
             correctly observed that at the time  of  application  in  2013
             none of the appellant's three  children  had  resided  in  the
             United Kingdom for a period of seven years,  by  the  time  of
             decision in 2015 the eldest  child  had  been  in  the  United
             Kingdom for over that length of time and, all the more, by the
             time of hearing in January 2017 was over nine years old. It is
             averred that the learned Judge failed to consider the  overall
             length of residence of the children  in  the  United  Kingdom,
             particularly of the eldest child, as relevant to an article  8
             proportionality  assessment;  failed  to  consider  or   apply
             authority including PD &  Ors  (Article  8,  conjoined  family
             claims) Sri Lanka; and failed to give any  or  due  weight  to
             this factor as also to the  effect  of  delay  and  change  in
             circumstances since the decision."


     7.  The  judge  granting  permission  states  "the  ground  is  fairly
        arguable".




Error of law


     8. Judge Ford was tasked with determining  this  appeal  following  an
        earlier decision by another judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,  who
        dismissed the appeal on all grounds in a  decision  dated  28  July
        2015, having been found to have erred in law such that the decision
        was set aside by a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal and  remitted
        de novo to be heard afresh.
     9. It was submitted by Ms Dhaliwal that the Judge had  made  the  same
        error in the decision under challenge as had the earlier First-tier
        Tribunal judge. The Upper Tribunal was referred to paragraphs 12 to
        14 of that original decision which are  written  in  the  following
        terms:


             12.  There was no adequate individual assessment of the eldest
                  child's needs  and  best  interests.  More  significantly,
                  there was  no  private  life  assessment  under  paragraph
                  276ADE in relation to that child, who met the seven  years
                  residence threshold requirement, as to whether it would be
                  reasonable to expect that  child  to  leave  the  UK.  The
                  similar test under  section  117B(vi)  provides  that  the
                  public interest does not require  an  applicant's  removal
                  where  he  has   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying  child,  where  it  is  not
                  reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK. The  judge
                  should have specifically assessed whether  it  would  have
                  been reasonable, given the evidence of  his  personal  and
                  individual circumstances, to expect that  child  to  leave
                  the UK.


             13.  In her submissions, Ms  Aboni  accepted  that  the  judge
                  failed to address paragraph  276ADE  in  relation  to  the
                  appellant and his children, in particular the eldest child
                  who has special needs arising from his autism.  In  error,
                  the  judge  proceeded  immediately  to  conduct  a  Razgar
                  proportionality assessment under article 8  ECHR,  without
                  first considering whether the  appellant  or  any  of  his
                  children met the requirements of the Immigration Rules for
                  leave to remain. Further, the judge should only have  gone
                  on to the article 8 assessment outside the Rules if it was
                  found  that  there  were   compelling   circumstances   in
                  adequately recognised in the Rules that would  render  the
                  removal decision unjustifiably harsh. That assessment  was
                  not conducted. For the reasons set out above, I find  that
                  the article 8 assessment was flawed, failing to adequately
                  address section 117B(vi) and to apply anxious scrutiny  to
                  the needs and best interests of the eldest child,  if  not
                  those of the other children as well.


             14.  In all the circumstances, I find, for the reasons set out
                  above,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   is
                  inadequate, incomplete and ultimately in error of law.


    10. An issue that arises in relation to this head of challenge is  that
        it was conceded that this error was  not  raised  or  pleaded  when
        seeking permission to appeal.
    11. The actual grounds on which permission to  appeal  was  sought  and
        granted can be summarised in the following terms:


   a) Ground 1 - although the Judge identified that none of the  appellant's
      children had lived in the UK for seven years  prior  to  the  date  of
      application and therefore identified that the family  could  not  meet
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules and the decision  turned  on
      the issue of proportionality, the Judge should have considered section
      117B(6) of the 2002 Act as at the date of the hearing the  appellant's
      oldest child was nine years old and had lived in the UK all his  life.
      The ground asserts the Judge failed to  identify  that  E  potentially
      fell within the definition of a 'qualified child' if it was also found
      it was not reasonable to expect him to leave the UK.  It  is  asserted
      although the Judge identified the length of time E has been in the  UK
      for the purpose of the Rules, the Judge failed to  identify  this  for
      the purpose of the Article 8 ECHR assessment.  The  fact  E  was  nine
      years of age is said to be a highly material factor.


   b) Ground 2 - in finding the decision to remove proportionate  the  Judge
      did not identify the correct legal test as identified in PD and Others
      (Article 8: conjoined family claims) Sri Lanka  [2016]  UKUT  108,  at
      [37]. Had she done so the  Judge  would  have  noted  that  the  Upper
      Tribunal was of the view that "strong  reasons  will  be  required  in
      order to refuse a case with continuous UK residents of more than seven
      years". In MA (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on  the  application  of)  v  Upper
      Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) & Anor [2016] EWCA  Civ  705
      the Court of Appeal said at [49]:


                   "However, the fact that the child has been in the UK  for
                   seven years would need to be given significant weight  in
                   the proportionality exercise  for  two  related  reasons:
                   first, because of its relevance to determining the nature
                   and strength of the child's best interests;  and  second,
                   because it establishes as a  starting  point  that  leave
                   should be granted unless there are  powerful  reasons  to
                   the contrary."


                   The Judge did not factor in the game changing  nature  of
                   the seven-year residence of E and, especially in light of
                   the  findings  of  fact  relating  to  E  and  the  clear
                   assessment of his best interests, whether this meant that
                   it was not reasonable to expect him to  leave  the  UK  -
                   especially when compared to the facts in PD and Others.


    12. The claim the Judge failed to note the length of time  any  of  the
        children or adults in this appeal have been in United  Kingdom  has
        no arguable merit. The Judge was clearly aware of when  the  adults
        entered the UK and also when the children were born in  the  United
        Kingdom. The provisions of the Immigration Rules, and  particularly
        276ADE(1)(vi) were considered by the Judge who  specifically  finds
        that none of the children had lived in the UK for seven years prior
        to the date of the application. This refers to a specific  timeline
        in relation to which an individual has to prove an  entitlement  to
        benefit from the provision of a relevant rule which, in relation to
        this case, could not be satisfied. The  Judge  notes  that  as  the
        appellants could not succeed under the Rule  it  was  necessary  to
        assess the human rights ground of challenge. The Judge provides the
        correct legal self-direction, as it was understood the date of  the
        determination, at [19] where it is written:


             19. In relation to  Article  8  human  rights  issues  I  will
             firstly consider the Rules and if I am then  led  to  consider
             proportionality  I  am  obliged  to  bear  in  mind  the  non-
             exhaustive list of factors set out at s117A and  117B  of  the
             Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)  in
             the balancing exercise.


    13. The Judge was arguably  adopting  an  approach  recognised  by  the
        Supreme Court in Hesham Ali and other cases  decided  earlier  this
        year in which it was found the First-tier and Upper Tribunals  have
        a human rights jurisdiction not a jurisdiction  limited  solely  to
        considering the issue by reference to the Immigration  Rules.  When
        considering the proportionality of a decision a judge  is  required
        to factor into account whether an individual  is  able  to  succeed
        under the Rules as they set out the Secretary of States view of how
        human rights cases should be assessed, which therefore  forms  part
        of the balancing exercise.
    14. In relation to the claim the Judge should have allowed  the  appeal
        by reference to 276ADE, such claim has no arguable merit as it  was
        not  argued  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  successfully  that   the
        appellants were able to succeed on this basis.
    15. In relation to s117B(vi) and the concept of a qualifying child,  by
        virtue of section 117D a "qualifying child" means a person  who  is
        under the age of 18 and who- (a) is a British citizen, or  (b)  has
        lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years
        or more.  If a child is a qualifying  child  for  the  purposes  of
        section 117B of the 2002 Act as amended, the issue  will  generally
        be whether it is not reasonable for that child to return.
    16. As stated, it is found the Judge was aware of the  period  of  time
        the appellant's eldest son E had been in the United Kingdom and the
        Judge does not commit an error of law by failing  to  set  out  the
        definition of a qualifying child and how  that  test  is  satisfied
        when the Judge was clearly aware of the  fact  E  did  satisfy  the
        criteria as a child under the age of 18 who  has  lived  in  United
        Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more.
    17. The question in this appeal was whether removing E from the  United
        Kingdom  was  reasonable.  The  Judge  approached  the   issue   of
        reasonableness within the proportionality assessment starting  with
        identifying the circumstances for all the family members, assessing
        the best interests of the children which were found to be to remain
        in United Kingdom, but then assessing the  proportionality  of  the
        decision as a whole.
    18. In relation to the Rules, and specifically paragraph  276  ADE(vi),
        in AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that
        when the question posed by s117B(6) is the same question  posed  in
        relation to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv), it must  be  posed
        and answered in the proper context of whether it was reasonable  to
        expect the child to follow its parents to their country of  origin;
        EV (Philippines). It is not however a question  that  needs  to  be
        posed and answered in relation to each child  more  than  once.  In
        this respect, the issue in the current appeal is whether the  Judge
        considered the appropriate test and answered the  question  of  the
        reasonableness, not necessarily under which label that exercise was
        conducted.
    19. The second ground asserts the Judge did not  identify  the  correct
        legal test. If this ground is suggesting the Judge  failed  to  set
        out in the determination the correct test by reference  to  PD  and
        Others, there is no legal obligation upon the Judge to have done so
        the failure of which amounts to an arguable legal error if she  did
        not. The Judge was clearly aware of the need to take  into  account
        all competing elements of the case, to attach appropriate weight to
        those aspects that were accepted (both positive and negative),  and
        then give reasons for why the appeal was decided  as  it  was.  The
        reference in PD and Others does not state  that  in  every  case  a
        child who has been in United Kingdom continuously for a  period  of
        seven years or more must succeed with their  claim,  but  that  the
        weight given to the fact they have lived in the UK  for  that  time
        and become settled and integrated into British  society  should  be
        given appropriate weight, such that strong reasons are required  in
        order to refuse such an appeal. This is clearly a comment upon  the
        weight a judge is entitled to give to the evidence relied  upon  by
        an appellant, but how such evidence is assessed and how much weight
        is attributed can only be  for  the  decision  maker  who  has  the
        opportunity to see and hear evidence being given,  to  assess  that
        evidence from all sources, to appraise themselves of relevant legal
        provisions, and then seek  to  arrive  at  wholly  sustainable  and
        adequately reasoned conclusions. The case law relied upon in Ground
        2 cannot and does not seek to fetter the Judges  discretion  as  to
        what appropriate weight should be attributed, absolutely. To do  so
        would be arguably unlawful. The  issue  is  whether  the  Judge  in
        dismissing the appeal gave adequate reasons for  why  in  her  view
        strong reasons existed that required the appeal to be dismissed.
    20. Contrary to the allegation in the original grounds, the fact E  has
        seven years' residence is not a  'game  changing'  factor  but  one
        element of the case, similar  to  the  best  interests  assessment,
        which is of primary importance. The Judge found that it is  in  the
        children's best interest to remain in the United  Kingdom  for  the
        reasons set out in the determination showing  this  aspect  of  the
        case had been  considered  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny.
    21. In R (on the application of  MA  (Pakistan)  and  Others)  v  Upper
        Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) and Another  [2016]  EWCA
        Civ 705  it  was  held  (notwithstanding  reservations)  that  when
        considering whether it was reasonable to remove a child from the UK
        under rule 276ADE(1)(iv)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  section
        117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  a
        court or tribunal should not simply focus on the child  but  should
        have regard to the wider public interest considerations,  including
        the conduct and immigration history of the  parents.  This  is  the
        aspect of the proportionality assessment the Judge  undertook  when
        assessing section 117 B (6) and no arguable legal error is made out
        in the Judge adopting this approach.
    22. In MA (Pakistan) it was also  confirmed  that  if  section  117B(6)
        applies then "there can be no doubt that section  117B(6)  must  be
        read as a self-contained provision in the sense that Parliament has
        stipulated that where the conditions specified in  the  sub-section
        are satisfied, the public interest will not  justify  removal."  It
        was additionally held, however, that the fact that a child had been
        in the UK for seven years should be given significant weight in the
        proportionality exercise because of its relevant to determining the
        nature and strength  of  the  child's  best  interests  and  as  it
        established as a starting point that leave should be granted unless
        there were powerful reasons to  the  contrary.  This  reflects  the
        discussion  above  which  the  Judge  was  clearly  aware  of  when
        undertaking the necessary assessment.
    23. I find Ms Dhaliwal is unable to succeed in relation to her  initial
        submission. Although this ground was not included in  the  original
        grounds of challenge and permission was not granted to pursue  this
        matter before the Upper Tribunal, Ms  Aboni  does  not  oppose  the
        application to amend the grounds to include this additional head of
        challenge. Accordingly, permission to amend was granted by consent.
    24. The Judge clearly considered the  position  under  the  Immigration
        Rules and gives reasons for why the appellant was unable to succeed
        in relation to the same, by reference to the specific timeline  set
        out in the relevant rule, namely that an applicant is  required  to
        identify and establish  they  can  meet  the  requirements  at  the
        relevant date which is at the date of application which was not the
        case in relation to this appeal.
    25. Having considered the  decision  and  evidence  with  the  required
        degree of care, the evidence made available to the Judge, which did
        not go as far as examining in detail the impact of removal upon the
        children  and  the  change  of  educational  providers  and  family
        circumstances, despite it being assessed that such  factors  should
        have been considered as part of the proportionality assessment,  it
        has not been made out the Judge failed to apply the  correct  test,
        failed to  identify  the  appropriate  issues  in  the  appeal  and
        relevant facts, and failed  to  conduct  a  proper  proportionality
        exercise. In particular, the Judge identified the existence of  NGO
        support, the lack of evidence regarding approaches  to  schools  in
        Nigeria with only one school appearing to have been  approached  by
        the appellants, and the lack of evidence  establishing  there  were
        not strong reasons for why this appeal should not be dismissed.
    26.  The  Upper  Tribunal  accepts  the  Judge  undertook  a   properly
        structured proportionality assessment in accordance  with  the  law
        and guidance from the Senior Courts. As  a  proper  proportionality
        assessment was undertaken the only basis of challenge available  to
        the appellant is on public law grounds. It is clear that this is  a
        matter in relation to which the judge took a great deal of care and
        could not help but have been moved by the difficulties  experienced
        by the two older children and the family having to cope  with  them
        and meet their needs. The Judge clearly noted  the  extent  of  the
        assistance available in the United Kingdom which as the Judge noted
        cost the taxpayer tens of thousands of pounds a year. The Judge did
        not decide this matter solely on economic grounds but  clearly  the
        economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom  is  a  legitimate  aim
        specified in article 8(2) ECHR.  The  Court  of  Appeal  have  also
        reminded us  that  the  United  Kingdom  can  neither  educate  nor
        medicate the world. No member of  this  family  has  any  right  or
        expectation that they will be entitled to remain  to  benefit  from
        the education and  health  services  provided  free  at  source  to
        British nationals and those otherwise entitled to enter  or  remain
        in this country lawfully. At a time of austerity where the pressure
        upon the budgets of the health service and educational services are
        as severe as it is often reported in the popular press, there is  a
        strong public interest argument that those entitled to benefit from
        such services should only be those lawfully entitled. The Secretary
        of State has a margin of appreciation under European law and it has
        not been made out before the Judge that the decision to reject  the
        application for leave to remain was outside  the  parameters  of  a
        reasonable exercise of such a right.
    27. Article 8 does not enable an individual to choose where  they  wish
        to live. The  purpose  of  article  8  is  to  prevent  unwarranted
        interference with a protected right by a Contracting State.  Family
        life enjoyed by this unit will continue, as the  Judge  identified,
        as they  will  be  removed  together.  The  private  life  aspects,
        including education, health, and other community  ties  that  exist
        will be disrupted in a manner sufficient to engage  article  8,  as
        the Judge recognised. The question for the Judge was  whether  that
        interference was warranted i.e. whether it  is  proportionate.  The
        Judge found on balance that strong  reasons  existed  for  why  the
        appeal  should  be  refused.  In  challenging  that  the  appellant
        disagrees. Disagreement or a desire for a  different  outcome  does
        not per se amount arguable legal error.
    28. Having considered the submissions made and all  relevant  issues  I
        make a finding of fact the appellant has failed to  make  out  that
        the Judge has erred in law in a manner material to the decision  to
        dismiss the appeals of this family unit.  The  determination  shall
        therefore stand.

Decision

    29. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    30. The First-tier  Tribunal  made  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.  I make that order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 4 August 2017
