
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05615/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th March 2016                   |On 28th July 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    [A A]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. S Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons promulgated by First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Holmes on 12th May 2015, in which he dismissed an
       appeal against the refusal by the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
       Department on 13th March 2015 to grant the appellant  asylum  and  to
       remove him from the UK.


 Background


    2. The appellant is a national of the Democratic Republic of the  Congo.
       He entered the UK on 16th February 2014. He made a claim  for  asylum
       that was refused for the  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision  of  the
       respondent dated 13th March 2015.  It was  that  decision  that  gave
       rise to the appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes.


    3. The appellant's case is summarised at paragraphs [13] and [14] of the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal and I do not repeat that  summary
       in this decision.  At paragraphs [15] to [17] of  his  decision,  the
       Judge sets out the evidence that he had before  him.   At  paragraphs
       [20] to [51] the Judge sets out the  appellant's  account  of  events
       insofar as is relevant to the core  of  the  appellant's  claim.   At
       paragraphs [52] to [66] of his  decision,  the  Judge  sets  out  his
       conclusions.  The Judge,  having  had  an  opportunity  to  hear  the
       appellant and his  wife  give  evidence,  and  having  observed  that
       evidence tested in cross examination states:


             "54. I am not satisfied that either the Appellant or his  wife
             are reliable witnesses."


    4.  The Judge considered the various facets of the account  advanced  by
       the appellant and his wife and for the reasons set out at  paragraphs
       [55] to [66] of the decision, he rejected their account of events.  I
       do not repeat  the  findings  made  in  this  decision,  but  I  have
       carefully read through them.


 The grounds of appeal


    5. The appellant advances three grounds of appeal.  First,  it  is  said
       that the Judge erred in finding at paragraphs [21] and  [22]  of  his
       decision that:


             "21. ... I note that it was not   until   11   November   2014
             that the  Appellant  sought  the assistance of his doctor  for
             symptoms of depression and anxiety said  to  result  from  his
             traumatic experiences in the DRC, and  grief  and  bereavement
             issues  following  the  death  of  his  father,  and  his  own
             circumstances ..."


             22.  Contrary to Ms  Rogers'  submissions  the  report  of  Mr
             Narimani does not purport to contain any formal  diagnosis  of
             PTSD, and it is in any event far from clear  that  the  author
             would be qualified to make such a diagnosis ..."


       The appellant submits that the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  GP
       report of Dr Susan Jones dated 5th August 2014 that was  before  the
       Judge.  In that report it is said that the appellant has experienced
       psychological symptoms and that a diagnosis of PTSD was  made.   The
       appellant claims that the Judge failed to have regard to the  mental
       health of the appellant, and had he had  proper  regard  to  the  GP
       report that was before him, the Judge may have reached  a  different
       conclusion in relation to the appellant's evidence.


    6. Second, the Judge refers to the letter from Mr Ngombo of the UDPS but
       the Judge erred in concluding that he cannot  place  any  significant
       weight upon the letter for the reasons set out in the decision.


    7. Finally, issues had been raised as to the interpreter and his conduct
       at the hearing.  It is said that the quality and  professionalism  of
       the interpreter was directly relevant to  the  manner  in  which  the
       evidence was given by  the  appellant.   The  Judge  found  that  the
       appellant was seeking to avoid answering  questions,  but  the  Judge
       confirms that the appellant was able to address  the  point  when  he
       himself sought to clarify constituent points.  It is said that as the
       appellant was able to answer the questions and address the point,  it
       is more likely that the appellant's inability to give direct  answers
       was due to the quality of interpretation rather than any intention on
       the part of the appellant of avoiding questions.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird on
       3rd June 2015.  The matter comes before me to consider whether or not
       the determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holmes  involved  the
       making of a material error of law.





The hearing before me


    9. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Rogers adopts the grounds  of  appeal.
       She submits that the Judge had before him  the  report  of  Dr  Susan
       Jones but fails to refer to it at all.  She submits that if the Judge
       had had regard to that report, it is likely that  the  diagnosis  set
       out would have had an impact  upon  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
       credibility of the appellant.  She  submits  that  the  psychological
       report confirms that the appellant demonstrates symptoms of PTSD. She
       conceded that neither the psychological report  nor  the  GP  report,
       states that the appellant's ability  to  recollect  matters  or  give
       evidence may in some way be affected by the diagnosis,  or  that  any
       adjustment should be made  during  the  hearing  to  accommodate  the
       appellant.   Ms Rogers submits that the  Judge  simply  rejected  the
       contents  of  the  letter  from  Mr  Theophile   Ngombo,   a   senior
       representative of the UDPS/UK without looking at, or  analysing  what
       is said in his letter. She submits that the Judge  erred  in  law  in
       rejecting that letter simply because the witness did not  attend  the
       hearing.


   10.  In reply, Mr Mangion accepts that  there  is  no  reference  in  the
       decision to the report of Dr Susan  Jones  that  was  in  the  bundle
       before the Tribunal. He submits that  the  failure  to  make  express
       reference to that report is not material.  The  report  of  Dr  Jones
       does not state who it was that made the diagnosis of PTSD or how that
       diagnosis had been made. In any  event,  he  submits  that  a  simple
       reference to a diagnosis of PTSD by the Judge would not have  altered
       the outcome or the overall assessment made by the  Judge  as  to  the
       credibility of the appellant. There is no evidence that the diagnosis
       of PTSD has an impact upon the appellant's ability to recall matters.
        Mr Mangion submits  that  in  any  event  not  all  of  the  adverse
       credibility findings made by the Judge are based upon the appellant's
       inability to recall matters. There were fundamental discrepancies  in
       the appellant's account of events that simply  remained  unexplained.
       Finally, he submits that the Judge plainly had regard to  the  letter
       from Mr Ngombo.  The Judge identifies that there  are  problems  with
       the letter, and as Mr Ngombo had not attended to give  evidence,  any
       concerns could not be resolved. He submits that the Judge was, in the
       circumstances, entitled to conclude that he could attach no weight to
       that letter.


 Error of Law Decision


   11. At paragraphs [16] and [17] of the decision, the Judge refers to  the
       evidence that was before him.  I accept that the Judge does not there
       list the medical report of Dr Susan Jones dated 5th August 2014.


   12. Dr Jones confirms that the appellant joined the Arrival  Practice  on
       25th March 2014 and that the  appellant  says,  that  he  experienced
       trauma in a demonstration in the  Congo  in  2012  during  which  his
       father vanished without trace. She notes that to date, the  appellant
       has not given any detail of his experiences in the Congo.   She  goes
       on  in  the  report  to  say  that  the  appellant  has   experienced
       psychological symptoms describing poor sleep,  hyper-vigilance,  lack
       of motivation and visual and aural flashbacks. DSM 4 criteria are met
       and so a diagnosis of PTSD has been made. She sets out in the  report
       the treatment provided and referrals made.  As Ms Rogers accepts, the
       GP report does not suggest that the appellant's ability to  recollect
       matters or  give  evidence  may  in  some  way  be  affected  by  the
       diagnosis, or that any adjustment should be made during  the  hearing
       to accommodate the appellant.


   13. At paragraphs [21] and [22] of his decision the Judge does  refer  to
       the psychological report that was before him.  Although the Judge was
       right to say that the report of  Mr  Nirimani  does  not  purport  to
       contain any formal diagnosis  of  PTSD,  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  is
       confirmed in the report of Dr Jones, that has not been referred to by
       the Judge.  I accept that the Judge erred in failing to refer to  the
       report of Dr  Jones,  but  in  my  judgement  that  omission  is  not
       material.  At paragraph [22] of his decision, the Judge states:


             "22. ... There is no suggestion in the report by  Mr  Narimani
             that the Appellant would have any difficulty giving  evidence,
             or that he suffered from comprehension problems.  Nevertheless
             I have taken into account Mr  Narimani's  evidence  concerning
             the Appellant's report to him of symptoms, and his assessments
             of him, when assessing the weight that can  be  given  to  the
             Appellant's evidence."


   14. The  Judge's  observation  that  there  is  no  suggestion  that  the
       appellant would have any  difficulty  giving  evidence,  or  that  he
       suffered from comprehension problems, applies as much to  the  report
       of Dr Jones as it does to the report of Mr  Narimani.   In  assessing
       the weight that could be given to the appellant's evidence, the Judge
       clearly had in mind the appellant's  account  of  symptoms,  and  the
       assessment made by Mr Narimani of him.  I accept the submission  made
       by Mr Mangion that a simple reference to the diagnosis  of  PTSD  set
       out in the report of Dr Jones would not have altered the  outcome  or
       the overall assessment made by the Judge as to the credibility of the
       appellant and that in any event not all of  the  adverse  credibility
       findings made by the Judge, are based upon the appellant's  inability
       to recall matters.  It follows that I  reject  the  first  ground  of
       appeal.


   15. The Judge refers at paragraphs [46] and [47] of his decision  to  the
       letter from Mr Ngombo.  He states:


             "46. I have had regard to the letter from Mr Ngombo,  and  its
             content concerning the enquiries he is said to have made  into
             the Appellant and his wife.  Mr  Ngombo  did  not  attend  the
             hearing and thus was not tendered  for  cross-examination.  He
             offered no explanation for his non-attendance, and no  request
             for an adjournment because of his inability to attend, or  for
             listing arrangements to be made to accommodate him,  has  ever
             been made.


             47.  According to Mr Ngombo's letter, he has been  told  as  a
             result of his enquiries that the Appellant and his  wife  were
             arrested  around  the  end  of  December  2014.  He  makes  no
             reference to being told that the Appellant was arrested whilst
             acting as a cross-border courier for the  UDPS,  although  his
             enquiries appear to have extended to  individuals  within  the
             party in the DRC who could be expected to know of that, and to
             have confirmed it."


   16. In reaching his conclusions, the Judge states:


             "57. I am  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  given  a
             truthful account of how he came to be  in  possession  of  the
             UDPS membership card upon which he relies. I am not  satisfied
             that I can  place  any  significant  weight  upon  either  the
             laminated membership card, or the letter from Mr Ngombo. I  am
             not satisfied that either the Appellant or his wife were  ever
             members of the UDPS when living in  DRC,  or  that  they  have
             since joined  the  party.   In  the  circumstances  I  am  not
             satisfied that the Appellant was arrested in 2011 on either of
             the occasions he has identified, or in  the  circumstances  he
             has identified. I am not satisfied that either  the  Appellant
             or his wife are presently perceived by the DRC authorities  to
             be members of the UDPS, or that they will be so  perceived  in
             the event of their return to the DRC.


             ...


             61.  I derive no assistance from  any  of  the  Justice  First
             reports that have been referred to by  Mr  Ngombo,  but  which
             have not been placed in evidence before me. Their  author  has
             not been called to give evidence on behalf  of  the  Appellant
             and I am not satisfied that its content is reliable ..."


   17. In my judgement, when one reads the extracts from the decision that I
       have set out above together, it is plain that  the  Judge  considered
       the evidence of  Mr  Ngombo  properly  alongside  all  of  the  other
       evidence that was before him.  The Judge comprehensively rejected the
       appellant's account.  A finding might only be set aside for error  of
       law on the grounds of perversity if it was irrational or unreasonable
       in the Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly  unsupported  by  the
       evidence. I have  carefully  read  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and in my judgment, it was open to the  Judge  to  make  the
       findings that he did.  They are supported by the evidence and  cannot
       on any view be described as being irrational or unreasonable.  As the
       Judge noted, the letter from Mr. Ngombo makes no reference  to  being
       told that the appellant was arrested whilst acting as a  cross-border
       courier for the UDPS.  That was a material part  of  the  appellant's
       account and it was plainly open to the Judge to express his  surprise
       that there was no reference to such material activities in the letter
       from Mr Ngombo despite  the  enquiries  that  he  carried  out.   The
       anomalies could not be addressed because Mr Ngombo was not called  to
       give evidence.  In my judgement it was therefore open to the Judge to
       conclude that he was not satisfied that he can place any  significant
       weight upon the letter from Mr Ngombo and the second ground of appeal
       also fails.


   18. I turn then to the third ground of appeal and the criticism  made  as
       to the interpreter's conduct.  At paragraph [23] of his decision  the
       Judge refers to the concerns that were raised by Ms Rogers after  the
       lunch break and in the absence of appellant and the interpreter.  The
       Judge shared with both representatives, his own impressions  as  they
       were at that time.  The Judge states:


             "24. Whilst I made it clear that I had by no means reached any
             conclusion,  I  shared  with  both  representatives   my   own
             impressions formed at that point. The Appellant had not raised
             any complaint about the interpreter, and the  interpreter  had
             not yet articulated any complaint about him; although  it  was
             plain from the interpreter's body language and actions that  I
             was observing that he had on occasions found  the  Appellant's
             behaviour difficult. The  Appellant  clearly  understood  more
             English than perhaps Ms Rogers appreciated,  because  I  could
             see that he was reacting to questions  before  they  had  been
             translated, and  was  reacting  to  the  translations  of  his
             answers to add more detail whilst the  interpreter  was  still
             speaking (although not to correct him), and he had reacted  to
             the instructions that I had given him  before  they  had  been
             translated.


             ...


             26.  It was clear that some of Mr Dewison's questions were not
             being  answered,  despite  a   number   of   repetitions   and
             rephrasing.  However when I had intervened, and had  sought to
              clarify constituent points, the Appellant did usually address
             the point.


             ...


             28.  Accordingly my own impression  at  that  point  was  that
             there was no issue over the level of understanding between the
             Appellant and the interpreter,  and  that  the  Appellant  was
             indeed on occasion seeking to avoid questions upon some of the
             issues that Mr Dewison was seeking  to  address.   I  proposed
             that when the evidence resumed I should repeat my instructions
             to the Appellant and interpreter about how evidence should  be
             given, and that Ms Rogers should feel free to raise the  issue
             again if she felt  it  appropriate  to  do  so,  and  I  would
             reconsider the matter if she wished me to do so.


             29.  Having repeated those instructions to the  Appellant  and
             the interpreter, Ms Rogers did not revisit  the  issue  during
             the Appellant's evidence, or at its  conclusion,  to  request,
             the appeal be reheard with a different interpreter.


             30.   I  note  that  the  Appellant's  wife  plainly  had   no
             difficulty in understanding the interpreter and  in  answering
             the questions put to her."


   19. I reject the claim now being made by the appellant that  because  the
       appellant was able to answer the questions and address the point when
       put to him by the Judge, it  is  more  likely  that  the  appellant's
       inability  to  give  direct  answers  was  due  to  the  quality   of
       interpretation rather than any intention on the part of the appellant
       of avoiding questions.


   20. The Judge carefully addressed, in the absence of  the  appellant  and
       the interpreter, the concern that had been raised by Ms  Rogers  that
       the appellant was not giving his evidence in the manner in  which  he
       behaved when interviewed by herself for the purpose of preparing  his
       witness statement.  It does not follow that because a witness is able
       to answer the question when the question  is  put  by  a  Judge,  the
       witness's inability to give direct answers to question put in  cross-
       examination is likely to be due  to  the  quality  of  interpretation
       rather than any intention on the part  of  the  witness  of  avoiding
       questions.  A witness would have as much  difficulty  addressing  the
       question put by the Judge using the same interpreter, as  he  or  she
       would have, if that question were asked  in  cross-examination.   The
       quality of the interpretation would not differ.  The purpose of cross
       examination is to probe and test an account and it is often the  case
       that a witness will refuse to give direct  answers  to  the  question
       put.  That may be for one of  any  number  of  reasons,  including  a
       realisation that the answer would be at odds with other  evidence  or
       simply as a distraction technique because the question  affords  only
       one answer, that would not assist the witness.  It is often the  case
       that a Judge will intervene when a question has been put to a witness
       several times by an advocate, and at that point when pressed  by  the
       Judge, an answer is forthcoming.


   21. Here, the Judge notes at paragraph [28] of his decision that his  own
       impression  was  that  there  was  no  issue  over   the   level   of
       understanding between the appellant and the interpreter, and that the
       appellant was indeed on occasion, seeking  to  avoid  questions  upon
       some of the issues that Mr Dewison was seeking  to  address.  As  the
       Judge notes,  when  the  hearing  resumed,  the  Judge  repeated  his
       instructions to the appellant  and  interpreter  about  how  evidence
       should be given, and Ms Rogers was free to raise the issue  again  if
       she felt it appropriate to do so.  She did not do  so  either  during
       the hearing or at any time before receiving the Judge's decision.


   22. It follows that the appeal is dismissed

Notice of Decision


   23. The appeal is dismissed.

Signed                                  Date 28th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 28th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
