
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05028/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th January 2019                 |31st January 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     WA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  in
this determination identified as WA.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings

 1. On 15th January 2018, the Court of Appeal set aside the decision of the
    Upper Tribunal promulgated on  23rd  February  2016  and  remitted  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal for a full  rehearing  on  Article  3  and
    Article 8.

 2. WA is an Afghan national born on 20th March 1996. He came to the UK  on
    7th March 2012 aged  15  and  claimed  asylum.  His  asylum  claim  was
    rejected but he was granted discretionary leave to  remain  until  19th
    September 2013. An application made for further  leave  to  remain  was
    refused and his appeal dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal.  Although
    he was granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that although there were legal errors in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal, none were material. The appeal to the Court of
    Appeal against that decision was  upheld  and  hence  the  appeal  came
    before me. The appeal is on his Article 3 and 8 claim only; it  is  not
    on asylum grounds. WA continues to have s3C leave to remain in the UK.

 3. The undisputed facts:

      a) WA came to the UK as a child;

      b) His parents and siblings died in a road traffic accident;

      c) There was no significant  evidence  that  WA  suffered  mental  ill
         health until January 2015;

      d) Since January 2015, WA has  attempted  suicide  on  four  occasions
         although  none  were  sufficiently  close  to  success  to  require
         admission to hospital;

      e) On or around 2nd October 2015 he  was  assessed  under  the  mental
         health Act 1983 and received 2  recommendations  for  admission  to
         hospital but was not admitted  because  he  received  an  intensive
         package of outpatient support including daily  home  visits  as  an
         alternative;

      f) He has  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  a  severe  depressive
         disorder

 4. I heard oral evidence from:

       . WA's maternal uncle (uncle 1) who is also related to WA through his
         wife who is his paternal aunt;

       . Uncle 2 who is uncle 1's brother; uncle 2's wife is not related  to
         WA save through marriage.

       . Ms J Stevenson, cluster lead,  Assessment  and  Treatment  Service,
         Millview Hospital

       . Michael Davis, Support Worker, Route One Brighton Housing Trust

 5. I did not hear oral evidence from WA - his vulnerability, mental health
    and the availability of other evidence meant that it was unlikely  that
    anything significant would be achieved hearing from him and  there  was
    no need to cause him unnecessary distress.

 6. There was documentary medical evidence in the bundle. Ms Isherwood  did
    not challenge the reports (save in so far as they  commented  upon  the
    availability  of  mental  health  services  and  support  networks   in
    Afghanistan) from Dr Patrick Le Seve (consultant  psychiatrist,  report
    dated 5th November 2018 following a review on 2nd  November  2018);  Dr
    Alice  Brooke  (ST4  Higher  Specialist  Trainee   in   General   Adult
    Psychiatry, report dated 19th June 2018 following clinic appointment on
    18th June 2018);  Dr  Chockalingam  (CT2  to  Dr  Le  Seve,  consultant
    psychiatrist, two reports dated 26th October 2017  and  14th  September
    2017). There were other earlier reports, none of which  were  disputed;
    all of which show that this appellant has  been  receiving  psychiatric
    services for more than 3 years.

 7. The medical evidence from Dr Le Seve confirms:

       . He is  on  daily  medication  -  Pregabalin  (300mg  twice  daily);
         Risperidone  (1mg  twice  daily);  Mirtazipine  (45mg  at   night);
         Venlafiaxine xl (225mg once daily).

       .  He  continues  to  present  with  severe  symptoms   of   PTSD   -
         hypervigilance,  heightened  startle  reflex,  paranoia,   anxiety,
         somatic pain, flashbacks,  vivid  nightmares  and  an  overwhelming
         belief that unnamed others are looking for him and will  eventually
         find and kill him.

       . He does not go out on his own because he is fearful of  others  and
         will only reluctantly go out with people he trusts; he  cannot  use
         public transport; he easily becomes lost and fails to remember  who
         people are.

       . The risk of completed suicide is increasing as the court case  gets
         closer.

       . The risk of self-harm or completed suicide on  a  journey  back  to
         Afghanistan is extremely high.

       . He benefits from regular medication, social and family support  and
         safe accommodation provided by Brighton Housing Trust.

       . He is in need of individual trauma work but given current inability
         to form memories he needs a period of  prolonged  stability  before
         this can be considered.

       . He is highly dependent upon family  members  who  visit  him  daily
         accommodation providers and secondary mental  health  services.  He
         cannot prepare simple meals.

       . He is highly vulnerable to exploitation and self-neglect.

 8. Earlier reports are in similar vein. There is reference to WA retaining
    capacity to make decisions about his ongoing  care  and  treatment  and
    that there remains a  risk  to  self-harm.  The  identified  protective
    factors are his aunts and uncles, the care team,  good  engagement  and
    'vague hopes for the future'.

 9. Ms Stevenson confirmed she had completed the care plan but  that  there
    were errors because parts of the plan  that  were  completed  when  she
    first had contact  with  him  were  not  subsequently  amended  as  she
    continued contact. She confirmed overall that he had daily visits  from
    family members, that they provided cooking, shopping and cleaning tasks
    for him and that without such intense support he would  be  at  serious
    risk of suicide. She said she had tried to engage him  in  the  various
    refugee services that exist in the Hove and Brighton area but  that  he
    was frightened of engaging with people from his own community. She gave
    examples of him flinching when people walked past  if  they  were  out,
    that he doesn't pray and doesn't go to community  centres.  When  asked
    about the reference in Dr  Brooks  report  to  WA  having  no  suicidal
    ideation, she said that Dr Brooks had only met  him  for  a  relatively
    short period of time whereas she had had continued contact with him for
    many months. She said that at the time he may  not  have  had  suicidal
    ideation but that in her view he would attempt suicide if he went  back
    because he has no resources to fall back on.  She  confirmed  that  the
    last attempt was  'maybe  2  years  ago'.  Ms  Isherwood  drew  to  her
    attention to the observation in the reports that appeared  to  indicate
    that his suicidal ideation increased in proximity to court  proceedings
    yet despite there being court proceedings since the last attempt, there
    had been no further attempts. Ms Stevenson's evidence was that he could
    not cope at all. When asked  whether,  if  there  were  facilities  and
    accommodation in Afghanistan, he would be able to cope she said that if
    family support, psychiatric review, accommodation and  medication  were
    there he would be able to cope. But without all of that he  would  not.
    In reply to a question about capacity and ability to make decisions she
    gave her opinion that if a formal capacity assessment  was  undertaken,
    he would not have capacity.

10. Mr Davis gave evidence that although the formal arrangement is that  he
    should see WA once a week, with him it is more informal and probably  a
    couple of times a week and some weeks every  day;  more  recently  they
    have been meeting for an hour once a week as well as the more  informal
    meetings. He confirmed that his uncle and/or aunt see WA daily. He said
    that although he, Mr Davis, did not see them  every  day,  whenever  he
    spoke with WA he would say that his uncle/aunt  had  brought  food/done
    washing. Mr Davis said that he had  never  seen  WA  prepare  food  for
    himself, that if he is outside it is because  he  is  waiting  for  his
    uncle/aunt and he's always dropped off or collected by his  uncle/aunt.
    There were no exceptions to this.

11. WA had originally lived with his uncle 1 but had been  asked  to  leave
    November 2014 because his  behaviour  and  nightmares  were  having  an
    adverse effect on uncle 1's children and family life.

12. The evidence from the two uncles was broadly consistent  and  consisted
    of confirmation that the  two  wives  did  the  shopping,  cooking  and
    laundry for WA; took him where he needed to be if his  support  workers
    couldn't (including college). Family members phoned him when they  were
    not with him, sometimes several times a day, to remind him to take  his
    medication. There were inconsistencies in the evidence between the  two
    uncles, there was a written statement from only one  wife  and  neither
    wife gave oral evidence. Ms Isherwood took issue with  the  reliability
    of their evidence both because of the inconsistencies (at times neither
    knew what each other did or which wife did what)  and  because  of  the
    lack of oral evidence from either wife. I place very little weight upon
    the discrepancies. The picture drawn by these two men was of a  nephew,
    the appellant, for whom their wives did virtually everything, that  the
    two wives organised his support between them and the  two  uncles  were
    not involved in the day to day  arrangements.  Ms  Isherwood  intimated
    that WA  had  been  permitted  to  become  so  dependant  and  was  not
    necessarily unable to undertake general day to day  tasks.  It  may  be
    that WA has been "enabled" to become so heavily dependent but  the  two
    uncles obvious concern for his well-being and the indications that  the
    appellant was unable to cope with day to day living was consistent with
    the medical evidence relied upon.

13. Ms Isherwood submitted that Ms Stevenson and  Mr  Davies  were  heavily
    involved with the appellant and their  evidence  couldn't  be  seen  as
    objective evidence of his needs and lack  of  ability  to  cope.  Their
    evidence  was  consistent  with  the  medical  evidence  save  that  Ms
    Stevenson took the view that the appellant lacked capacity  and  either
    had suicidal ideation a considerable amount of the time or would become
    so if stressed. I do not accept her evidence that the  appellant  lacks
    capacity. If that were the case I would have expected formal assessment
    to be undertaken given the medication and treatment  he  is  receiving.
    The medical evidence from the psychiatrists treating him  was  that  he
    did not lack capacity.

14. In so far as  suicidal  ideation  is  concerned  I  do  not  accept  Ms
    Stevenson's evidence to that  effect.  It  differs  from  that  of  the
    treating psychiatrist and there is no indication in her  evidence  that
    supports that contention. He has had court cases which have not led  to
    suicide attempts although I do of course accept that  there  have  been
    attempts in the past. Other than these issues, Ms Stevenson's  evidence
    was broadly consistent with that of the treating psychiatrists and  the
    family members.

15. I accept that the appellant  does  no  shopping,  cooking,  laundry  or
    cleaning for himself. I am not satisfied that he is  physically  unable
    to undertake these tasks, but I do accept that  his  mental  health  at
    present prevents him taking personal responsibility for his day-to  day
    life. I also accept what is said by Dr  Le  Seve  that  once  there  is
    stability in his status then psychotherapy would be  of  assistance  in
    his recovery. I assume that such  would  be  undertaken  with  the  co-
    operation of the family and support workers.  The  indications  in  the
    reports are that such treatment, whilst  perhaps  not  resulting  in  a
    "cure", would result in him being able to cope on a day to day basis.

16. Ms Isherwood drew attention to a number of matters that indicated  that
    the appellant was not, now, as dependant as claimed. For  example,  she
    referred to the GP notes which indicate that he  telephones  and  makes
    his own appointments, that he attended college for  one,  possibly  two
    courses, that he has used taxis in the past and has been  able  to  ask
    strangers for assistance. She drew attention to the  evidence  that  he
    spends much of his time alone, receives telephone calls to  remind  him
    to take his medication and is  living  in  low  support  accommodation.
    Although the evidence was that there were no direct blood relatives  in
    Afghanistan, Ms Isherwood submitted that uncle 2's  wife  (who  is  not
    related by blood) does have relatives and there was no reason why  they
    could not be asked for assistance.

17. In terms of the country material and the extract from the report by  Dr
    Giustozzi, Ms Isherwood submitted that there  was  adequate  medication
    available, albeit not free but the uncles had said they would  continue
    to  support  him  financially,  that  there  was  evidence  of  medical
    facilities and treatment for mental health available  although  not  of
    the standard in the UK. She reiterated that the appellant did not  lack
    capacity; that he was in low support accommodation and  that  this  did
    not sit  well  with  the  family's  submission  that  he  was  of  high
    dependency. She submitted that the family ties  were  not  such  as  to
    amount to family life.

18. Mr Hodson did not concede that the appellant could not  meet  the  high
    threshold of Article 3 but indicated  that  his  submissions  would  be
    primarily focussed on  Article  8.  On  conclusion  of  Ms  Isherwood's
    submission, given the time, I agreed that  Mr  Hodson  could  make  his
    submissions in  writing  which  he  did  very  promptly.  Ms  Isherwood
    confirmed having received those written  submissions  and  she  had  no
    further comments to make.

    Article 3

19. In response to a query raised by the respondent to the  Country  Policy
    and Information  Team,  the  respondent  submitted  that  inpatient  or
    outpatient treatment with follow up by a psychologist,  CBT,  EMDR  and
    narrative exposure therapy was available  in  Kabul  for  treatment  of
    PTSD;  that  long-  and  short-term  clinical  treatment  for   chronic
    conditions is available, various antipsychotic medicine  is  available.
    Mr Hodson did not dispute this or provide contrary evidence.

20. There is no doubt but that the  appellant  is  suffering  from  serious
    mental health problems for  which  he  has  been  receiving  consistent
    treatment in the UK. The medical reports  state  that  he  will  be  at
    increased suicide risk on  notification  of  and  during  removal.  The
    respondent is aware  of  the  seriousness  of  his  condition  and  the
    treatment he has been receiving. He has access to the  various  medical
    reports and the treatment the appellant  has  been  receiving  and  the
    medication regime he is prescribed. There is every reason  to  conclude
    that if removed, the process of removal will be adequately  managed  in
    the light of that information.

21. Uncle 2 has travelled to Afghanistan since he obtained  his  status  in
    the UK, albeit not recently. There was no evidence that  he  could  not
    travel  with  the  appellant  and  make   arrangements   for   adequate
    psychiatric and psychological treatment to be made available for him on
    arrival to  avoid  the  possible  dire  consequences  of  him  arriving
    unattended in what for the  appellant  is  a  frightening  and  strange
    place. There was no evidence that he either  would  not  or  could  not
    afford to pay for the necessary medication or  psychological  treatment
    at least in the short to medium term whilst the  appellant  adjusts  to
    living in Afghanistan.

22. I do not accept that the reception  of  the  appellant  in  Afghanistan
    would be such that the risks to the appellant would meet the very  high
    Article 3 threshold. The evidence before me was such that such risks as
    there were could be adequately managed, although I accept that it would
    be very distressing for the appellant and could have consequences  such
    as would lead him  to  have  to  be  admitted  as  an  inpatient  to  a
    psychiatric unit. Nevertheless, the high threshold is not met.

23. I dismiss the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

    Paragraph 276ADE/Article 8.

24.  Mr  Hodson  submits  that  the  appellant   falls   within   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) namely that there are very significant obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Afghanistan.

25. The appellant has a significant subjective  fear  of  individuals  from
    Afghanistan. Although not objectively well founded, it is  nevertheless
    of  importance  in  the  assessment   of   the   appellant's   possible
    integration. I accept the evidence that the appellant cannot deal  with
    strangers or situations where he has no previous knowledge, that he has
    no or very  little  memory  recall  and  that  he  is  fearful  of  new
    situations and people he does not know. I accept that he is fearful  of
    people from his own country, that he feels no affiliation with them and
    that he genuinely feels  that  unnamed  individuals  are  "after  him".
    Although he has on occasions managed to ask for directions, get a taxi,
    phone to make GP appointment and attend college, these have been  small
    activities that in the overall picture  of  his  dependency  on  family
    members and his support workers do not indicate any ability  to  "cope"
    on his own without considerable and  continuous  support.  Particularly
    telling was the evidence of Mr Davis and Ms Stevenson of the length  of
    time it took before the appellant would have much to do with  Mr  Davis
    and that it is only recently, after several months of  engagement  that
    Mr Davis has been able to talk to the appellant for as long as an  hour
    and engage with him on more than merely passing communication.

26. The appellant's private life in the UK is inextricably  bound  up  with
    his engagement with social and mental health services. Almost his whole
    life is spent either with those support services or alone in his  room.
    He does not work, read, shop, clean  or  cook.  Some  of  this  may  be
    cultural but his private life is highly dependent on others and without
    that input there is little doubt but that  he  would  not  provide  for
    himself. This is evidence not only from the evidence of his two  uncles
    but the medical reports and the  evidence  from  Ms  Stevenson  and  Mr
    Davis.

27. The relationship the appellant has with his two uncles and their  wives
    is highly dependent. He is given reminders to take his  medication  and
    all his personal life is organised by the two wives. He does  virtually
    nothing for himself.

28. Although submitted to the contrary by Ms Isherwood, I am satisfied that
    the relationship between the appellant and his family in the UK is that
    of dependency and closeness; although an adult he is to all intents and
    purposes a child of those two families.

29. I am satisfied that in Article 8 terms he has  established  family  and
    private life in the UK, and the  removal  of  him  from  the  UK  would
    interfere with that.

30. The appellant has no siblings, aunts or uncles  in  Afghanistan.  There
    are no relatives there upon whom  he  could  call  for  assistance.  Ms
    Isherwood submitted that  Uncle  2's  wife's  family  could  be  either
    expected to assist or could be asked to assist and that request had not
    been made. Uncle 2's evidence  was  that  this  was  not  possible;  he
    appeared quite flabbergasted that  her  family  could  be  expected  to
    assist a non-blood relative with whom they have had no interaction.  He
    described their employment as that of labourers  but  more  importantly
    that they had no familial duty to assist,  he  was  not  sure  to  what
    extent they were aware of the appellant's mental  health  problems  and
    that  assistance  would  simply  not  be  forthcoming.  I  accept  that
    evidence. I accept the evidence that Uncle 2's  wife  gives  assistance
    because she is, through marriage, part  of  the  family.  There  is  no
    reason why a family who are not related should  assist.  The  appellant
    had to leave uncle 1's home because of his  behaviour.  Return  of  the
    appellant to the country where he has such significant subjective  fear
    to individuals who have no obligation to assist him  would  not,  I  am
    satisfied result in him receiving any assistance.

31. The  current  position  is  therefore  that  this  appellant  would  be
    returning to a country where he has a significant subjective fear  that
    unnamed individuals wish to cause him serious harm or even kill him; he
    has serious mental health problems that require medication to be  taken
    at varying times of the day; he is unable to shop, cook,  clean  or  do
    laundry for himself; he is fearful of those he does  not  know  to  the
    extent that he does not engage with anyone until  he  has  built  up  a
    relationship which can take months; although living  semi-independently
    he requires psychiatric review on a 6 monthly basis.

32. I am satisfied that if he returns to Kabul with his uncle who finds him
    accommodation and links him up with the psychiatric outpatient services
    that are available, and remains with him  for  a  period  of  time,  he
    would, on the departure of his uncle, fall into a  situation  where  he
    would not engage with the services available, would not shop,  cook  or
    clean or do his laundry and would simply  remain  in  his  room  alone.
    Although Ms Isherwood is correct that he already spends time  alone  in
    his room and sleeping, his day to day care is provided by  his  family.
    He does not starve. Without the support and care of his family as it is
    now provided, there is no evidence - medical or social - that he  would
    begin to take care of himself or be able to integrate to even a limited
    extent in society. The evidence is that he would not be able to  engage
    with the psychiatric services available in the absence of support  from
    either support workers or his family.  It  is  unreasonable  to  expect
    either of his uncles or their wives to return to  Kabul  with  him  and
    remain living there with him - they have families and jobs here in  the
    UK.

33. Ms Isherwood also  correctly  observed  that  at  present  he  receives
    reminders to take his medication from family members by  telephone,  if
    they are not present with him. This could continue by telephone when he
    is in Kabul. But those telephone  reminders  are  part  of  an  overall
    package of support that is provided by his family - if it were simply a
    case that he needed a phone call to take his medication then  he  could
    clearly return without problem to Kabul. But there is so very much more
    to the support he requires and currently receives.

34. Reintegration into a country requires engagement to at least a  minimal
    level. The appellant's engagement in the  UK  cannot  be  described  as
    minimal; to do so would not be an  accurate  reflection  of  his  life.
    Taking out of the equation  the  engagement  he  has  with  psychiatric
    services his life is focussed on the engagement with his  family  which
    enables social interaction, even though not to a great extent.  He  may
    well be able to achieve the level of interaction that he  has  with  Ms
    Stevenson and Mr Davis with similar individuals in Kabul  in  time  and
    with considerable assistance. But on return to Kabul,  that  assistance
    could not be there other than for a short period of time if  his  uncle
    went with him. I am satisfied that he would  not  have  any  supportive
    links in Kabul and that the possibility of achieving such  links  would
    be minimal if not non-existent without family support; he would have no
    meaningful family support other  than  in  the  very  short  term.  His
    integration in Kabul would be non-existent to the extent that he  would
    be unable to feed and clothe himself with any semblance of dignity.

35. I am satisfied that taking all of  these  factors  into  account  there
    exist, at present, very significant obstacles to his reintegration into
    Afghanistan. I am satisfied that this situation will continue  for  the
    foreseeable future until he  has  received  the  necessary  psychiatric
    treatment such that he is enabled to cope without the  intensive  input
    from family members. Of course, he may not live a full and social life,
    but his reintegration in Kabul may well be  achievable  after  adequate
    medical intervention.

36. The extent of this situation may, as suggested by  Ms  Isherwood,  have
    been enabled by his family  in  the  UK,  for  all  the  right  reasons
    including the desire not to see him suffer. Nevertheless,  the  medical
    evidence is highly suggestive that until he is able to receive adequate
    treatment that situation will continue. The medical evidence  indicates
    that such treatment is unlikely to be able to start  or  be  successful
    until his status is more stable. There is no indication in the  medical
    evidence how long such treatment is likely to take or what  the  likely
    outcome will be. But it does seem that  a  positive  outcome  would  be
    achievable.

37. In conclusion therefore I am satisfied that there currently exist  very
    significant   obstacles   to   the   appellant's   reintegration   into
    Afghanistan. I am satisfied that the appellant has established  private
    and family life in the  UK  such  that  Article  8  is  engaged.  I  am
    satisfied that the removal of the appellant  to  Afghanistan  would  be
    disproportionate.

38. I allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by  dismissing  the  appeal  under
    Article 3 and allowing it under Article 8.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 29th January 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
