
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA052052015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th June 2016                              |On 14th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                          MS Binal Dipakkumar Patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is  an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant  with
    permission granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  appeal
    before the First-tier  Tribunal  came  before  Judge  Ross  sitting  at
    Harmondsworth on 1st  March  this  year.   On  that  occasion  she  was
    represented, as now, by Mr Turner of Counsel.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Kenya born on 27th July 1989.  She  came
    to the UK in July 2008 as a student.  She is now married to a Pakistani
    national who entered the UK in May 2007, also as a student.  He at  the
    time of the First-tier hearing had no leave to be in the UK and  indeed
    had been served with papers as an overstayer.

 3. The Appellant herself had applied for leave to remain as a  student  on
    four separate occasions between September 2010 and March  2011  all  of
    which were refused.   In  March  2013  she  submitted  a  human  rights
    application which was also refused and then on 18th February  2015  she
    was served with papers as an overstayer.  After that in March 2015  she
    made an asylum claim.  She had a screening interview in March 2015 when
    she explained that she had converted to Islam and had adopted a  Muslim
    name, Isha Irfan.

 4. She said that although she was a Kenyan national she had been  born  in
    India and that her husband was from Pakistan.  She had left Kenya using
    her own passport and when asked why she could not return to  Kenya  she
    said it was because she had married a Muslim person, she had  converted
    to Islam and her Hindu family did not accept her and  she  feared  that
    they would kill her.

 5. The husband was also interviewed and he said that for  similar  reasons
    his own family in Pakistan did not accept his marriage to a  Hindu  and
    they would kill him if he returned to Pakistan.

 6. The judge set out the basis of the Appellant's claim between paragraphs
    2 and 6 of the Decision and then  set  out  the  Secretary  of  State's
    reasons for refusal from paragraph 7 up to and including paragraph  11.
    The judge then set out the evidence at the hearing from  paragraphs  13
    to 18 and in those paragraphs the judge  noted  the  Appellant's  claim
    that her father was a business tycoon very well  known  in  Kenya  with
    lots of contacts and he would find out if she returned.

 7. She said that he had been disappointed when she refused  to  marry  the
    man he had selected.  That was a disabled British citizen she  did  not
    wish to marry and she explained that having received threats  from  her
    family on Facebook between 2011 and 2013 she did not  close  down  that
    account as she wanted to keep herself up-to-date.  Her evidence was she
    could not be with her husband outside of the UK and considered  the  UK
    to be her home.  There was no guarantee her husband would be allowed to
    accompany her to Kenya and she has no contacts in Kenya.   Her  parents
    live in a place in the North.  She could not relocate to  another  area
    because she would be in fear as a result of her family.  She also  gave
    evidence that she was pregnant with a baby due in October.

 8. The judge also referred to the evidence of the Appellant's husband,  Mr
    Irfan Shahzad.  He confirmed  that  his  wife  having  originally  been
    Hindu, his family did not accept her and that he would be killed if  he
    returned with her to Pakistan.  However, it is also noted at  paragraph
    18 that the husband conceded there was no legal bar to them  living  in
    Pakistan but there were the problems  over  the  marriage  and  corrupt
    police.

 9. The Judge then moved on to his findings which are  contained  in  three
    paragraphs, 22, 23 and 24, and it is those  paragraphs  which  are  the
    subject of challenge by Mr Turner.  The grounds of appeal, specifically
    at paragraph 7, assert that the judge has made perverse and  irrational
    findings in relation to matters that  were  material  to  the  outcome,
    which amounts to a material error of law.

10. As Mr Tufan  says,  there  is  a  high  threshold  for  perversity  and
    irrationality.  There are two points to the arguments put forward by Mr
    Turner.  The first is contained in paragraph 22 and relates to an error
    in relation to something the Judge says  about  the  Facebook  entries.
    The judge makes a comment in that paragraph that: "I also have concerns
    about whether the Facebook  entries  have  been  created  in  order  to
    support her claim for asylum." It is pointed out that given  her  claim
    for asylum was only made in 2015 and the Facebook entries predated that
    by some years that could not be the case.  Mr Turner argues that taints
    all of the credibility findings as it is the main basis for the Judge's
    adverse finding.

11. However, what the Judge also says in that paragraph is  that  there  is
    evidence from the Facebook entries that the father  in  Kenya  is  most
    upset with her for marrying a Muslim but he did not consider  that  the
    evidence demonstrated that the Appellant considered  that  the  threats
    would be carried out.  The Judge considered that if she had thought  so
    she would have changed her Facebook address or closed  it.   The  Judge
    also found that if she had been genuinely concerned about her  position
    on return she would have applied for asylum soon after she  married  in
    2011 rather than waiting until March 2015.

12. There is then a comment about  concerns  as  to  the  creation  of  the
    entries.  However, the Judge carries on to  note  that  the  family  in
    Kenya were trying to marry off their daughter to a British person  even
    though that person was disabled and  says  that  suggests  there  is  a
    fairly strong agenda for the Appellant to obtain  residence  status  in
    the UK.  Mr Turner  argues  that  comment  refers  to  the  Appellant's
    agenda.  I disagree. That sentence, it is quite clear to me, relates to
    the parents' agenda.

13. The Judge goes on to say that the Appellant's credibility  is  somewhat
    undermined in relation to her parents' attitude to her because  on  the
    one hand she sought to  illustrate  a  dictatorial  attitude  from  her
    father, saying that when she declined to  marry  the  disabled  man  he
    ordered her to come home, but then conceded that that was in  fact  not
    correct because he had supported her application to remain in the UK.

14. At paragraph 23 the Judge  went  on  to  find  there  was  no  reliable
    evidence that if the Appellant was to return to Kenya with her  husband
    she would not be able to live in another part of the country, away from
    her parents.   The Judge said:- "It is  claimed  that  her  father  has
    considerable influence in Kenya but I do not accept that  this  is  the
    case.  He is a local businessman.  Kenya is a very large country with a
    population of over 40,000,000 people.   There  are  substantial  cities
    such as Nairobi with large populations.  I do not consider that if  the
    Appellant was to return to Kenya her parents would be  aware  that  she
    had come back".  The Judge also noted that her family had not contacted
    her since 2014 and there was thus no  evidence  to  suggest  that  they
    would still wish to harm her.

15. Mr Turner argued that  those  findings  are  speculative  and  required
    corroboration, which is not permitted in asylum cases.   They  are  not
    speculative.  They are based on the evidence.  The burden of  proof  is
    on the Appellant and there was no evidence that she would be unable  to
    live elsewhere in what is a very highly populated large country and the
    considerable influence and position that her father has, given that  it
    is her father, she ought to have been able to obtain  evidence  of  his
    high profile.

16. The Judge also notes that Hindus are a very small  minority  in  Kenya,
    less than 1% of the population,  so  the  Appellant's  claim  that  the
    Hindus will target her is a matter of no weight.  There is a suggestion
    by Mr Turner that she would be instantly identifiable  as  someone  who
    has converted from Hindu to Muslim.  I do not see why  that  should  be
    the case, particularly as she has adopted a Muslim name.

17. Mr Turner argues that the findings are simply too brief and inadequate.
     However, it is not always necessary to  make  very  deep  and  lengthy
    findings.  If the issues are  narrow  and  straightforward  then  brief
    findings suffice and it is the case that in those  two  paragraphs  the
    judge has adequately dealt with  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    claim and the risk to her on return.

18. There was then some discussion over  the  husband's  evidence  that  he
    could not live with his wife in Pakistan.  However, that is  completely
    irrelevant because what the judge has found is that there is no  reason
    to suggest that the Appellant cannot return to Kenya  and  arrangements
    be made for her husband to join  her  there.   Having  found  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk then there is no  reason  to  go  on  to
    consider whether or not they could live in Pakistan.

Notice of Decision

For the above reasons I find  that  the  Decision  of  the  judge  does  not
contain an error of law  material  to  the  outcome  and  I  uphold  it.   I
therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
