
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 May 2015                        |On 15 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     TA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Anyene, Counsel, instructed by Capital
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim and on the basis of his minority.

 2. For the purposes of this decision we refer to TA as the  appellant  and
    to the Secretary of State for the Home Department  as  the  respondent,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. This is an appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State  which
    refused TA's application for leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR grounds.



 4. The decision of the respondent  was  originally  also  made  on  asylum
    grounds, but it was common ground before us that that  matter  went  no
    further where it had been decided against the appellant in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and no cross-appeal against it was brought before  us  at
    any stage.

 5. The Article 8 ECHR claim came before us following the decision  of  the
    Honourable Mrs  Justice  Andrews  and  Upper  Tribunal  Pitt  dated  13
    November 2014 which found an error of law in the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Samimi. That error of law decision is appended hereto.

 6. In summary the Tribunal found that  the  failure  to  address  a  clear
    conflict in the evidence between that of the  appellant  and  his  aunt
    concerning contact with the appellant's parents  in  Bangladesh  and  a
    British High Commission  Field  Report  had  not  been  addressed,  the
    failure to do sufficiently undermining the decision that it had  to  be
    set aside and remade.

 7. We heard oral evidence from  the  appellant's  aunt,  Miss  Nessa,  and
    submissions from the two legal representatives.

 8. We should indicate initially that on the day before the hearing we were
    provided with a psychological report of  Dr  Michael  George  dated  27
    March 2015.  This was new evidence not before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and not before the Upper Tribunal at the  time  of  the  error  of  law
    hearing in November 2014.  We asked the representatives to address  the
    provisions of Rule 15(2A) of Tribunal  Procedure  Rules.   Rule  15(2A)
    indicates that in an asylum or in an immigration case if a party wishes
    the Upper Tribunal to consider evidence that was not before the  First-
    tier Tribunal that party must send or deliver a  notice  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and any other party indicating the nature of the evidence  and
    explaining why it was not submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. Firstly we should indicate that Mr Anyene conceded that no such  notice
    had been served on the Upper Tribunal.  It was also argued  that  there
    was really nothing by way of an explanation as to why that evidence had
    not been before the First-tier  Tribunal.   Further,  as  indicated  by
    paragraph 15(2A)(B) it is also a criterion when considering whether  to
    admit evidence that we address  whether  there  has  been  unreasonable
    delay in producing the evidence.  It was our view that there  had  been
    such unreasonable delay given that the claim was made to the respondent
    over a year ago, that the application was refused, that it came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and has already  been  once  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal but no  such  report  provided.   The  unreasonable  delay  is
    compounded by the fact that the report appears to have  written  on  27
    March 2015 and was only received  over  a  month  later  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 30 April 2015.

10. Those matters led us to decline to admit the psychological report.

11. We should also deal with a further preliminary  matter  which  is  that
    Miss Nessa gave her evidence in English  and  without  an  interpreter.
    She indicated at the beginning that it would be easier for her to  give
    evidence as she  had  done  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  an
    interpreter.  It remains  the  case  that  directions  issued  for  the
    hearing indicated in terms at paragraph 4 that no interpreter would  be
    booked for the hearing unless the party was unrepresented.  Miss  Nessa
    is represented.

12. That original direction was repeated in the specific direction of Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt dated 18 November 2014 which at paragraph 3 stated:

         "It is expected that the appellant's aunt will give evidence. If an
         interpreter is required a request should be made within 14 days  of
         the date of issue of this direction."

 1. No such request has been made at any time.

 2. It also appeared to us from the responses that Miss Nessa gave  at  the
    hearing that she understood the questions  and  was  able  to  put  her
    answer in sufficiently clear terms.  It was not suggested by either  of
    the parties that this was not so.  No application  for  an  adjournment
    was made before us on this or any other basis. For all of those reasons
    we proceeded with the hearing in the absence of an interpreter.

 3. As referred to briefly above, a key matter before us  was  to  reach  a
    finding on the conflict in the evidence between  the  contents  of  the
    British High Commission Report dated 30 June 2014 covering the visit to
    the appellant's family in Bangladesh and the evidence of the  appellant
    in his written statements that he had had no contact  with  his  mother
    since she telephoned some four years ago to say she  was  returning  to
    Bangladesh without him, that also being the evidence of his aunt in her
    written and oral evidence.

 4. Miss Nessa told us that she could not comment on  the  content  of  the
    report which stated that there was monthly  regular  telephone  contact
    between the appellant and his parents in Bangladesh.  She did not  know
    why the report said that and she could not take the matter any further.
     She, and as we understood it, Mr Anyene, did not seek to  dispute  the
    fact that the field visit had taken place.  It appeared to us from  the
    details provided giving the address, family details and so on that were
    entirely consistent with those provided by the appellant  that  it  had
    taken place. The amount of detail in the report indicated to  us  that,
    on the balance of probabilities, it was a reliable document.  Where  it
    said that regular contact was maintained on a monthly basis between the
    appellant and his family in Bangladesh, having considered  all  of  the
    evidence before us, including that of Miss Nessa and the  appellant  to
    the contrary, it was our view that we could place weight on  the  field
    visit report.

 5. We also reached this view where Miss Nessa accepted that she had  known
    of the report at least a year ago. The High Commission  had  apparently
    had no difficulty in finding the appellant's  family  and  obtaining  a
    mobile telephone number for the appellant's father.  It  was  difficult
    for us to understand why the family in the UK had  made  no  effort  on
    behalf of the appellant to contact his parents in Bangladesh given that
    it was clearly possible to do so.  This was an additional reason for us
    placing less weight on the evidence of Miss Nessa and the appellant. We
    did not find that we could accept the claim that the appellant had been
    abandoned by his family in Bangladesh given the contents of  the  field
    report and limited weight attracting to the evidence of Miss Nessa  and
    the appellant.

 6. Moving on to the Article 8 assessment, in light of  those  findings  of
    fact, it was common ground before us that the appellant cannot meet the
    provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules  contained  in  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE regarding family and private life. We therefore had to
    look behind those provisions to a second stage Article 8 assessment  to
    establish whether there were compelling circumstances that should  lead
    to the matter being allowed nevertheless.

 7. We approached the second stage assessment in light of the  five  Razgar
    questions.  It was our view that given that the appellant came  to  the
    UK aged 11 and is now 15, it was the case that  he  had  established  a
    private life during the four years that he has been  here  and  also  a
    family life with those relatives with whom he has been living full-time
    in that period.  We found this to be so where he is a minor  and  these
    are formative years and he can be expected to still need to form  close
    bonds with family members around him who are caring and supporting him.



 8. We should indicate immediately, however, that we reach this view in the
    light of our finding above  that  he  has  retained  contact  with  his
    parents in Bangladesh with whom he has lived for most of his  life  and
    that his relationship with them  remains  a  primary  one  not  reduced
    significantly by his having lived with other family members  in  recent
    years. It was also our view that  his  ongoing  relationship  with  his
    parents must to some, if not a large, extent reduce the strength of the
    family life that he has established here in the UK with family members.



 9. Our finding that he has a private life must also  be  tempered  by  the
    fact that he has still lived  by  far  the  majority  of  his  life  in
    Bangladesh where he will have retained some form of private life if  he
    returns.

10. It was not suggested at any point that in these  proceedings  that  the
    next three Razgar questions should not be answered in  the  appellant's
    favour and we therefore move on to a proportionality assessment.

11. We considered first the appellant's best interests, as we are  required
    to do by Section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
    2009. We found that his best interests were served  relatively  equally
    in both the scenario of remaining in the UK and returning home  to  his
    family  in   Bangladesh.   There   are   clearly   better   educational
    opportunities in the UK and what appears to  be  a  stable  social  and
    financial environment with extended family  members  living  close  by.
    There will be disruption for him returning to Bangladesh to reintegrate
    into a different education system, re-establishing social networks with
    his peers and so on.  However on the  positive  side  it  can  only  go
    towards his best interests that  he  return  to  his  immediate  family
    having been separated from his parents and  siblings  for  four  years.
    Contact with the family in the UK can continue, the evidence  from  the
    British High Commission suggesting that it is not difficult for that to
    take place, particularly as the father has a mobile  telephone  number.
    There can be visits between the two countries as there have been in the
    past. It was  therefore  our  view  that  the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant did not strongly indicate either way whether he should remain
    in the UK or remain in Bangladesh.

12. Mr Anyene referred in his submission  to the difficulties the appellant
    put forward as part of his asylum claim as to having been harassed  and
    bullied as a result of his father's political  activities.  The  asylum
    claim was not found to have merit and it was not found  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that much weight could attract to those arguments as  the
    evidence was simply not strong enough. That is additionally  so  before
    us where we have the British  High  Commission  report  of  the  father
    remaining in the family home and of nothing  to  indicate  difficulties
    for any of the other siblings who have remained. We did not  find  that
    is a factor that could assist the appellant in showing that  return  to
    Bangladesh would be too difficult.

13. We also have to weigh as part of our decision the provisions of Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  We note that
    the appellant speaks English and therefore will be less of a burden  on
    the tax payer and will be better able to integrate into society and  we
    adjust our approach to the public interest in his  favour  accordingly.
    It appears to us to  be  neutral  as  to  whether  he  was  financially
    independent given that he is still a minor and that albeit  his  family
    may be providing him with finance he is currently being educated within
    the UK state system at a cost to the tax payer and  nothing  before  us
    suggested that the UK relatives will not be able to send  some  finance
    to Bangladesh to assist him if needed.

14. Section 117B(4) indicates that little  weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a person at  time  when  they  are  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully. That is so here. The  appellant  came  as  a
    visitor and has remained as an overstayer for some four years or  more.
    We can therefore, following the statute, attribute little weight to his
    private life.  The  other  provisions  of  Section  117B  were  not  of
    relevance to the decision before us.

15. What we are left with, then, is a child aged 11 brought to the UK by  a
    parent, left with his extended family but who remained in contact  with
    his immediate family in Bangladesh.  He has been well looked  after  by
    his family here and progressed in his studies. It remains the case that
    the appellant does not qualify for leave under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and has remained unlawfully for some time. The evidence before us  does
    not indicate that he will have anything approaching serious hardship on
    return to Bangladesh now. He can return to his parents and siblings.

16. Where those matters are so, it is  our  conclusion  that  the  decision
    refusing leave could not  be  said  to  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's family and private life and we refuse
    the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is re-made as dismissed.



Signed   [pic]         Date 14 May 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

