
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05385/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |Decision and reasons Promulgated |
|On: 5 June 2017                           |On: 7 June 2017                  |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA
                                   Between

                         MR THAVALINGHAN KANAGASABAI
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr Paramjorthy of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                                                    DECSION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 23 September 1983.  He
      appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 11 March 2015 to
      refuse to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection in  the  United
      Kingdom. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler  dismissed  the  appellant's
      appeal on 1 March 2017.


   2. Permission to appeal was at first refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Kimmel and subsequently granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on
      20 April 2017 stating that it is arguable that the Judge did not  note
      Dr Lawrence's psychiatric report at pages 13 and 14 and  20.  He  also
      found that the appellant's sur plus activities in this  country  could
      be a cause for concern.


   3. Thus, the appeal came before me.


      The First-tier Tribunal's findings


   4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  the  following  findings   in
      dismissing the appellant's appeal which I  set  out  in  summary.  The
      appellant's case is that on 26 December 2010, he  was  stopped  at  an
      army checkpoint and identified as a LTTE member and detained at Vallai
      camp where he was  questioned  and  beaten  for  four  weeks.  He  was
      released after his father paid a bribe.  He  was  required  to  report
      weekly but was scared that he would be detained and his  father  hired
      an agent to arrange for the appellant to obtain a student visa for the
      United Kingdom and to pass through immigration control at the  airport
      in Sri Lanka. The appellant claims that the authorities in  Sri  Lanka
      have  attended  the  appellant's  family  home  and  asked  about  his
      whereabouts.


   5. The appellant has provided a number of medical reports  including  one
      from Dr Lawrence a consultant psychiatrist. Dr Lawrence concluded that
      the appellant had  symptoms  of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  and
      secondary depression and in his opinion; the trauma described  by  the
      appellant is a primary cause of  his  PTSD.  The  Judge  accepted  the
      medical evidence.


   6. The respondent accepted that the appellant was at the  very  least,  a
      supporter of the LTTE. The appellant has given  a  broadly  consistent
      account of his detention and ill-treatment beginning in December 2010.
      The apparent inconsistencies relating to the length of training  carry
      little weight. The medical evidence indicates that  the  scarring  and
      other physical signs  together  with  the  psychiatric  diagnoses  are
      consistent with the appellant's case and support it. The  Judge  found
      that the account given by the appellant is a broadly credible one.


   7. The Judge was satisfied that  the  appellant  became  and  remained  a
      member of the British Tamil Forum whilst in the United Kingdom. At his
      interview, he claimed to have attended two meetings at Tamil house  in
      North London, a demonstration in London, a celebration in Coventry and
      a celebration on Hero's day in London. There is  no  evidence  in  the
      appellant's latest statement of any  British  Tamil's  forum  activity
      since his interview on 2 March 2015. His evidence  that  he  has  been
      collecting donations from shops and had attended a demonstration on 18
      May 2016 is not credible. In any event there is no cogent evidence  to
      indicate that such  activity  over  the  past  two  years  would  have
      attracted the adverse attention of the Sri Lanka authorities or indeed
      would have become known to them. The  country  guidance  case  GJ  and
      others (post-Civil War returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  319  (IAC
      makes clear that the Sri Lankan  authorities  undertake  sophisticated
      intelligence  gathering.  The  Judge  was  not  persuaded   that   the
      appellant's claimed activities in 2015 and  2016,  even  if  credible,
      would be seen by the Sri Lankan authorities as  indicating  a  present
      risk to the unitary Sri Lankan State of the Sri Lanka government.


   8. The appellant's evidence was vague about the authorities in Sri  Lanka
      attending his family house and asking for his whereabouts. No  warrant
      of arrest has been issued for  him  which  he  accepted  during  cross
      examination. His name  would  not  appear  on  the  computerised  list
      accessible at the airport, as a result of which a  person  whose  name
      does appear on the list would be stopped at  the  airport  and  handed
      over to the authorities.


   9. The Judge took into account the country guidance case of GJ  which  is
      set out at length in his decision. The Judge found that the  appellant
      was a subject of persecution while in  Sri  Lanka,  was  detained  and
      seriously ill treated by reason of his political opinion, having  been
      identified as an a LTTE member who provided  them  with  intelligence.
      This fact is to be regarded as a serious indication of the  real  risk
      of future harm unless there are good reasons to consider that it  will
      not be repeated.


  10. The case of GJ gives guidance that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  have
      their focus on preventing the resurgence of the LTTE and  the  revival
      of the civil war. As to the categories of person  in  real  risk,  the
      appellant does not fall within those listed at (7) (b) (c) or  (d)  of
      the country guidance case. The appellant will not be perceived to be a
      threat as a person having a significant  role  in  relation  to  post-
      conflict  Tamil  separatism  and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities.  The
      appellant cannot on any reasonable assessment of his activity with the
      BTF, be regarded as  falling  within  such  a  category.  For  similar
      reasons, there is no real risk  that  his  name  would  appear  on  an
      intelligence  led  watch  list.  His  diaspora  activities,  at  their
      highest, could not lead the Sri Lankan authorities to believe that  he
      represented a present risk to the Sri Lankan government.


  11. The Judge was not persuaded that the appellant has been the subject of
      adverse interest of the authorities in Sri Lanka  since  he  fled  the
      country. It is not credible that the authorities  have  maintained  an
      interest in him and have searched for the  appellant  particularly  in
      light of the evidence concerning the attitude of  the  authorities  as
      found in GJ The Judge give consideration to the country guidance  case
      of CJ. Accordingly, the appellant would not be at real risk on  return
      either at the airport or on arrival in Sri Lanka and  subsequently  in
      his home area. The judge stated, "I do not consider any other basis of
      appeal in light of Mr Paramjorthy's explicit concession that no  other
      grounds were relied upon".


   Grounds of appeal


  12. The relevant grounds of appeal state the following which I  summarise.
      Ground one states that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  erred  by
      making clinical judgements concerning the medical findings of GP Dr  L
      Clarke. The second ground is that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
      erred by making clinical judgements concerning the medical findings of
      Dr Lawrence.  The  third  ground  is  that  the  impact  of  PTSD  and
      vulnerability on discrepancies regarding evidence of torture.

Findings as to whether there is an error of law

  13. The Judge in an extensive  and  well-reasoned  decision  accepted  the
      appellant's evidence that he had been tortured in Sri Lanka  while  he
      was  in  detention  as  a  member  of  the  LTTE.  He  discounted  any
      credibility issues raised by the respondent. The Judge found that past
      persecution and considering  the  appellant's  present  circumstances,
      will not amount to  future  persecution.  The  Judge  found  that  the
      appellant would not be at risk on his return  to  Sri  Lanka  and  was
      guided by the country guidance case of GJ.


  14. It was held in GJ that  the  focus  of  the  Sri  Lankan  government's
      concern has changed since the Civil War ended in May 2009. The LTTE in
      Sri Lanka itself is a spent force and there  have  been  no  terrorist
      incidents since the end of the Civil  War.  The  government's  present
      objective is to identify Tamil  activists  in  the  diaspora  who  are
      working for Tamil separatism and to destabilize the unitary Sri Lankan
      state and its focus is on preventing the re-insurgence of the LTTE  or
      any similar Tamil separatist organizations  and  the  revival  of  the
      Civil War within Sri Lanka. It states that if a person is detained  by
      the Sri Lankan security services, there remains a  real  risk  of  ill
      treatment or harm requiring international protection. It  states  that
      internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a person  at
      real risk  from  Sri  Lankan  authorities  since  the  government  now
      controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to a
      named address. After passing through the airport, it states that  they
      are no detention facilities at the airport and only the  names,  which
      appear on the wanted list will not be detained from the  airport,  but
      in their home area when their arrival will  be  verified  by  the  CID
      police within a few days.


  15. The Judge's reasoning, in that regard is  unassailable.  His  findings
      that the appellant will not be at risk of harm on his  return  to  Sri
      Lanka because of his claimed political activities in Sri Lanka, cannot
      be said to have any error in law, material or otherwise. The Judge was
      entitled to find on the totality of the evidence  that  the  appellant
      does not merit recognition as a refugee or  that  he  is  entitled  to
      humanitarian protection in respect  of  the  events  which  he  claims
      happened to him in the past which have been accepted.


  16. The Judge found that the appellant would not  be  perceived  to  be  a
      threat to the Sri Lankan authorities because he  does  not  present  a
      risk to the unitary Sri Lankan State of the Sri Lankan government. The
      Judge considered the evidence as a whole against the risk  factors  in
      GJ.  There was no evidence before the Judge from which he  could  have
      concluded that the past activities of the appellant would cause him to
      be at risk on his return to Sri Lanka.


  17. Implicit in the decision is that the present medical condition, as set
      out by Dr Lawrence in his report, the appellant  is  not  capable  and
      will not be perceived to be capable of mounting any resistance or pose
      a threat to the unitary state of Sri Lanka. The appellant cannot  have
      it both ways. On the one hand, he states he is too  unwell,  suffering
      from PTSD and depression and on the second hand he  says  he  will  be
      perceived to be a threat by the Sri Lankan authorities. In  GJ  it  is
      stated  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  approach  is   based   on
      sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri Lanka and
      in  the  diaspora.  The  Sri  Lanka  and   intelligence   would   have
      intelligence that the appellant is a spent force.


  18. The Judge found that the appellant was released on the condition  that
      he report to the authorities every week, after he had been tortured by
      them. If the appellant had been further interest of  the  authorities,
      he would not have been released and therefore the  Judge's  conclusion
      that he is of no interest of the authorities is well placed. It is not
      credible evidence that the authorities  would  release  the  appellant
      after having tortured him and then expect him to present  himself  and
      not run away. That is exactly what the appellant's evidence  was  that
      he was scared to report because he did not wish to be  detained  again
      and his father hired an agent to get him out of the country.  It  must
      have been obvious to the authorities, that  the  appellant  would  not
      report yet they still let him go. The Judge was entitled to find  that
      authorities have no interest in him.


  19. The Judge found that the appellant is not a person  whose  name  would
      appear on a computer "the stop" list accessible at the airport because
      there is no warrant of arrest issued against him. If the appellant had
      been released on the payment of a bribe, as he claims, there would not
      be an arrest warrant against him and therefore he would not be on  the
      computer stop list. This is a sustainable finding.


  20. The Judge did consider and make proper findings on the second limb  of
      the appellant's claim that he has participated in political activities
      in the United Kingdom which would put him at risk on his return to Sri
      Lanka. He was aware that even in circumstances where the appellant has
      created an opportunistic refugee  sur  place  claim,  the  appellant's
      Refugee Convention or humanitarian protection claim  will  nonetheless
      succeed if he can establish in accordance with the  applicable  burden
      of proof that there is a real risk of him suffering persecution for  a
      Convention reason on return.  In Danian [2000] IAR  96  the  Court  of
      Appeal held that even where a refugee sur place has acted in bad faith
      in the United Kingdom with the purpose of  creating  an  asylum  claim
      where otherwise he would have had none, the  Refugee  Convention  will
      nonetheless apply provided that he has a genuine and well-founded fear
      of persecution for a Convention reason and there is a real  risk  that
      such persecution may take place.


  21. The Judge was entitled to hold that the  appellant  would  not  be  of
      interest to the authorities in  Sri  Lanka  because  of  his  previous
      activities in Sri Lanka or the United Kingdom. GJ said that it will  a
      question of fact to be decided in each case, depending on any diaspora
      activities carried out by such an individual. The Judge  was  entitled
      to find that the appellant had not produced credible evidence that  he
      had participated in any LTTE activities in the  United  Kingdom  after
      2015.


  22. In GJ it states that the Sri Lankan authorities are  aware  that  many
      Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also  that
      everyone in the Northern Province had the same  level  of  involvement
      with the LTTE during the Civil War. In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
      individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent that  it
      is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as including as  indicating
      present risk to the  unitary  Sri  Lankan  State  of  the  Sri  Lankan
      government. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant does not
      fit this category of those who may be at risk of GJ.


23. Therefore,  the  Judge  found  as  a  matter  of  fact  found  that  the
   appellant's activities in the United Kingdom will be of  no  interest  to
   the Sri Lanka and authorities for all the reasons given. The  appellant's
   appeal is no more than a quarrel with the decision of the Judge.


24. The Judge's finding that the appellant can return to Sri Lanka and  will
   not be perceived to have a role significant or otherwise in  relation  to
   post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora  and  all  renewal  of
   hostilities within Sri Lanka is a sustainable conclusion on the facts  of
   the case.

   Decision
   The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the upper Tribunal                Dated 6th  day  of  June
   2017
Mrs S Chana








