







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05917/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |               Decision and Reasons     |
|                                    |Promulgated                             |
|On: 7 April 2015                    |                 On: 20 April 2015      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                                    S P J
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, counsel (instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 10 November 1986 in
      Chapai Nawabganj, Rajshahi. She appeals with  permission  against  the
      determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  promulgated  on  20
      January 2015. He dismissed her  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
      human rights claims (Articles 3 and 8).


   2. He found "overall" that the appellant would not be at risk of any  act
      of violence or an attempted violence upon her after her return to  her
      home area, namely the city of Rajshahi [17].


   3. He also found  that  there  were  not  any  exceptional  circumstances
      warranting leave to remain outside  the  immigration  rules.  [20]  He
      embarked on a "Razgar" assessment; he had  regard  to  the  children's
      circumstances and "the duty under s.55  of  the  2006  Act."  He  also
      dismissed the human rights appeal.


   4. In granting permission Firs-tier Judge  Cruthers  found  that  it  was
      arguable 'amongst other  things'  that  that  the  Judge  should  have
      'further explained' his conclusion that the appellant does not face  a
      real risk from Mr A, (her former husband), in her home area.


   5. Ms Chapman,  who  represented  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, relied on four grounds of appeal.


   6. The Judge made inconsistent findings as to the risk to  the  appellant
      and her child, S, upon return to Bangladesh. He found that her  former
      husband, Mr A, had threatened her family in Bangladesh, procuring  the
      arrest and detention of her brother and that he  had  acted  violently
      towards her and continues to be "malevolently disposed  towards  her."
      He also found that the Bangladesh authorities would be  unwilling  and
      unable to provide her with protection [14].


   7. However, he then went on to find that the appellant  did  not  have  a
      well founded fear of persecution in her home area  in  Bangladesh  and
      would not be at risk of any unpleasant action at the hands of Mr A.


   8. She submitted that having accepted that the appellant was  a  credible
      witness, and having regard to the fact that the Family Court  and  the
      Home Office accepted that she had been subjected to domestic  violence
      from her former husband in the past, his finding at  paragraph  16  is
      inconsistent and irrational.


   9. Moreover, Mr A is from the  same  home  area  as  the  appellant.  His
      threats against the appellant's family in Bangladesh were made  whilst
      he was present in the UK. As a result the appellant's brother had been
      unlawfully arrested and detained, having been ill treated by the local
      police in Bangladesh.


  10. The reason that her children E and S spent  time  with  the  appellant
      over the Christmas holidays was as a result of a Family Court  contact
      order, rather than through any instigation by Mr A. Moreover, contrary
      to the Judge's finding at paragraph 16, the  appellant  had  expressly
      stated that she has no contact with Mr A  but  collects  the  children
      from his home by ringing the bell, after which the children come  down
      on their own without their father.


  11. Although Mr A knows her address in the UK, he is not able to come near
      her house, having regard to the Court order. If he came near her  home
      she would be able to ring the police immediately. The  Judge  took  no
      account of that fact.


  12. The fact that Mr A has not assaulted or physically  harmed  her  since
      the marriage broke down is referable to the fact that  they  are  both
      currently in the UK where the authorities, unlike those in Bangladesh,
      offer the appellant protection against such acts. In addition, Mr  A's
      immigration status is precarious.


  13. Ms Chapman further submitted that the Judge's finding at paragraph  18
      that any discrimination that the appellant and S would be subjected to
      in the appellant's home area would not amount to persecution, amounted
      to a failure correctly to apply the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  SA
      (Divorced Woman/Women - Illegitimate Child) Bangladesh CG [2011]  UKUT
      245 (IAC). There, the Tribunal noted that she was not likely to be  at
      real risk of serious harm in urban areas by reason of her  having  had
      an illegitimate child which becomes known.


  14. The Judge wrongly assumed that the appellant and Mr  A  are  from  the
      city of Rajshahi, whereas it had never been disputed that she was from
      the village of Chara Danga near the town of Chapai Nawabganj,  in  the
      district of Rajshahi. Her mother also lives in the  village  of  Chara
      Danga. Mr A is from a neighbouring village.


  15. There was no reliable evidence upon which the Judge  could  find  that
      the appellant could either return to the family home or be financially
      supported by the rental income from a house owned by her mother in the
      main city. This had not been raised during the hearing. No details  or
      evidence was given as to the amount of money and whether this  was  in
      fact available to support her and S. There was  no  finding  regarding
      any male protector. The appellant's father had died  and  her  younger
      brother is a university student.


  16. The Tribunal in SA, supra, was considering the generalised risk  to  a
      divorced woman with a child in the context of  a  return  to  a  major
      urban area [90-109] rather than,  as  in  the  appellant's  case,  the
      return to a specific community where the appellant's transgression  is
      known.


  17. In that respect Ms Chapman noted that the Judge accepted  that  it  is
      known in the community that the appellant has  an  illegitimate  child
      born out of wedlock.


  18. The Judge did not have proper regard to the evidence of Mr C  who  was
      S's former foster carer, and who stated  that  he  believed  that  the
      breakdown of the relationship between the appellant  and  her  husband
      would  make  it  dangerous  and  possibly  life  threatening  for  the
      appellant and S to return to Bangladesh.


  19. Nor did the Judge have regard to the evidence of the social worker, Ms
      Locke, that the appellant would be at great risk if  she  returned  to
      Bangladesh. That was because Mr  A  had  broadcast  the  news  of  her
      infidelity widely.


  20. Further,  the  Judge  failed  to  take  account  of  the  Home  Office
      guidelines in respect of Bangladeshi women dated 22 December  2014  in
      which it is stated at paragraph 1.3.14 that taking  into  account  the
      general position of women in Bangladeshi society, internal  relocation
      may be unduly harsh for a woman with no support networks and  who  has
      no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood.  Effective  state
      protection is, in general, unlikely to be available for women  fearing
      gender based violence.


  21. Nor did  the  Judge  make  any  findings  when  considering  S's  best
      interests, what the the impact on S would be, despite  the  fact  that
      this had been expressly raised both in submissions and in the skeleton
      argument produced by Ms Chapman at that hearing.  The  impact  claimed
      was based on the evidence  of  Ms  Locke,  as  set  out  in  the  core
      assessment, that S would be at risk possibly of physical harm  as  the
      visible manifestation of her mother's adultery, and certainly at  risk
      of emotional harm; she would be seen as an illegitimate  child  and  a
      second class citizen.


  22. In consequence of these misdirections regarding risk on return both to
      the appellant and S in their home  area,  the  Judge  failed  even  to
      consider whether it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant  and
      S to relocate internally. This had been dealt with at some  length  at
      paragraph 4 of the skeleton.


  23. The appellant in fact has a paternal aunt,  L,  in  Dhaka.  Mr  A  had
      contacted L and told  her  what  had  happened,  suggesting  that  the
      appellant is a prostitute. Accordingly, the  appellant  would  not  be
      able to turn to L for support.


  24. Ms Chapman also referred to other reasons disclosed  in  the  evidence
      before the First-tier Tribunal  which  had  not  been  dealt  with  or
      referred to, including the appellant's assertion that people from  the
      village area in Dhaka would know about her situation as she and  Mr  A
      are from the same community. Word would accordingly reach Mr A  as  to
      her whereabouts.


  25. She would find great difficulty in finding housing as a  single  woman
      in the absence of a husband, father or male sponsor.  She  could  only
      reside in a  shelter  for  up  to  six  months  in  unsuitable  living
      conditions which would be contrary to S's best interests. There is  in
      any event a lack of availability of shelters.  All  this,  Ms  Chapman
      concluded, had been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


  26. She also noted that it had been submitted that the  only  possible  or
      realistic form of employment for a woman in the appellant's  situation
      would be in a garment factory. This  however  was  unsuitable  as  the
      appellant  would  not  have  access  to  a  network  to  obtain   such
      employment; it would also put her at risk of being located  by  Mr  A.
      Alternatively she  would  be  forced  to  lie  about  S's  provenance,
      justifying the absence of a husband and would in any event face stigma
      if she stated that she was divorced. There would be nobody to care for
      S whilst she worked as the hours are very long and garment workers are
      the poorest paid in the world. Nor could  she  be  cared  for  in  the
      village by the appellant's mother as this would alert Mr A as  to  her
      whereabouts.


  27. The work is very dangerous. Ms Chapman  referred  to  the  Rana  Plaza
      incident which was part of the evidence. That post dated the  decision
      in SA, supra, and accordingly even such work cannot be assumed  to  be
      suitable or reasonable.


  28. She accordingly submitted that the Judge erred in failing to make  any
      findings in respect of internal relocation.


  29. Finally, she submitted  that  the  Judge  erred  when  dismissing  the
      Article 8 appeal. First, he erred in finding that Article  8  was  not
      engaged as there were no exceptional circumstances which had an effect
      on his consequent findings.


  30. Given the extensive family court  interventions,  and  the  fact  that
      three separate family units are involved as well as  Social  Services,
      there were such circumstances.


  31. Moreover, his finding that  the  implementation  of  the  decision  to
      remove the appellant would not sever her  links  with  her  other  two
      children, F and Sb was clearly wrong as he failed to take  account  of
      the reality of the position, namely that if the appellant  and  S  are
      removed and F and Sb remained in the UK, her links would  be  severed,
      and if all of them are removed to Bangladesh, the appellant  would  be
      unable to maintain contact with them without Mr A  finding  out  about
      her whereabouts, thus putting her at risk.


  32. His finding at paragraph 22 that the appellant did not claim  to  have
      had extensive contact with her other two children  was  incorrect.  He
      failed to take account of material evidence, namely the contact  order
      affording the appellant access every other weekend as well as half  of
      the school holidays.


  33. Nor did the Judge conduct a  proper  and  compliant  assessment  under
      s.55. In  particular  he  failed  to  consider  the  impact  on  S  of
      separation from Mr C and her former foster mother, and the  fact  that
      removal would  prevent  her  from  forming  a  relationship  with  her
      biological father.


  34. Nor did the Judge have proper  regard  to  the  impact  on  all  three
      children of the separation from each other. The social  worker  stated
      that S's removal would cause her harm. S had never been to Bangladesh,
      having been born in the UK.


  35. The Judge did not have proper regard to the decision in SA, which made
      it clear that illegitimate children are stigmatised and  discriminated
      against and that this would clearly be contrary to  S's  physical  and
      moral integrity and against her best interests.


  36. Ms  Chapman  referred  to  the  extensive  family  court  proceedings.
      Permission had been given to disclose the documents and details. These
      had been produced, by way of  two  judgements  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


  37. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Tarlow submitted that there  had  been
      no material error of law. He distinguished between violence  and  what
      he  characterised  as  unpleasant  threats  against   the   appellant,
      including potential threats [17]. Those were found not to have crossed
      the threshold of persecution. The Judge found that the appellant would
      not be at risk of an act of violence or attempted violence upon return
      to her home area, namely the city of Rajshahi [17]. He had  regard  to
      the appellant's evidence that for the two and a half years  since  she
      separated from Mr A, her mother had not been physically attacked.  Nor
      had the appellant herself been physically attacked during this period.




  38. Those findings are not perverse. The grounds amount to a  disagreement
      with the findings of the First-tier Judge. It is clear  from  SA  that
      there is discrimination as  submitted,  but  it  does  not  cross  the
      threshold. Accordingly, the appellant would  not  be  in  danger.   In
      those circumstances, there had been no need for the Judge to  consider
      the possibility of internal relocation.


  39. With regard to the  Article  8  assessment  and  findings,  the  Judge
      properly noted that the appellant could not qualify  under  the  rule.
      There were no exceptional circumstances.


  40. The reasons underlying that finding are  set  out  in  the  Article  8
      assessment at paragraph 21 onwards. Mr Tarlow submitted that the Judge
      had 'done enough to make the determination unappealable'.


  41. In reply, Ms Chapman referred again to paragraph  17.  The  Judge  was
      obliged not only to have regard to threats of violence, but  also  the
      associated  stigma:  all  these  factors   need   to   be   considered
      "holistically" having regard to the Tribunal's decision in SA.


  42. She submitted that the facts in this case are in  fact  stronger  than
      those in SA, where the appeal was allowed on Article 8 grounds.


  43. There was a need to look more carefully at the  cumulative  basis  for
      the appellant's claims under Article 8.


     Assessment


  44. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  found  that  Mr  A  had  indeed  issued
      threats to the appellant's family in Bangladesh. He found that Mr A is
      a man prepared to act violently towards  his  spouse.  That  had  been
      unsurprising given his violent  reaction  upon  discovering  that  the
      appellant had been unfaithful. He evicted  her  from  the  matrimonial
      home.


  45. The Judge also found that Mr A had been able to use influence with the
      local police force and bring about the arrest  and  detention  of  the
      appellant's brother. The appellant had given a credible account of her
      brother's arrest  and  detention  including  his  beating  during  his
      detention.


  46. He found that she gave a credible account as  to  the  incident  as  a
      whole and to the circumstances in which he came to be released.


  47. There was thus no reason which permitted a  finding  to  the  contrary
      that Mr A continues to be malevolently disposed towards the appellant.
      Moreover, the Judge accepted  [14]  that  the  Bangladesh  authorities
      would be unable or unwilling to protect the appellant against him.  He
      was from the same home area as the appellant.


  48. The consequent finding at paragraph 16 that as at the date of  hearing
      it was difficult to conceive that upon return to her  home  area,  the
      appellant would be at risk of any unpleasant action at the hands of Mr
      A is at the very least, inconsistent.


  49. The Judge appears not to have taken on board that the reason that  the
      appellant's former husband had not made any threats or harm in the  UK
      is that there is a court order preventing Mr  A  from  coming  to  her
      house. She is able to ring the police immediately should that order be
      breached. The collection and dropping off of  the  children  does  not
      require any direct communication between them.


  50.  Accordingly,  unlike  in  Bangladesh,  the  appellant  can  rely   on
      protection from the police.


  51. The Judge found that the appellant and S would be accommodated in  the
      settled family unit with the  appellant's  mother  and  brother.  They
      would  support  the  appellant  regarding  any  social  prejudice  and
      discrimination.    They   would   also   support   them   financially.
      Accordingly, she would not be at risk of serious harm.


  52. However, the Judge did not grapple with the facts as  presented.   The
      finding that the appellant could return to  the  family  house  or  be
      financially supported from rental income in the main city  was  not  a
      matter that had been  raised  during  the  hearing.  No  details  were
      provided regarding the amount of money or its availability to  support
      them.


  53. Moreover, the Judge found that the appellant and Mr A  were  from  the
      city of Rajashahi whereas she was from a village in  the  district  of
      Rajshahi and Mr A was from a neighbouring  village.  Accordingly,  the
      reliance upon the Upper Tribunal's decision in SA which considered the
      generalised risk to a divorced woman with a child in  the  context  of
      return to a major urban area was not  applicable  to  the  appellant's
      case.  She would be returned to a community where her transgression is
      known.


  54. The Judge has not assessed the implications to the  appellant  of  her
      being the mother of an illegitimate child born out of wedlock; nor the
      evidence of Mr C or the social worker, Ms Locke. Nor was proper regard
      had to the Home Office guidelines to which I have referred.


  55. The Judge had been required to have proper regard to  and  assess  the
      evidence of Ms Locke, that S would be at risk,  possibly  of  physical
      harm, as the  visible  manifestation  of  the  mother's  adultery  and
      certainly at risk of emotional harm, where she would  be  seen  as  an
      illegitimate child and a second class citizen.


  56. Having regard to the failure to have regard to  the  circumstances  of
      the appellant and S in their home area as  a  whole,  the  Judge  also
      failed to consider whether it would be unduly harsh to expect them  to
      internally relocate.


  57. Nor did the Judge deal with the implications for the children F and Sb
      were the appellant and S to be removed.  Should  the  former  children
      remain in the UK, the appellant's links with them  would  be  severed.
      However, if they are all removed to Bangladesh, the appellant would be
      unable to maintain contact with them without  Mr  A  finding  out  the
      whereabouts.


  58. In that respect the Judge erred in finding that the appellant did  not
      claim to have had extensive contact with these two children [22].  The
      terms of the contact order were not considered, which showed that  she
      in fact sees them every other weekend as well as half  of  the  school
      holidays.


  59. Finally, in the Article 8 assessment, the  Judge  did  not  conduct  a
      proper s.55 assessment. He did not consider the  implications  of  any
      separation of S from Mr C and her former foster mother, including  the
      fact that  her  removal  would  prevent  her  from  forming  a  proper
      relationship with her own biological father.


  60. Nor did the Judge have regard to the impact on all three  children  of
      their separation from each other. Ms Locke in her core assessment also
      found that S's removal would cause her  harm.  S  had  never  been  to
      Bangladesh before, having been born in the UK.


  61. Nor did the Judge consider the implications from the evidence as  well
      as from SA, supra, that  illegitimate  children  are  stigmatised  and
      discriminated  against.  This  was  required  to  be   considered   as
      potentially affecting S's best interests.


  62. I thus find that the Judge has not properly and appropriately directed
      himself. This is more than a case simply involving  the  risk  that  a
      mother of an  illegitimate  child  may  face  with  regard  to  social
      prejudice and discrimination if her circumstances are found  out.  The
      Judge should have considered all the other factors  to  which  I  have
      referred to including the fact that she would not be  returning  to  a
      major urban area but to a specific  community  where  the  appellant's
      past is known. Moreover, the respective and competing interests of the
      children had to form part of the overall assessment.


  63. I accordingly find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of material errors on a point of law. I set  aside
      the decision.


  64. Ms Chapman submitted without opposition from  Mr  Tarlow  that  should
      that be the decision reached, this  was  an  appropriate  case  to  be
      remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Taylor  House,  for  a  fresh
      decision to be made.


  65. Ms Chapman contended that complexity of  the  fact  finding  resulting
      from the issues raised as well as the amount of  evidence  that  would
      have to be adduced, justifies the remitting of the case.


  66. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      relating to the  issue  of  remitting  an  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. In giving effect to that approach, I am satisfied  that  the
      extent of judicial  finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
      decision to be made is extensive. There will be a complete  re-hearing
      with no findings preserved. I have also had regard to  the  overriding
      objective and conclude that it would be just and  fair  to  remit  the
      case.


  67. In the circumstances, I direct that the  appeal  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House) for a fresh decision to be made.


  68. The necessary administrative arrangements will need to be made.


         Notice of Decision


         The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of material            errors of law and is set aside.


         The appeal is remitted to Taylor House for a fresh decision.


         An anonymity direction is made.


         Signed                              Date: 17/4/2015


         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

