
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05043/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Remittal & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2015                           |On 3 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     nkm
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tuburu of Ty Arian Solicitors


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of India who was born on 26 April 1985.

 4. It is unclear when the appellant first entered the UK.  However  on  21
    January 2011 she applied for a visit visa to Ireland which  was  issued
    on 26 January 2011.  On  25  July  2011,  she  applied  for  a  Tier  5
    Religious Migrant visa in  order  to  work  with  the  Missionaries  of
    Charity - Dublin and this visa was issued on 27 July 2011 valid until 9
    September 2014.  In a letter dated 11 January 2013, the Missionaries of
    Charity notified the Home Office  that  the  appellant  was  no  longer
    employed by them as she had absconded from the convent on  25  December
    2012.  As a consequence, on 6 February 2013, the appellant's leave  was
    curtailed and the notice required her to leave the UK by 7 April 2013.

 5. Thereafter, it would appear that the Sisters of  Charity  arranged  for
    the appellant to return to  India  and  a  flight  was  booked  for  25
    February 2013.  However, the appellant did not  leave  the  UK.   On  6
    April 2013, she submitted a human rights claim relying upon  Article  8
    which was rejected by the Secretary of State on 25 April 2013.

 6. On 18  June  2013,  she  was  encountered  by  Immigration  Enforcement
    Officers and was arrested, interviewed and served with a IS151A  notice
    informing her of her liability to be removed.   She  was  detained  and
    claimed asylum on 20 June 2013.  She was subsequently granted bail on 7
    August 2013 and thereafter granted temporary admission  with  reporting
    restrictions.

 7. On 1 July 2014, the Secretary of State refused  the  appellant's  claim
    for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  and  also  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The Secretary of State did  not  accept  that  the  appellant
    would be at risk on return to India from a gang or group of men who she
    claimed had persistently raped her between the ages of 11 and 17  after
    which she joined the Missionaries of Charity as a  nun.   Further,  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant would be  at  risk
    from her family because she had joined the mission and become a nun.

The Appeal

 8. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  22  September  2014,  Judge   Archer   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  However, he allowed  the  appeal
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  First, the judge  found  that  the
    appellant was at real risk of harm from the  gang  who  had  previously
    raped her and from her own family in  her  home  area.   Secondly,  the
    Indian authorities would not provide a "sufficiency of  protection"  to
    the appellant in her home area.  Thirdly, it would be unduly harsh  for
    her to internally relocate within India.  In reaching  those  findings,
    and in particular the third finding, the judge found that, despite  the
    appellant having married a Sri Lankan national in  the  UK,  she  would
    return to India as a "lone mother" with a "newborn baby" which she  was
    expecting at the time of the hearing.

 9. The judge made no decision in relation to  the  appellant's  Article  8
    claim.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a number of grounds.  First, the judge had erred in law  in
    finding that the appellant would return to India as a "lone  woman"  by
    disregarding the evidence of the appellant's husband that he  would  be
    willing to return to India with her if required and further in shifting
    the burden of proof to the respondent to establish that the appellant's
    husband could obtain a visa (without undue delay) to enter India as the
    appellant's spouse.  Secondly, the judge had applied the wrong standard
    in finding that there was not a "sufficiency of  protection"  available
    to the appellant if  returned  to  India.   Thirdly,  in  finding  that
    internal relocation was unduly harsh, the judge had failed to take into
    account the appellant's  evidence  concerning  her  education  and  her
    employment experience as a nun.

11. On 7 October 2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pooler)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came  before
    me.

The Submissions

12. On behalf of the Secretary  of  State,  Mr  Richards  relied  upon  the
    grounds.  First,  he  submitted  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return was predicated on his finding that
    she would be returning as a single woman  either  heavily  pregnant  or
    with a newborn baby.  He submitted that the judge failed to  take  into
    account her husband's evidence that he would return with her.  Further,
    the judge had wrongly reversed the burden of proof which was, in  fact,
    upon the appellant in relation to whether the appellant's husband would
    be able to obtain a visa (without undue delay) to India.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that the judge could not have come to the conclusion  he  did
    if, in fact, the appellant would return to India with her husband.   He
    submitted that, as a consequence, the finding in the appellant's favour
    under Article 3 could not stand.

13. Secondly, Mr Richards submitted that the finding that there would be  a
    lack of "sufficiency of protection" could not stand and  the  appellant
    had never reported the incidents of rape to the police.

14. Finally, Mr Richards submitted that the  judge's  finding  on  internal
    relocation was flawed as it was also based  on  the  premise  that  the
    appellant would return as a lone female.

15. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Tuburu sought  to  sustain  the  judge's
    findings.  As regards the issue of whether the appellant  would  return
    as a lone woman, Mr Tuburu submitted that  the  judge  was  correct  to
    place the burden upon the respondent (who  had  raised  the  issue)  of
    whether the appellant's husband would be able to  enter  India  with  a
    visa.  Mr Tuburu submitted that that was the key issue in  the  appeal.
    Secondly,  Mr  Tuburu  submitted  that  the  judge  had  accepted   the
    appellant's evidence concerning the sexual violence she had  previously
    experienced and, in paragraph 38, the judge had properly  come  to  the
    conclusion on the basis of the objective evidence that there was not  a
    sufficiency of protection in such circumstances.  He referred me to the
    Operational Guidance Note  (May  2013),  in  particular  at  paragraphs
    3.13.12-3.13.21.  Thirdly, he also relied upon  the  OGN  at  paragraph
    3.13.20 that internal relocation for  the  appellant  would  be  unduly
    harsh as a single woman with a child.

Discussion

16. I deal first with the judge's finding that the appellant  would  return
    as a lone woman with a newborn baby.

17. At paragraph 35 the judge set  out  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    husband that:

         "he is prepared to go to India if the appellant is removed to India
         and he is permitted to go."

18. The judge  then  went  on  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant's husband would be able to obtain a visa to  enter  India  as
    the appellant's spouse as follows:

         "He is not an Indian citizen and Mr Howells accepted that he  would
         require a spouse visa.  The husband will not be  removed  with  the
         appellant because he has indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.
         There is no evidence before me that  the  husband  would  meet  the
         requirements of a spouse visa for India or of the  timescales  that
         would be involved.  The fact that the baby will be a UK citizen may
         be a significant complicating factor.  I find  that  the  appellant
         would return to India alone; either  heavily  pregnant  or  as  the
         mother of a new born baby."

19. As a consequence of that, at paragraph 36 the judge found that:

         "[the] appellant ... will be a lone mother of a new born  baby  ...
         in India".

20. It is trite to state that the burden of proof was upon the appellant to
    establish that there was a real risk that she  would  be  subjected  to
    serious ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 in India.  It was  accepted
    before me that whether she returned alone or with  her  husband  was  a
    relevant factor in determining whether there was such a risk.  As  part
    and parcel of that burden, the appellant was seeking to establish  that
    she would return to India without her husband.   The  burden  of  proof
    was, therefore,  upon  her  to  show,  albeit  to  the  lower  standard
    applicable in international protection cases,  that  she  would  return
    alone because, in the circumstances of this case, her husband would  be
    unable to obtain entry clearance or would only do so after undue  delay
    and so creating the circumstance in which she claimed the risk  to  her
    from gang members and her family would arise.

21. I do not accept Mr Tuburu's submission that any  burden  of  proof  was
    placed upon the Secretary of State to  prove  (or  introduce  evidence)
    that the appellant's husband would be able to enter India.  There is no
    good reason for casting any evidential (let alone  legal)  burden  upon
    the Secretary of State.  It cannot be said, in my judgement,  that  the
    Secretary of State was in a better position to produce evidence on this
    issue.  No doubt, the appellant could have produced evidence from,  for
    example,  the  Indian  High  Commission  or  other   sources   on   the
    requirements for entry and whether the appellant's husband  was  likely
    to satisfy the requirements.

22. Neither representative referred me to any case law on this issue.   The
    matter is, in my judgment, resolved as a matter of principle as I  have
    indicated.

23. The position might well be different in an Article  8  case  where  the
    Secretary of State bears the burden under Article 8.2 of justifying any
    interference with an individual's private and family  life  and,  if  a
    live issue, whether an individual  can  obtain  entry  clearance  to  a
    foreign country (see SM and Others (Entry  clearance,  proportionality)
    Afghanistan CG [2007] UKAIT  00010).   In  this  appeal,  however,  the
    burden of proof under Article 3 (as in a refugee claim) began and ended
    with the appellant.

24. Consequently, I accept Mr Richards' submission that the judge erred  in
    law in reaching his finding that the appellant would return to India as
    a "lone mother of a newborn baby", a finding which is  predicated  upon
    the erroneous premise that the Secretary of State carried the burden of
    proving that the appellant's husband would gain entry to India.

25. Mr Tuburu accepted that this was a key issue in  the  appeal.   At  the
    conclusion of his submissions, he sought to  argue  that  even  if  the
    judge were in error on this issue it was not material to the  decision.
    I do not accept that submission.

26. First, whether the appellant returns alone or with her  husband  is  an
    issue relevant  to  whether  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  her  to
    internally relocate.  Paragraph  3.13.20  states,  in  the  context  of
    domestic and gender-based violence:

         "For some women in India relocation will not be  unduly  harsh  but
         this is only likely to be the case where the individual is  single,
         without children to support, able to access safe accommodation  and
         is educated enough to be able  to  support  herself.   Some  single
         women may also be able to relocate to live with extended family  or
         friends in other  parts  of  the  country.   However,  where  these
         circumstances do not apply internal  relocation  is  likely  to  be
         unduly harsh".

27. It was that paragraph which the judge relied upon in  paragraph  37  of
    his determination in concluding that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
    appellant to internally relocate.

28. The meaning of paragraph 3.13.20 of the OGN is not without  difficulty.
    In substance it states that internal relocation  will  not  be  "unduly
    harsh" for some women in India.  It then goes on to state that this  is
    "only likely" where the  individual  is  single,  without  children  to
    support, able to access safe accommodation and is educated enough to be
    able to support herself.  The paragraph goes  on  then  to  state  that
    where those circumstances do not apply "internal relocation  is  likely
    to be unduly harsh".

29. The representatives did not make any submissions on the proper  meaning
    of paragraph 3.13.20.  It may  well  be  that  the  paragraph  is  only
    contemplating the return of a "single" woman and then  considering  the
    circumstances where it would not be unduly harsh  for  her  to  return,
    namely where she has  no  children  to  support,  has  access  to  safe
    accommodation and is educated enough to be able to support herself.  If
    a single woman does not fall within those circumstances, then  internal
    relocation is likely to be unduly harsh.  If that is correct,  it  says
    nothing about the position of a woman returning with her husband  where
    she has children and, although the  judge  found  otherwise,  has  some
    means to support herself through her educational background.

30. The crucial point is, however, that the judge applied this provision to
    the appellant because he found she was a "single" returning woman  with
    a child.  That finding, for the reasons  I  have  given  above,  cannot
    stand and  therefore  the  judge's  finding  in  relation  to  internal
    relocation also cannot stand.  That  is,  in  substance,  Mr  Richards'
    third submission which I accept.

31. It may well be that the issue of whether the appellant returns alone or
    with her husband is also relevant to any risk to her in her home  area.
    I do not express any concluded view on this.  As I have concluded  that
    this appeal must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, that will be a
    matter, if raised before it, for the First-tier Tribunal  dealing  with
    the remitted appeal.

32. Turning to the second issue concerning the judge's finding in paragraph
    38 of his determination that the state would not provide a "sufficiency
    of protection" the judge's reasoning was as follows:

         "If the appellant does return to her home village then  she  is  at
         serious risk of treatment that would breach  her  protected  rights
         under Articles 2 and 3 of the Human  Rights  Convention,  from  the
         rape gang and her family.  There is no evidence of a sufficiency of
         state protection in her home village.  The objective evidence casts
         significant doubt on the general  ability  of  the  authorities  to
         protect women from domestic violence or  repeat  sexual  abuse.   I
         find that it is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  will  be
         subject to violence from the rape gang or her own family  and  will
         not be able to effectively access police protection.   Her  ability
         to flee or protect herself will be severely limited by her new born
         baby."

    Mr Richards submitted that the judge had failed to take into account in
    reaching his finding that the appellant had not sought state protection
    in India after the attacks upon  her.   In  my  judgment,  that  was  a
    relevant factor  which  the  judge  should  have  taken  into  account.
    Further, it is far from clear upon what "objective evidence" the  judge
    bases his comment that there  is  "significant  doubt  on  the  general
    ability of the authorities to protect women from domestic  violence  or
    repeated sexual abuse".  Mr Tuburu, as  I  have  already  pointed  out,
    referred me to  the  OGN  dealing  with  "violence  against  women"  at
    paragraphs 3.13.12-3.13.21.  There is undoubtedly some  evidence  there
    that the police do not effectively or with any ready enthusiasm enforce
    laws  or  investigate  complaints  relating  to  domestic  and   gender
    violence.  Paragraph 3.13.19 of the OGN concludes:

         "Those experiencing or fearing domestic violence, or other forms of
         gender-based violence are able to seek protection from  the  Indian
         authorities.   However,  given  the   lack   of   law   enforcement
         safeguards, including the refusal  to  register  domestic  violence
         complaints, discriminatory attitudes held by the  police,  failures
         to conduct  effective  investigations  and  corruption,  each  case
         should be considered on its individual  merits  to  assess  whether
         effective protection will be provided."

33. In my judgment, the judge failed to give that individual  consideration
    highlighted in the OGN as essential.  Even though there  is  supporting
    evidence for his view, the Judge has not given adequate reasons for his
    finding particularly in view of the fact that he  fails  to  take  into
    account the appellant's own evidence that she did not  seek  protection
    from the police following the attacks.

34. For that reason, the judge's finding in  relation  to  "sufficiency  of
    protection" also cannot stand.

35. Thus, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal under Article 3 involved the making of an error of law  and  its
    decision cannot stand.

Decision and Disposal

36. Both representatives invited me to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal if I set aside  Judge  Archer's  decision.   Bearing  in  mind
    paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statements, I consider
    that an appropriate course of action.  There are significant evidential
    matters which must be considered and factual findings made.  The  judge
    made no findings in relation to Article 8 because he allowed the appeal
    under Article 3.  Art 8 may become relevant at a re-hearing.

37. The issues for the First-tier Tribunal will be

         (1) whether the appellant has established a real  risk  of  serious
         harm for the purposes of humanitarian protection or  Article  3  of
         the ECHR;

         (2)  whether  the  appellant  would  obtain   a   "sufficiency   of
         protection" both in her home area or elsewhere to which  she  might
         internally relocate;

         (3) whether, if the appellant has established the required risk and
         an insufficiency of state protection in her home area,  whether  it
         would be unduly harsh or unreasonable for her  to  relocate  within
         India.

38. In addition, the appellant relies upon Article 8 and (to the extent  it
    adds anything to her claim) Article 2 of the ECHR.

39. In  determining  the  issues  I  have  identified  above,  whether  the
    appellant will return to India alone or accompanied by her husband will
    be a factual matter to be determined by the First-tier Tribunal as will
    the relevance of that to internal relocation or, perhaps, any  risk  to
    her in India.

40. I see no reason to set aside the  judge's  finding  (untouched  by  the
    errors of law) that the appellant's account was credible in relation to
    her repeated gang rape.

41. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    remit the appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined  in
    accordance with the above and to be heard by a judge other  than  Judge
    Archer.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

