
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05887/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 February 2016                       |On 4 April 2016                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM



                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, Lawrence & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Palestine and he  was  born  on  16  May
    1987.  He made an application for asylum on 24 October 2014  which  was
    refused on 19 March 2015 by the respondent who did not accept that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return to Lebanon  as  a  result  of  sur
    place activities.

2.   The appellant's evidence in summary is  that  he  has  attended  twenty
    demonstrations in London against the Syrian regime outside the  Syrian,
    Russia, US and Iranian Embassies. He claimed to be chanting and holding
    banners and produced at the hearing photographs that had been taken  of
    him demonstrating.   His case is that  the  Lebanese  authorities  have
    seen the photographs and have become aware of the sur place  activities
    and this has resulted in  the  appellant's  brother  and  father  being
    detained by the authorities in Lebanon.

3.   The appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Devittie  following  a  hearing  in  a  decision   that   was
    promulgated on 12 October 2015.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Plimmer  granted
    permission on 22 December 2015.  Thus the matter comes before me today.



4.   In support of the appellant's case  he  produced  (appellant's  bundle,
    section B,  Page  1)  an  article  from  The  Daily  Star  (a  Lebanese
    newspaper) of 31 March 2015.  He submitted this in order  to  establish
    that surveillance is conducted by the authorities which  would  explain
    how the authorities became aware of the photographs and his  sur  place
    activities.

5.   The judge made findings from paragraph 12 of  the  decision.  He  found
    that the appellant was not credible for a number of  reasons,  most  of
    which are not challenged.  The judge did not accept that the  appellant
    had established that his father and brother were arrested and  although
    he accepted that the appellant had taken part in the demonstrations  as
    claimed, he did not accept  that  these  activities  had  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities.

6.   The judge at paragraph 11 refers to the evidence of  the  newspaper  in
    The Daily Star in the context  of  the  appellant's  submissions.   The
    grounds of appeal argue, in a nutshell, that the judge had no regard to
    the evidence of The Daily Star and he failed to make findings on it and
    thus the assessment of credibility and risk is flawed.

7.   It is clear that the judge was mindful of the evidence from  The  Daily
    Star (see paragraph 11(i)). He does not make findings about the article
    but in my view this does not amount to a material error of law. By  any
    account the content of the article is extremely weak evidential support
    for the appellant's case that his sur place activities have come to the
    attention of the authorities.  The newspaper article  is  not  sourced.
    It claims that a computer spying campaign is likely to have  originated
    with a government agency or political group in  Lebanon  and  that  the
    activities are without financial motive and are not perpetrated by  low
    skill hackers.

8.   The judge found the appellant  to  be  lacking  in  credibility  for  a
    number of reasons.  He took into  account  the  photographic  evidence.
    There was no evidence that these were on the internet or in any way  in
    the public domain so it is difficult to see any connection between them
    and the article in the newspaper. The article  quite  simply  does  not
    establish what the appellant wants it to; namely, that the  authorities
    are engaging in a computer  spying  campaign  which  targets  political
    dissent and  that  as  a  result  of  this  they  have  discovered  the
    appellant's sur place activities.  The  link  between  the  appellant's
    case and the content of the article is at best  tenuous.  There  is  no
    material error of law.


Notice of Decision

9.   There is no material error of law and the decision  of  Judge  Devittie
    is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date  16 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

