

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05047/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 12th March 2015                           |On 20th May 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     LJ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson and
                    Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic of Iran who is now
      aged 44 years old.  Her appeal has taken far too long to be  resolved,
      and  apologies  must  be  offered  to  both  parties  for  that.   The
      Appellant's appeal was dismissed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
      Brunnen) on the 14th July 2013. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by
      Judge JM Lewis on the 8th August 2013 and on the 11th October  2013  I
      heard submissions on whether the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      contained an error of law. Finding that it did, I  directed  that  the
      matter be re-listed before me so that the decision could  be  re-made.
      So far so good.  Then an unfortunate administrative error  meant  that
      the file was  then  sent  into  storage.   Repeated  requests  by  the
      Appellant's solicitors for the matter to be relisted went unheeded. It
      was not until February 2015 that the error was rectified, bringing the
      matter back before me.  As  I  say,  apologies  are  offered  to  both
      parties for this delay.

      Background & Error of Law

   2. When the Appellant claimed asylum back in April 2013 the basis of  her
      claim was that she faced a well-founded fear in Iran  for  reasons  of
      her imputed political  opinion/  membership  of  a  particular  social
      group.  Her case was that she had  felt  trapped  in  an  unhappy  and
      sometimes violent marriage to a man whose family  had  disapproved  of
      what they perceived as her lax adherence to Iran's strict dress  codes
      for women, and, by inference, her morality overall.  Male  members  of
      his family were in the Etelaat. The Appellant had an affair, this  was
      discovered by her husband and she was taken to court  and  accused  of
      adultery.  She managed to escape detention after  her  father  paid  a
      fine and her husband withdrew the allegation against her.  Having been
      returned to her difficult domestic situation, and fearing that further
      allegations would be made against her, the Appellant left Iran.

   3. The Respondent did not believe the account given  and  the  claim  was
      rejected on the 6th May 2013[1].

   4. When the matter came before Judge Brunnen  in  July  2013  he  had  an
      opportunity of hearing live evidence from the Appellant.  Having  done
      so he gave a number of unassailably  sound  reasons  why  he  did  not
      accept the Appellant's account as credible.  Whilst he  accepted  that
      she had been unhappy in her marriage, he rejected  her  evidence  that
      members of her husband's family were in the Etelaat, that she had been
      caught having an affair or that she had faced criminal prosecution  as
      a result.   The Appellant had on appeal stated that she had  taken  an
      interest in Christianity. Although at that stage she did  not  put  it
      any higher than that, she was resolute in her  evidence  that  she  no
      longer considered herself to be a Muslim. She objected  to  having  to
      conform to strict Islamic dress codes and felt it an  infringement  of
      her rights to have, for instance, to cover her  head.   Of  this  last
      matter Judge Brunnen said this [at 41]:

          "With regard to the issue arising from religion  and  the  Iranian
          dress code, I accept  Miss  Khan's  submission  that  the  Refugee
          Convention protects the right to hold no religious belief as  much
          as the right to hold a particular belief. However I do not  accept
          that this right is infringed by being  compelled  to  dress  in  a
          particular way. I accept that the dress code enforced in  Iran  is
          based on the Islamic foundation  that  underpins  all  aspects  of
          Iranian society. However the dress code is not simply a matter  of
          religion. It is also a matter of culture and social mores.  For  a
          woman to have her head uncovered in public, for example, would not
          merely be in contravention of Islamic ideas but  also  an  offence
          against public decency. All societies have standards as to how  it
          is or it is not acceptable for people to dress and these  are  not
          merely manifestations of religious belief. I do not consider  that
          being compelled to comply with  the  locally  acceptable  standard
          constitutes persecution for reasons of religion or any  breach  of
          any protected human right".

   5. It was against this reasoning that the appeal was brought to the Upper
      Tribunal. At the hearing in October 2013 Ms Khan  successfully  argued
      that the First-tier Tribunal had erred, in the  context  of  Iran,  in
      seeking to distinguish social expectations about dress  and  behaviour
      from religion.  There had been before the Tribunal an expert report by
      Dr Kakhki who had explained in detail  the  relationship  between  the
      state and religion in the Iranian theocracy. The dress  code  enforced
      by the laws of that country were universally described as "Islamic". I
      , and indeed the Respondent,  agreed that this was so.   There  was  a
      clear causal nexus between  the  harm  feared  -  for  instance  being
      attacked in the street by Baseeji or being sentenced to flogging - and
      the Convention reason. If the Appellant were to  be  seriously  harmed
      for refusing  to  comply  with  Iranian  dress  codes  that  would  be
      persecution for reasons of her (lack of) religious belief.   There was
      further an omission in that the determination contained no findings of
      fact about how the Appellant would in fact act if  returned  to  Iran.
      This was an important consideration. I noted in my written decision on
      'Error of Law' that I remained to be satisfied that if  she  chose  to
      comply and cover her hair, albeit with internal objections, that  this
      would be so fundamental a breach of her core human  rights  so  as  to
      amount to persecution: the 'HJ (Iran)[2]' point would  therefore  need
      to be addressed in the re-making.  The decision was set aside to  that
      limited extent.

      The Re-Made Decision

   6.  Perhaps  inevitably,  given  the  delay,  the  Appellant's  case  had
      developed considerably by the time the  appeal  was  reconvened.   The
      central plank of her case was now that she has formally  converted  to
      Christianity, having been baptised at Liverpool Cathedral. As such she
      was an apostate from Islam and faced a real risk of harm as a  result.
       Permission was sought to adduce evidence on this matter.  Mr Harrison
      did not object. He rightly accepted that this was not an entirely  new
      basis of claim. Part of the  Appellant's  case  had  always  been  her
      antipathy towards Islam, and she had expressed her nascent interest in
      Christianity before Judge Brunnen. As such this new material was  part
      of a continuum  of  evidence.  Permission  was  granted  for  the  new
      evidence to be  admitted.  This  comprised  a  letter  from  Liverpool
      Cathedral, her baptism certificate and pictures of the ceremony, and a
      statement from the Appellant.

   7. Live evidence was called from the Appellant  and  from  Canon  Richard
      White of  Liverpool  Anglican  Cathedral.  Canon  White  worked  as  a
      missionary with young people for many years before  he  trained  as  a
      vicar and took a degree in Theology.  The Appellant first attended the
      Cathedral in the Autumn of 2013. That was when Canon White  first  met
      her and he has seen her regularly - at least on a weekly basis - since
      then. The Appellant attends the Cathedral at  least  twice  per  week.
      She comes to the standard Sunday service and on Monday evenings  comes
      to the Farsi service. There are about  60  Iranians  who  attend  this
      service. The congregation on Sundays is usually between  350  and  400
      people.  Canon White thought that the majority of the Iranians do  not
      have any settled status in the UK. As far as he is aware about  15  of
      them have leave to remain.

   8. The Appellant has completed the Alpha course. This course is  designed
      as an introduction to Christianity. It lasts for about  14  weeks  and
      the Church of England would ordinarily expect people to have completed
      it before they are baptised. The Canon delivered the course  that  the
      Appellant took. It was delivered through interpreters in Farsi, and it
      has been adapted specifically to  answer  questions  often  raised  by
      people  who  had  formerly  been  Muslims,  for  instance   particular
      questions about the nature of the trinity.  Part of the message of the
      Alpha course is that it is important to spread the faith. Although  he
      has not personally witnessed the  Appellant  evangelising  he  has  no
      reason to doubt that she would.

   9. Canon White said that the Cathedral would not baptise someone if  they
      were unsure as to whether that  individual  had  genuinely  converted.
      They are of course aware that there is an advantage to be  gained  for
      some nationalities who may be able to make asylum  claims  because  of
      their conversion. As  a  result  the  Cathedral  is  rigorous  in  its
      approach.  They have produced a leaflet in Farsi which explains to new
      congregants that they cannot  expect  anyone  from  the  Cathedral  to
      attend court for them, nor that they will inevitably be baptised.   In
      the case of the Appellant part of her preparation was a weekend course
      where the  former  Bishop  of  Tehran  attended  and  spoke  with  the
      participants - he also helped to baptise her alongside the  Bishop  of
      Liverpool.  Whilst it can never  be  said  with  100%  certainty  that
      anyone is definitely genuine neither Canon White nor any other  member
      of clergy at the Cathedral have any doubts about  the  Appellant.   He
      has had many opportunities to talk to her about her faith.  She  takes
      an active role in the life of the Cathedral and she appears to him  to
      understand and believe in  what  she  is  doing.  In  response  to  Mr
      Harrison's questions Canon White  confirmed  that  the  Cathedral  has
      refused to baptise people, and  that  he  has  personally  refused  to
      baptise an Iranian  asylum  seeker.   The  Appellant  is  one  of  the
      exceptional cases where the clergy at the Cathedral have decided  that
      they should support her case. In  all  the  years  that  he  has  been
      ministering to the Iranian congregation Canon White has only  attended
      court on four other occasions.  All of those four individuals continue
      to attend the Cathedral regularly.  He has refused to attend  numerous
      asylum appeals including in three cases those of Iranians who had been
      baptised - in each of these cases something had given  rise  to  doubt
      about their faith after the baptism and Canon White therefore  refused
      to support their claims.

  10. Having heard the evidence of the Appellant and Canon White, and having
      had an opportunity of cross-examining both witnesses, Mr Harrison said
      that he was not going to seek to persuade me to reject the claim  that
      the Appellant had converted. Notwithstanding that her earlier evidence
      had been rightly rejected by Judge Brunnen this was not a  claim  that
      came 'out of the blue'; the Appellant as she  presented  today  was  a
      natural progression from the woman that had claimed asylum  two  years
      ago. Canon White is a man of considerable experience and it  is  clear
      from his evidence that he and his fellow clergy at Liverpool Cathedral
      are all too well  aware  that  some  Iranians  might  seek  to  "fake"
      conversion  in  order  to  make  unfounded  asylum  claims.   That  is
      something he is alive to and it  has  indeed  led  him  to  refuse  to
      baptise, and attend court, for others.  Over a period of two years  he
      had come to know the Appellant well, seen her and spoken with her on a
      weekly basis and he had formed the view that he  was  as  sure  as  he
      could be about her claim to be a  Christian.    Mr  Harrison  accepted
      that I would be entitled to attach substantial weight to his  opinion.
      In the absence of any evidence to  the  contrary,  the  Appellant  has
      shown on the lower standard of proof that she is in fact a Christian.

  11. It follows that the Appellant's  appeal  must  be  allowed  on  asylum
      grounds.  I, like Mr Harrison, was left in very little doubt that  the
      Appellant has genuinely converted to Christianity. Having  left  Islam
      she is by operation of Islamic law  as  it  is  applied  in  Iran  and
      apostate and would very likely suffer serious  harm  on  return  as  a
      result.

  12. In respect of the Appellant's objection to wearing the hijab  she  was
      ambivalent about what she would  actually  do  if  returned  to  Iran.
      Although she consistently said that she has objections to being forced
      to cover her hair,  she was not able to say with  certainty  what  she
      would actually do if faced with the dilemma. She initially  said  that
      if returned to Iran she would wear the headscarf because  if  she  did
      not there would be serious consequences. She then adamantly said  that
      she would refuse. Finally she said that she  did  not  know  what  she
      would do. It  would  be  a  difficult  decision.  She  was  unable  to
      articulate why she objected to the garment beyond saying that she  did
      not like it. God had made her like she was and she  did  not  want  to
      hide that.  She then accepted Mr Harrison's point that God had made us
      all naked and that it was probably not socially acceptable for us  all
      to walk around with  no  clothes  on.  Having  heard  the  Appellant's
      evidence Ms Khan chose not to make submissions  on  the  hijab  point,
      notwithstanding that her solicitors had provided a very erudite report
      by Dr Anna Enayat of Oxford University.   Although Dr Enayat's  report
      raised interesting points I find that Ms Khan was wise not  to  pursue
      this point in this case. Although it was clear  from  the  Appellant's
      evidence that she did not like the hijab she was unable to say whether
      she would in fact wear it, or why she would object to it if  she  did.
      She did not, for instance, couch her objections  in  terms  of  gender
      discrimination or religious belief. Nor did she claim that  having  to
      wear it would amount to a flagrant breach of her  personal  and  moral
      integrity.  For those reasons that plank of her case was rightly  not,
      in the end, pursued.

      Decisions

  13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law
      and it is set aside only to the extent identified above.

  14. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

      "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

      The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection  because  she
      is a refugee.

      The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

  15. In view of the subject matter of this appeal I make  a  direction  for
      anonymity having had regard to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of
      2013: Anonymity Orders.

           "Unless and until a tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
          Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
          shall directly or indirectly identify her or  any  member  of  her
          family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and  to  the
          Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
          contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               10th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] The appeal is brought against a decision to remove the Appellant
pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 dated 14th May 2013.
[2] HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31

