
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/05967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 26th January 2015                 |On 25th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                      KO
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Stevens, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20th March 1960  and  she
    appealed against a decision made on  4th  August  2014  to  remove  the
    appellant from the United Kingdom following  a  refusal  to  grant  her
    asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  protection  under  the  European
    Convention.

 2. In a determination promulgated on 11th November 2014 Judge of the First
    Tier Tribunal C  H  Bennett  refused  the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 3. An application for permission asserted that the Jude had erred  in  law
    in failing to grant and adjournment, failed to  consider  property  the
    evidence provided and failed to consider Article 8.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Stevens relied  on  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) and  submitted  that  the  judge  did
    consider the application in detail  but  the  refusal  to  adjourn  was
    unfair given  the  credibility  findings.  A  specific  aspect  of  her
    evidence could  be  clarified  through  medical  reports  including  an
    assessment of the anal  injuries.   The  appellant  had  mental  health
    problems and her injuries were  consistent  with  her  claim  that  she
    experienced gang rape.  Mr Whitwell submitted that there was  still  no
    report before the Tribunal even though the appellant was given time.

Conclusions

 5. The application for permission to appeal by  the  appellant  challenged
    Judge Bennett's decision on the basis that the judge had made  material
    findings  in  relations  to  the   appellant's   credibility   in   his
    determination and argued that she was an  unreliable  witness  yet  the
    Judge failed to take proper account of  the  appellant's  mental  state
    including her  previous  psychotic  episode  which  led  to  her  being
    sectioned under the Mental Health Act (as confirmed in paragraph 34  of
    the appeal determination).  In essence it was  stated  that  it  should
    have been clear to the Judge that a psychiatric report was required  in
    order  for  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's  ability  to   respond
    consistently to questions relating to her history of suffering  inhuman
    treatment and torture in Nigeria.  Instead of granting  an  adjournment
    the judge gave the appellant's representatives an unrealistic period of
    time in which to instruct such an expert to prepare  a  medical  report
    (three weeks)  and  the  judge  did  not  mention  or  respond  to  the
    confirmation    in    the    appellant's    representative's    further
    representations  submitted,  in   accordance   with   the   directions,
    confirming the impossibility of instructing medical  experts  with  the
    timeframe allowed and as confirmed by emails from various  medical  and
    psychological experts which were included in the representations.

 6. It was also stated that the respondent had only made the basis  of  the
    rejection of her claim known on 4th  August  2014.   The  hearing  took
    place on 19th September 2014.

 7. The  Rule  24  response  from  the  respondent  advanced  that  counsel
    representing the appellant before the First Tier Tribunal  accepted  an
    error on the part of the solicitors for failure to  request  a  medical
    report prior to the hearing.  The respondent submitted that  the  judge
    directed himself appropriately.

 8. At paragraph 23 the judge reasoned that he was not satisfied  that  the
    appeal  could  not  be  justly  determined  without  there   being   an
    adjournment and thus he was prohibited by the mandatory  provisions  of
    Rule 21(2) of the Tribunal Procedure Rules from adjourning the hearing.
     The background as set out above and in the determination was that  the
    appellant had experienced significant mental health difficulties  since
    2009 as a result of the experiences  in  Nigeria.   Clearly  the  judge
    accepted the necessity to delay his determination for the production of
    further evidence in relation to medical  reports  and  yet  by  way  of
    contradiction did not consider that the  appeal  could  not  be  justly
    determined on the day.

 9. The judge stated at [22a]

         'There has been ample time since June 2014 (a fortiori since  March
         2012) for a medical report dealing with  the  question  of  whether
         that was reasonably likely  to  have  been  a  consequence  of  the
         (asserted) rapes.  There is  no  clear  explanation,  let  alone  a
         witness statement from the individual who has been handling Mrs O's
         case at all times since she first consulted Duncan  Lewis  (or  any
         other firm or firms she has previously consulted), to  explain  why
         (if this is  the  case)  no  steps  had  been  taken  to  obtain  a
         consultant's  report  or  to  demonstrate   what,   if   any,   but
         unsuccessful attempts had been made.  I am well aware  that  Duncan
         Lewis is experienced and conscientious solicitors, well  accustomed
         to dealing with immigration  and  asylum  appeals.   Whilst  it  is
         possible that whoever has had the conduct  of  this  matter  simply
         overlooked the need to obtain a consultant's report (and this is in
         effect what Miss Sirikanda invited  me  to  conclude),  I  was  not
         provided with the details necessary to reach a positive  conclusion
         that that is what happened.  I am not satisfied that it is the only
         realistic explanation'

10. Although the judge stated at [21] that he was not  satisfied  that  the
    requirement of Rule 21(3)(c ) of the Rules was fulfilled that is

         (c) where the party has failed to comply with directions for the
         production of the evidence he has provided a satisfactory
         explanation for that failure.

      he stated at 22(e)

         'crucially and irrespective of all the above points, I could see no
         reason why I should adjourn the hearing, and waste the hearing day,
         or why I should not simply hear the oral evidence  and  then  delay
         the preparation of  my  determination  for  a  comparatively  short
         period of time to enable DL to arrange for Mrs. O to be seen by one
         or more appropriate medical practitioners and for their reports  to
         be submitted. ...

         The 3 week period which that involved was shorter than that which
         Miss Sirikanda required.  But I had in mind, not only the ample
         time which there has been to obtain a report but that to obtain a
         report within the above timescale might involved the payment of an
         additional fee.  But if that was the result, that would simply be
         the consequence of having delayed the giving of instructions and/or
         not having considered the need for one or more medical reports in
         good time. No evidence was placed before me to support the
         proposition, and I am not satisfied that no such reports could be
         obtained within the 3 weeks which I allowed'.

11. The judge gave  no  consideration  as  to  whether  the  fault  of  the
    solicitors, bearing in mind the mental health of the appellant,  should
    be held against the appellant and did  not  take  the  point  that  the
    decision letter of the respondent was produced a matter  of  only  just
    over 6 weeks prior to the date of the hearing.

12. As pointed out above the reasons for refusal were made the month before
    the hearing and the judge made no reference to the emails sent  to  the
    Tribunal demonstrating that the medical report could  not  be  produced
    within the three week timescale.

13. I am not persuaded that Nwaigwe is per incuriam not least  because  the
    Tribunal Procedure Rules are to be read in the light of the  overriding
    objective (rule 4 of the Procedure Rules) and an  overriding  objective
    is just that.  Whether applying  Rule  4  of  the  2005  Rules  or  the
    previous Rule 10 the proceedings must be just.

14. The reference to  Rule  21(3)(c  )  does  not  take  into  account  the
    overriding objective but even if that were incorrect Ngwaige refers  to
    the fundamental common law right, namely the right of every litigant to
    a fair hearing.  I cannot see that Nwwaige  is  per  incuriam  on  this
    point. It is self evident that the interests  of  justice  include  the
    differing perspectives of both appellant and respondent  and  time  and
    expense refers to that of the  appellant  and  respondent  and  to  the
    expense to the public of funding the asylum appeal system.

15. SH Afghanistan v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 (albeit that the  court  was
    not  concerned  with  the  Tribunal  Rules)  sets  out  a   fundamental
    proposition with regard adjournments, and although this  case  referred
    to Fast Track cases, the proposition can be applied more generally,  as
    follows

          'It is fundamental that the parties should be  allowed  to  answer
         adverse material by evidence as well as argument (see, e.g., In Re.
         D [1996] AC 593 at 603) and all  the  more  so  where  the  subject
         matter, such as a claim for asylum, demands the  highest  standards
         of fairness (R v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  ex-
         parte Fayed [1998] 1 WLR 763-777).'

         And further

         'if that report had not been obtained the question  for  the  Upper
         Tribunal on appeal from the First  Tier  Tribunal  was  whether  it
         would have been pointless to wait for further independent  evidence
         as to age.  Tribunals, like courts, must set aside a  determination
         reached by the adoption of an  unfair  procedure  unless  they  are
         satisfied that it would be pointless to do so  because  the  result
         would inevitably be the same'.

16. One of the distinguishing features in SH appeared to be  not  that  the
    matter was in fast track but that in fact, as in this case, it  was  an
    asylum matter.

17. The fact that the judge delayed his decision by 3 weeks accepts that  a
    further report would not necessarily be pointless and as conceded by Mr
    Whitwell, and in this particular case nowhere in the determination  was
    there any reference to the Vulnerable Witnesses  guidelines.   This  in
    itself was an error but a further report may well have  shed  light  on
    the treatment of the appellant's evidence (the  first  interviews  were
    conducted) and the approach to be taken to it.

18. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified and this goes  to
    the heart of the credibility findings of the determination.  As such  I
    do not address the further grounds in the application for permission to
    appeal.   I set aside the decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of  the
    Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in  mind
    the nature and extent of the findings to be made the matter  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of  the
    TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement



Signed      Date 23rd February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

