
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05787/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 June, 11 and 12 September 2014 |On 16 June 2016                      |
|and 27 April, 24 and 25 June 2015    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McGEACHY


                                   Between

                               Saleem Miakhel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel (instructed by Messrs Lawrence
                    & Co Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is the determination of the Tribunal to which each of its  members
    has contributed.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on  15  February
    1994.  He left Afghanistan in 2007 and travelled to Iran by  lorry  and
    then through various unknown countries by foot and lorry  entering  the
    United Kingdom clandestinely on 22 January 2008.  He claimed asylum  on
    29 January 2008 when he was served with the form IS.151A as an  illegal
    entrant.  His asylum claim was refused in a decision dated 22 July 2008
    but he was granted discretionary leave (in accordance with  the  policy
    of the  Secretary  of  State  regarding  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
    children) until 15  August  2011.   He  did  not  appeal  against  that
    refusal.

3.   The Appellant applied for further leave to  remain  on  18  July  2011.
    The application was refused on 28 May  2012.   The  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision.  His appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Black on 24 July 2012 and dismissed.   On  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal the determination of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.   We   heard  the  appeal  as  a  country
    guidance appeal to consider the relevance of "Badal", that is   revenge
    under the Pashtunwali Code, in a dispute  between an   Afghani  Pashtun
    and the Taliban but given the effluxion of time  it  has  been  decided
    not to report it as such.

The appellant's claim

4.   The Appellant  is  a  Pashtun  from  Wazir  village,  in  the  Khogyani
    district in Nangarhar Province in  Afghanistan.   When  he  arrived  in
    Britain on 22 January 2008 he was aged 13.  His evidence then was  that
    he had lived with his parents in Afghanistan: his  father  had  been  a
    fighter with Hisb-e-Islami since before his birth and  had  spent  long
    periods away from home.  His father had then become a driver  for  ACDO
    (the Afghan Community  Development  Organisation)  which  was  an  NGO.
    Around June 2006 the Taliban had started to visit his home because they
    wanted his father to join them. Although the Appellant  initially  said
    that his father had "gone into  hiding"  he  later  asserted  that  his
    father had been taken or kidnapped by the Taliban.

5.   The Taliban had told his mother that if his father  did not  join  them
    his sons would be killed. Shortly thereafter the Appellant's uncle  had
    made arrangements for him to leave Afghanistan and come to  the  United
    Kingdom. The appellant left Afghanistan in June 2007 when he  was  aged
    13 and 4 months. At interview,  the  Appellant  gave  evidence  of  his
    father's periods away from home whilst fighting for  Hisb-e-Islami  and
    also details of his paternal uncle  who  had  arranged  his  travel  to
    Britain.  Asked for details of the Taliban who came  to  his  home,  he
    said that he had not known their names or whether or not they were from
    his village.  He stated that if he  were  returned  to  Afghanistan  he
    would be killed by the Taliban.  He said  that it was his uncle,  Waris
    Khan Sherzad, who had told him that his father had been  taken  by  the
    Taliban (Waris Khan Sherzad is in fact  his  father's  cousin).   Asked
    what he believed the Taliban might have done with his father when  they
    had taken him, he stated that they might have killed him or might  have
    done something to him.  He said the reason his father had not wanted to
    join the Taliban was because he had wanted to look after his family.

6.   The Respondent did not accept the  Appellant's  evidence:  it  was  not
    accepted that his father had been a member of Hisb-e-Islami or that his
    father had worked for an NGO or that the  Taliban  had  issued  threats
    against the Appellant.  The letter of refusal also stated that  it  was
    not accepted that the Appellant would be alone  in  Afghanistan  if  he
    were returned, as his mother, siblings and uncle  remained  there.   It
    was also asserted in the  letter  of  refusal  that  a  sufficiency  of
    protection was available in Kabul.

7.   When the Appellant renewed his claim for asylum in 2011 he stated  that
    the authorities would know that his father had been taken, as they  had
    informants who had reported that the Taliban were going  to  his  house
    and that "my father had gone with them".  He therefore  suggested  that
    he would be at risk from the authorities as well as from  the  Taliban.
    He stated that if returned to Kabul he would not be safe there, because
    the authorities would want to know who he was and if they found out  he
    was his father's son that would expose him to the adverse attention  of
    the authorities who were based in Kabul.

8.   He said that if he went to Kabul he would have to try to get help  from
    local people from his home area to assist him and therefore the Taliban
    would learn, as he would have to live in a community which had a lot of
    Taliban informants, that he was there and he would be traced to  Kabul.
    Because it was known that he had returned  from  London,  he  would  be
    thought to be a spy.  He asserted that there would be no protection for
    him in Kabul where he would not be able to look after himself.

9.   He went on to say that he had tried to  obtain  information  about  his
    family but had been unsuccessful. He said that Waris Khan  Sherzad  had
    called his father-in-law, who lived in Pakistan, who had told him  that
    he could not go to the Appellant's area for fear of the  Taliban.   The
    appellant did not know whether his  uncle,  mother  and  siblings  were
    still in their village.  He went on to say that he  would  be  at  risk
    from the Taliban because he would be seen to be an infidel, the son  of
    a traitor and also as a traitor himself.  He asserted that the  Taliban
    would want him to train "to do their suicide bombing". In his statement
    dated 6 July 2012 it is of note that the  appellant  stated  that  that
    "the insurgents came and captured my father and took him away".

10.  At the outset of the hearing before us on 19 June  2014  it  was  noted
    that, although Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins had set aside the  decision
    of  Judge Black and stated that the appeal was to be heard afresh,   on
    13 June 2013 there had  been a  hearing  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen, who considered that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  positive
    findings were  sustainable  and  it  was  agreed  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's positive findings over paragraphs  39  to  48  of  his
    determination should be preserved.  Judge Black's relevant findings  in
    paragraphs 41 onwards were:

         "41. Mr Sherzad (Waris Khan  Sherzad)  himself  claimed  asylum  on
             arrival in the United Kingdom in February  2002.   He  pursued
             his claim on the basis of his own arrest  by  the  authorities
             and their questioning of him about his  father's  whereabouts:
             his father had been  a  commander  in  Hisb-e-Islami  and  had
             worked with the Appellant's father in that  organisation.   Mr
             Sherzad was granted asylum following an appeal in which he was
             found to be a credible witness.  On this  basis,  having  seen
             the determination on Mr Sherzad's appeal, I find, particularly
             in the absence of any challenge by the  Respondent,  that  the
             Appellant's  uncle's  account  is  a  reliable  one,  that  Mr
             Sherzad's father was a commander of  Hisb-e-Islami,  that  the
             family has a history of association with the Hisb-e-Islami and
             that Mr Sherzad's father worked with the Appellant's father in
             that organisation.

         42.  The Appellant's  uncle  has  explained  how  he  obtained  the
             documentation which evidences the  Appellant's  father's  work
             for the NGO, Afghan Community Development Organisation (ACDO).
              I also note the emails  from  that  organisation.   I  accept
             therefore that the Appellant's father worked for ACDO  between
             1 April 2005 and 15 September 2006.  This timing is consistent
             with the Appellant's evidence as to his last sighting  of  his
             father a week before he left Afghanistan in June 2006.

         43.  Taking the evidence of the Appellant  and  his  uncle  in  the
             round, I am satisfied that the Appellant  is  a  credible  and
             reliable witness.  I accept that his  father  was  formerly  a
             member of Hisb-e-Islami and that he later worked as  a  driver
             for an NGO.  I also accept that, following two visits  to  the
             family  home  by  members  of  the  Taliban  looking  for  the
             Appellant's  father,  the  latter  disappeared  and  that  the
             Appellant has not seen him  since  about  a  week  before  the
             Appellant's departure from Afghanistan.

         44.  The Appellant's uncle has provided  the  Appellant's  father's
             work  telephone  number  in  his   witness   statement.    The
             Appellant's uncle says in his  statement  that  he  discovered
             from his father-in-law that the Appellant's  father  had  been
             taken by the Taliban.  I therefore accept  that  this  is  the
             case.

         45.  In summary, I accept that the Appellant's father is  a  former
             member of Hisb-e-Islami and that he was being  pressurised  by
             the Taliban into joining that organisation.  I accept that the
             Taliban was likely to  have  been  aware  of  the  Appellant's
             father's employment by ACDO as a driver.  I also  accept  that
             the  Appellant's  father  has   disappeared   and   that   his
             whereabouts are not known.

         46.  It is claimed that, had the Respondent attempted to locate the
             Appellant's family on his arrival, she would have  appreciated
             that he was an orphan at the time.  I do not consider this  to
             be  the  case.   There  is  no  reliable  evidence  that   the
             Appellant's mother was not still living in his family home and
             indeed is not still there now; the Appellant's uncle makes the
             point that it is difficult to obtain news from that  area  and
             this explains the lack of it.  There is no  reliable  evidence
             that the Appellant's mother, uncle and siblings are no  longer
             living in their homes in the Appellant's village either now or
             at any time since his departure in June 2007.

         47.  Relying on the above factual matrix, I find that the Appellant
             is likely to be known in his village as the son of a  man  who
             was formerly a member of the Hisb-e-Islami and who,  latterly,
             has worked for an NGO as a driver.   It  is  likely  that  the
             Taliban would have been aware of this and that  his  work  for
             the NGO was at the root of their visits to the family home  to
             find him.  This finding is consistent with the evidence of  Dr
             Giustozzi as follows:

                  'The  practice  of  the  Taliban  to  threaten  government
                  officials  and  anybody   whom   they   consider   to   be
                  collaborating with the enemy in order  to  force  them  to
                  resign or abandon  their  activities  is  well-documented.
                  The targets typically  included  elders,  senior  clerics,
                  teachers, Judges, policemen, soldiers,  National  Security
                  Directorate officials, interpreters, contractors  and  NGO
                  workers.  When intimidation does not work,  assassinations
                  are common.  Many have been assassinated'.

         48.  On Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence,  I  accept  therefore  that  the
             Appellant's father has disappeared and that it is the  Taliban
             which was responsible for his disappearance.  However, I  note
             Dr Giustozzi's opinion that the  Taliban's  hostility  to  the
             Appellant's father 'is unlikely to have  been  caused  by  his
             failure to join them per se; he might  have  had  an  argument
             with them, related to his NGO work'.  On this  basis,  I  find
             that the Appellant's assessment of the reason for his father's
             disappearance is speculative.  I find it more likely that  the
             reason he was targeted by the Taliban was  his  work  for  the
             NGO, rather than a failure to join the Taliban".

11.  It had been argued before Judge Black on the Appellant's  behalf,  that
    as a Pashtun he would be bound to invoke Badal in accordance  with  the
    Pashtunwali Code.  The Appellant would be  at  risk  from  the  Taliban
    because they would consider that he was a threat to them on  the  basis
    that he would wish to avenge his father. This issue became the focus of
    the appeal before us. We have set out  details of the Pashtunwali  code
    at annex 1.

12.  On 19 June 2014,  the first day of  the hearing of  the  appeal  before
    us, Mr Bazini further clarified the Appellant's position in that regard
    stating that the Appellant, as a Pashtun would  be seen as someone  who
    was bound by the Pashtunwali Code and therefore the  Taliban,  although
    they may not necessarily be bound by the code  would   see  him   as  a
    threat for a number of reasons, one of which would  be  in  respect  of
    collaboration, because as is clear from the reports, revenge  manifests
    itself in different ways for example, spying or showing western values.

13.  We have considered whether or not, the appellant,  as  a  male  Pashtun
    asylum seeker, would, because of the Pashtunwali Code and in particular
    the concept of Badal, on  return to Afghanistan, be bound to avenge his
    father's death because it was considered or suggested that  his  father
    had been killed at the hands of the Taliban and  whether  or  not   the
    Taliban would, he have a real risk on return of the Taliban taking pre-
    emptive action against him.

14.  Mr Bazini said that there was no issue as to  humanitarian  protection.
    There was, however, an Article 8 ECHR issue to be considered. Mr Bazini
    referred to  the guidance in KA [2012] EWCA Civ 1014 and EU [2013] EWCA
    Civ 32 regarding the Secretary of  State's  obligation  to  attempt  to
    trace  the families of minors.

15.   Mr  Bramble  recognised  that  that  issue   could   impact   upon   a
    consideration of the appellant's Article 8 rights but said that  taking
    into account the appellant's age, although it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant enjoyed family life in Article 8 terms,  the   principles  in
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31,were relevant and  there was no  reason  to
    doubt that the Appellant could  re-establish  himself  in  Afghanistan,
    irrespective of the time he had been out of  the  country  and  in  the
    United Kingdom.

16.  Over the course of the hearings before us, we were provided  with  five
    bundles of documentation on behalf of the Appellant that  included  two
    reports of Dr Giustozzi dated 11 July 2012 and 12 June 2014  that  were
    subsequently supplemented with articles authored by  Dr  Giustozzi  and
    others entitled "Shadow Justice - how the Taliban run their  judiciary"
    and "The Politics of the Taliban's Shadow  Judiciary  (2003  -  2013)".
    There were also before us, reports of Mr Jawad Zadeh dated 17 June  and
    29 December 2014.  Those reports in summary, were  designed  to  assist
    the Tribunal in respect of the risks claimed to be associated with  the
    concept of revenge and the nature and scope of  the  Pashtunwali  Code.
    The bundles further included witness statements of  the  Appellant  and
    his two witnesses Mr Waris Khan Sherzad and a third expert, Dr Qazizada
    and background material, articles, case law guidance and  documentation
    in support of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal.

17.  We also had before us two bundles  prepared  by  the  Respondent:   the
    first of which comprised background material including a  UNHCR  report
    dated  6  August  2013  relating  to  the  eligibility  guidelines  for
    assessing the international protection needs  of  asylum  seekers  from
    Afghanistan dated 6 August 2013;  a  Country  of  Origin  Research  and
    Information (CORI) document  entitled  "Thematic  Report;  Afghanistan;
    Blood Feuds (commissioned by UNHCR)" dated February  2014,  a  LandInfo
    (Norwegian  Country  of  Origin  Information  Centre)  report  dated  1
    November 2011  entitled  "Afghanistan:  Blood  Feuds,  Traditional  Law
    (Pashtunwali) and Traditional Conflict Resolution" and a review of  the
    COI Report on Afghanistan of the UKBA  Country  of  Origin  Information
    Service Report by Peter Marsden dated February 2013.  The  Respondent's
    second  bundle  included  Mr  Bramble's  written   submissions   cross-
    referenced to the categories of source  to  which  he  referred  and  a
    bundle comprising further case  law  guidance  all  of  which  we  have
    considered with care.   Further  in  the  course  of  the  hearings  we
    received Mr Bazini's written opening and closing submissions.

18.  In addition to  hearing  and  considering  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and his witnesses, we also considered the oral evidence of Dr
    Giustozzi,  Mr  Zadeh  and  Dr  Qazizada  supplementing  their  written
    evidence.  We took a careful written note of the evidence  and  mindful
    of the gap in time between the hearings in   over  June  and  September
    2014  and  the  resumed  hearings  on   24  and  25  June  2015,   both
    representatives, having been told by us that we had maintained a  typed
    note  of  the  evidence  and  submissions,  confirmed  that  they  were
    satisfied that the Tribunal should proceed to conclude the appeal up to
    and including this determination.

The Appellant's further Evidence

19.  Shortly before the start of the hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    Appellant served a further supplementary  witness  statement  dated  11
    June 2014.  In it he stated that he had approached  the  Red  Cross  to
    help to trace his family and that he had sent a letter to his uncle and
    to the village elder both of whom had eventually  replied.   His  uncle
    said that he had fled  to  Pakistan  and  that  he  did  not  know  the
    whereabouts of the Appellant's mother.  The village elder  stated  that
    in the last six years he did not know where his family had gone.   When
    the appellant had contacted his uncle by telephone, his uncle had  said
    that he had left the village because he was  afraid  that  the  Taliban
    were after him - as his father's brother, they did not trust  him.   He
    had said that he had  been  blamed  by  the  Taliban  for  helping  the
    Appellant escape and he had remained living in Pakistan.  He had  asked
    the Appellant not to phone him again in case that would lead him to  be
    in trouble with the Taliban.

20.  In this statement, the appellant stated that he had been young when  he
    had fled but now that he was a man, the Taliban would believe  that  he
    had returned to take revenge and that word would get to  them,  because
    there were many people from his community and district in the  UK,  who
    would let them know that he had returned.  He asserted that the Taliban
    would target people they knew had a good reason  to  be  their  enemies
    "because they'd rather harm them before they can take revenge on them".

21.  He said that he would not be able to relocate in safety to  Kabul.   He
    did not know the area well and  there  were  many  Taliban  within  the
    community.  It would not take long for them to find him and they  would
    certainly believe that he would be attempting to take  revenge  against
    them.

22.  He stated that the fact that there was no body would mean that  it  was
    impossible to prove what had happened  to  his  father  and  that  some
    people would suspect that his father  had joined the Taliban  and  many
    would believe or know that he had been taken by the Taliban  by  force.
    He would be seen as his father's son and it would be believed  that  he
    would follow in his father's footsteps with  adverse  consequences  for
    him.

23.  He emphasised that he was still in full-time studies  and  living  with
    his uncle and his family on whom he was financially dependent.  He  had
    been out of Afghanistan for more than seven years.

24.  A further statement was  prepared  on  27  August  2014  in  which  the
    Appellant gave details of his private and family life in Britain.  This
    statement relates to his  claim  for  leave  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds.

25.  He stated that he had settled in Britain and  that  he  looked  on  his
    father's cousin as his father and that his family were now his  family.
    He referred to the completion of his  GCSEs  at  St  Mary's  School  in
    Hendon and then his BTEC studies in IT.  He said that he would like  to
    build a career in IT management.  There were three levels of  the  BTEC
    programme which was a four year programme.  He had completed his second
    year in July 2014.  He planned to go to university, but as he  did  not
    have refugee status, a place had not been offered to him and that  plan
    had been abandoned.  He had, however, been offered a place to study for
    a degree in IT management at Greenwich School of Management and he said
    that he was due to commence his studies in October 2014 but  for  that,
    he needed his status documents or to have indefinite leave  to  remain.
    He hoped that he would receive some evidence of his status  before  the
    course was due to start.

26.  He referred to his private life with friends here and also referred  to
    the fact that he suffered from depression and  was  on  medication.  He
    feared that if he were returned, his mental health would deteriorate.

27.  In his oral evidence before us, the Appellant  relied  on  and  adopted
    his various statements and was then cross-examined by  Mr  Bramble.  He
    was asked about the letters which he sent through the Red Cross and  to
    his uncle and he said that he had spoken to his uncle on  five  or  six
    occasions but could not prove that he had done so.

28.  Mr Bramble put to him that there had been  no  mention  of  his  father
    when he had spoken to his uncle and he was asked what he  believed  had
    happened to his father.  The Appellant replied that he  hoped  that  he
    was still alive but he had not heard for six years and he had  no  idea
    whether or not he was still alive.

29.  He was asked why his uncle had not sent a  statement  for  the  appeal.
    He said that his uncle did not have much information about his  father.
    His father had been taken by the Taliban and his uncle did not know  if
    he was still alive or not.  All his uncle's information came  from  the
    fact that he lived in the same village.

30.  Mr Bramble asked him if he had asked his uncle if his father  had  been
    taken by the Taliban or not.  The Appellant said  that  as  he  already
    knew this, he had not asked his uncle.

31.  Asked if his family had followed the Pashtunwali Code when  he  was  in
    Afghanistan, the Appellant  said  that  they  did,  because  they  were
    Pashtun and Pashtuns followed a traditional lifestyle.   Asked  whether
    or not he believed in Badal, he stated that he did and Mr Bramble  then
    asked him if he considered that he would  have  to  "do"  Badal  if  he
    returned to Afghanistan.  The Appellant replied that as his father  had
    been taken, it would be his  responsibility  to  take  revenge.   Asked
    against whom he could take revenge if  he  did  not  know  whether  his
    father was alive or dead, the Appellant replied  that  his  father  was
    forcibly taken by the Taliban and that when the  Taliban  take  someone
    they kill them.

32.  Mr Bramble put to him that for Badal to take  place,  there  should  be
    evidence that the killing had been seen or that the  village  elder  or
    chief knew that the  victim  had  been  killed.   It  was  put  to  the
    Appellant that he had said that no-one had witnessed  the  killing  and
    that the letter  received  from  Zafir  Miakhel  (the  headman  of  the
    village) made no mention of the Appellant's father's death.  Mr Bramble
    therefore put it to the Appellant that if nothing had  happened,  there
    was no reason why Badal would be relevant. The Appellant  replied  that
    he had spoken to his paternal uncle who had told him  that  his  father
    had been taken by the Taliban six years ago and he had not  heard  from
    him since:  that meant that he was killed. Mr Bramble asked him  if  he
    felt obligated to kill. Whilst he did not answer the question directly,
    he said that he strongly believed that his father had been killed.

33.  Mr Bramble then asked the Appellant if he  suffered  from  any  medical
    conditions. The Appellant said that he  suffered  from  depression  and
    received medicine but he did not know  the  name.   He  would  see  the
    doctor from time to time, usually when his prescription  was  finished.
    He had had some counselling in 2012.  He had seen the doctor about  one
    month ago.



Evidence of Waris Khan Shehzad.

34.  Waris  Khan  Sherzad  gave  evidence  relying  upon  and  adopting  his
    statements,  with  that  dated  28  August  2014  emphasising  that  he
    supported the Appellant financially, emotionally and in any  other  way
    he could and that he and his wife treated the Appellant as  their  son.
    He stated that he and his wife  had  seen  the  Appellant  through  his
    teenage years and helped him to mature and become a  responsible  adult
    and that his children, who included daughters aged 12 and  6  and  sons
    aged 9 and 14, saw the Appellant as their eldest  brother  and  treated
    him as  such.   He  referred  to  the  Appellant's  completion  of  his
    education in IT at college  and  his  offers  of  places  to  study  at
    university.

35.   He  detailed  the  Appellant's  depression  and  emphasised  that  the
    Appellant always had a home with him. He said that  the  Appellant  was
    well-integrated  and  had  managed  to  rebuild  his  life   from   the
    devastation that had threatened to end it.

36.  In cross-examination, he emphasised that he was no longer being  funded
    to support the Appellant. He was asked about  telephone  calls  to  the
    Appellant's uncle and he said that he had not  been  present  when  the
    Appellant had made these.  Mr Sherzad himself had direct  contact  with
    the Appellant's uncle and it was difficult for him and the Appellant to
    phone at the same time because of his work pattern.

Evidence of  the Expert witnesses.

37.  We received evidence from Dr Giustozzi, and Mr Zadeh and  Dr  Qazizada.
    Dr Giustozzi is well-known to the Tribunal and  has  been  accepted  on
    numerous occasions as an objective,  knowledgeable  and  well-resourced
    expert.  His reports are dated 11 July 2012 and 12 June 2014. Mr  Zadeh
    is an Afghan national with British citizenship.  He  considers  himself
    to be an independent expert on Afghanistan and is a full member of  the
    Academy of Experts in the United Kingdom. He has completed a  two  year
    LLM in International Law and International Relations at the  University
    of Kent: 85% of his academic work was on Afghanistan and he had written
    extensively on  Afghanistan.   He  has  worked  for  two  international
    charities in Afghanistan (1994 - 1999) and for the  British  Red  Cross
    Society (2004  -  2008)  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  has  first-hand
    experience of working with the Mujahedin  and  Taliban  governments  in
    Afghanistan.  He has not, however,  been back to Afghanistan  for  some
    years although  he has maintained regular contact with Afghan academics
    in Afghanistan and the diaspora. Dr  Qazizada  worked  as  a  judge  in
    Afghanistan for many years. He now has refugee status in  Britain.  The
    three expert witnesses  gave similar evidence and therefore rather than
    set out in detail what each  expert said we have  concentrated  on  the
    evidence of the principal expert, Dr Giustozzi, and where  there   were
    differences  of emphasis    or additional evidence  we  have  set  that
    out.

38.  Dr Giustozzi  said that there have been  pockets  of  support  for  the
    Taliban in Nangarhar (the Appellant's province) since the  early  post-
    2001 years and that the districts where  the Appellant and  Mr  Sherzad
    had lived  had long been  areas  which  were  among  the  most  heavily
    infiltrated by the insurgents and  where the local people were  hostile
    to foreign troops. The  security  situation  in  Nangarhar    had  been
    deteriorating  since  2006  and  although  the  city   remained   under
    government control the insurgents had been  infiltrating  it  for  some
    time.  Attacks had increased in 2011 and in the first quarter of  2012,
    135 attacks had taken place, an increase of 5.5%.  In his second report
    he said that in 2012 Nangarhar recorded 724 insurgent  attacks,  a  30%
    increase on the previous year.  In 2013 insurgent attacks in  Nangarhar
    had increased dramatically by 161% to 1,451.

39.  The practice of  the  Taliban  to  threaten  government  officials  and
    anybody whom they considered to be  collaborating  with  the  enemy  in
    order to force them to resign or abandon  their  activities  was  well-
    documented and that when intimidation did not work, assassinations were
    common.  Collaborationists were normally first warned to quit their job
    and/or stop cooperating with the government and foreigners.  There  was
    evidence that the Taliban threatened or  kidnapped  family  members  of
    people associated with the  government  and  relatives  of  individuals
    opposed to the Taliban, whether government employees or village elders,
    were known  to  have  been  executed  in  retaliation:  relatives  were
    targeted particularly when their family members who were  collaborating
    with the government were out  of  reach.   On  this  basis  it  was  Dr
    Giustozzi's view that the Appellant could be at risk from the  Taliban,
    the more so, as his father had presumably been taken by  them,  and  he
    would now be thought to be motivated by the desire for revenge  and  to
    be hostile to them. He added that the Taliban would not normally target
    pre-puberty males.  The decision to get the  appellant  to  leave  made
    when he was 12, was probably linked to the fact that he would soon have
    been at risk as he would be just approaching puberty.

40.  Dr Giustozzi said that ACDO, the NGO for which the  appellant's  father
    had worked, was an Afghan NGO that  among  other  things  acted  as  an
    implementing   partner   for   UNICEF.   Many   Afghan    international
    organisations recruited former members of  Hezb-i-Islami,  in  part  to
    facilitate access to areas where that party had influence.  The Taliban
    did  not  target  all  NGOs  but  only  some.   Information  on  ACDO's
    activities was  insufficient  to  determine  why  it  could  have  been
    targeted, but once the  Taliban  decided  to  target  an  organisation,
    anybody including low-ranking employees would be at risk.

41.   Whilst  the  Taliban  and  Hezb-i-Islami   rarely   practised   forced
    recruitment nowadays, they did offer financial incentives  to  recruits
    and employed psychological pressure. The  Taliban  had  attracted  many
    former members of Hezb-i-Islami to their ranks so that it was plausible
    that  they  might  have  also  targeted  the  Appellant's  father   for
    recruitment. He added that the Appellant could  not  expect  protection
    from the police, in that the police were  often  known  to  collaborate
    with the Taliban and the police  would  therefore  not  be  a  reliable
    source of protection for the Appellant.  Moreover  there  were  serious
    concerns about the capabilities of the  police.   Corruption  was  rife
    within the police force as staff tried to make up for a low  income  by
    asking for bribes or imposing arbitrary taxes on the population.

42.  Dr Giustozzi considered that the Appellant could "relatively easily  be
    tracked down around Afghanistan unless he  was  able  to  hide  without
    seeking employment".  He said that prospective landlords and  employers
    would ask for references and information about his place of origin  and
    his family background.   Failure  to  provide  them  would  hamper  his
    chances of finding somewhere to live or  employment;  lying  would  not
    work in the medium and short term as employers and landlords  are  able
    to check information through networks and acquaintances  and  regularly
    do so.  In this way the  Taliban  would  learn  where  he  was  living.
    Moreover they have a widespread network  of  informers,  covering  most
    villages and neighbourhoods of Afghanistan. The risk to  the  Appellant
    would not be limited to Nangarhar as the insurgents had  infiltrated  a
    number of southern and western districts of Kabul city.  Exploiting the
    Pashtun traditions of hospitality as codified in the Pashtunwali Tribal
    Code, militants obtained hospitality from relatives  and  tribesmen  in
    the Pashtun areas of the capital  and  were  gradually  building  up  a
    network there.  The Taliban  had  claimed,     in  an  off  the  record
    interview, to have 1,000 paid  intelligence  agents  and  a  large  but
    undisclosed number  of  informers.   Part  of  the  Taliban  operations
    consisted in buying  or  renting  shops  in  strategic  locations  near
    embassies or government offices from where it was possible  to  observe
    the movements of people.

43.  The Appellant represented a low value target for the Taliban.  When  we
    asked Dr Giustozzi how realistic it would be for the Taliban  to  trace
    him he said that the Taliban would not  be  proactive  in  finding  the
    Appellant, particularly away from his home area, and that it would only
    be if they were looking for somebody who had presented a threat -  they
    might see the Appellant as  such  a  person.   The  Taliban   look  for
    informers who are a danger to them. However, they would  consider  that
    the appellant must harbour a desire for revenge because of his father's
    disappearance and the Appellant would be at risk if he  resided  in  an
    area of Taliban activity.

44.  He considered that in Kabul the appellant  would  have  to  live  in  a
    Pashtun area as the ethnically mixed areas of central  Kabul  would  be
    financially out of reach for him.  The appellant would also be at  risk
    from the authorities because of his family background and  because  the
    disappearance of his father could be interpreted  as  evidence  of  the
    fact that he has joined the insurgents. The Appellant's safety in Kabul
    would depend on where in Kabul he resided.  There were large  parts  of
    Kabul that were safe and had no Taliban  presence,  mostly  in  central
    Kabul or North Kabul and most of West Kabul where government  ministers
    or army members lived because it  was  difficult  for  the  Taliban  to
    penetrate those areas but Dr  Giustozzi  doubted  that  the  Appellant,
    being a Pashtun from Nangarhar, would find it easy to settle in one  of
    those areas, in part because of the cost of  living,  unless  he  could
    secure a good job and live in a middle or upper class neighbourhood  or
    around the centre of Kabul.  Normally people from Nangarhar resided  in
    East Kabul where there was a Taliban presence. Mr Zadeh was of the view
    that the Appellant as a Pashtun would not  be  trusted  in  Hazara  and
    Tajik populated parts of Kabul in that in those areas he would be  seen
    as a Taliban.

45.  If the Appellant returned  to  Afghanistan  he  would  be  at  risk  of
    becoming homeless, as Afghanistan did not have any state benefit system
    and he would be without any family support or state assistance and  had
    little  experience  of  Afghanistan.  Finding  accommodation  would  be
    difficult and expensive.  Due to the massive return  of  refugees  from
    Pakistan that had led to the population of  Kabul  doubling  in  twelve
    months and to the destruction of 65,000 - 70,000 houses caused  by  the
    war rents had shot up.  Four to sixfold increases were reported to have
    taken place over the last eighteen months.  He said that the rent for a
    room could cost as much as a male labourer's wage and it could often be
    more.  Even in remote parts of Kabul a two room apartment had  cost  in
    May 2003 US$120 (two and a half times the salary of a civil servant)  ,
    up from US$20 eighteen months earlier.  By May  2007  rents  had  moved
    even higher as the building industry failed  to  meet  demand  and  the
    average monthly rent of  a  two-room  apartment  reached  around  $200.
    After that prices continued to grow.

46.  Earning a livelihood would be a  major  challenge  for  the  Appellant.
    Unskilled worker or daily labourer in the  building  industry  was  the
    most widely available option but due to massive unemployment (35 -  50%
    depending on the estimates) most workers only got a few  days  of  work
    each week.  Therefore the Appellant's chances of getting even this type
    of employment would depend on  his  physical  strength.   Daily  labour
    rates in Kabul were about 200 AFS per day ($4) but work was not  always
    available.  Depending on how good his English language skills were  the
    Appellant might have a better chance of finding work, although  working
    as an interpreter would carry additional  risks  as  interpreters  were
    increasingly the target  of  threats  and  harassment  in  Afghanistan.
    Moreover, employment for interpreters was falling fast because  of  the
    ongoing withdrawal of  western  troops.  Mr  Zadeh  said  that  if  the
    Appellant sought  employment  either  with  the  Afghan  government  or
    private businesses he would have to provide references and his  Taskira
    ID card, parents' details, addresses lived at and much more information
    such as details  of  his  hobbies  and  extended  family  members.   In
    Afghanistan finding employment with private businesses was  very  hard.
    Afghans employed relatives and siblings because they  could  not  trust
    people they did not know.

47.  Turning to the Pashtunwali Code Dr Giustozzi  referred  to  the  social
    imperative of taking Badal whenever possible. There was a hierarchy  of
    those who would be required to exercise Badal, first sons, then closest
    male relatives over 13.  If the eldest son had not been of  an  age  to
    take responsibility that would fall on the brother of  the  person  who
    had been injured.  It would depend, however, on  how  many  sons  there
    were.  The responsibilities of the son would start from the eldest  and
    then down the hierarchy.  If the eldest brother did not  take  revenge,
    then families would discuss among themselves and relatives might decide
    not to pursue Badal, but another member of the family might  take  over
    the role of exercising Badal. Mr Zadeh said that often in the  practice
    of the Pashtunwali code the concept of honour, the  defence  of  honour
    and Badal worked together to motivate  the  aggrieved  person  to  take
    revenge.  Mr Zadeh said that the issues of honour and bravery had  also
    strong Islamic roots in Sharia law. The religious concept of Qisas gave
    the revenge  taker  something  of  a  "divine  right"  whereby  he  was
    encouraged to take revenge.  These factors were  publically  known  and
    practised by the Pashtuns.  Mr  Zadeh  continued  that  a  Pashtun  was
    expected to observe the rules of Pashtunwali for his  entire  life  and
    that these rules and codes of behaviour were not time-bound.

48.  Even a modest offence was regarded  as  an  insult  that  demanded  the
    shedding of the offender's blood.  When Dr Giustozzi was asked  whether
    the murderer would have to be specifically identified for Badal  to  be
    exercised he stated that that depended on the reason for  the  killing;
    if it was personal or not and also whether the tribe or the culprit was
    willing to cooperate- because before taking  revenge, it was  usual  to
    try to negotiate with the family/tribe/culprit to  find  a  settlement.
    The elders of the village or a member of  the  family  in  a  different
    village  would  negotiate  and  try  and  achieve  a  settlement.  Such
    settlement could be the transfer of land to the family of a  victim  or
    the giving of a daughter in marriage or  handing  over   cash  or  some
    other type of property, for example a shop or a car.  If  the  offender
    could not be reached, then the closest male relative was  the  one  who
    must be targeted instead.  Once blood was spilt, a blood  feud  started
    as the offended party had to seek Badal and spill more blood. There was
    no time period on the validity of a feud  that  could  often  last  for
    generations.  Sometimes  these  feuds  could  turn  into  outright  war
    between the Bhattani tribes..   Feuds  only  ended  with  a  successful
    mediation and a payment of blood  money.  The  Pashtunwali  Code  still
    determined the behaviour of individuals, especially in rural areas  and
    especially with the more traditionalist tribes  such  as  the  Ghilzai.
    With regard to killing, Pashtunwali prescribed that the 'price'  to  be
    paid by the offending party was to be agreed among the  tribal  elders.
    If the offended party (the relatives of the dead) agreed on  a  sum  of
    money or any other form of payment such as land or   even  women,  then
    the matter was settled.  If that  did  not  work,  the  family  of  the
    offending party could  clean  its  record  of  any  responsibility,  by
    handing over the guilty individual to the other family, or even execute
    him itself.  If this did not happen either, then it became a matter  of
    honour for every male member of the offended  party's  family  to  take
    revenge whenever it was possible.

49.  Compared to the situation as it was before the war in  the  1970s,  the
    practice of Badal was even more widespread now, both because of  weaker
    policing and because of the re-tribalisation  of  Afghan  cities  which
    meant that Afghan tribesmen in remote districts were now much more able
    than before to rely on fellow tribesmen in the cities to track down and
    punish individuals who were considered guilty of some crime  against  a
    family or a clan. Failing to pursue Badal would lead  to  the  loss  of
    status in Pashtun society and the loss of respect from other villagers.
     A household that failed to pursue Badal would be seen as weak  and  at
    risk of depredation by other households.  For  this  reason  there  was
    usually strong social pressure on the leading males of  each  household
    to pursue Badal. The Pashtunwali Code did not apply  to  ethnic  groups
    other than Pashtuns.  Among Pashtuns, however,  it  was  followed  most
    closely  by  the  tribal  populations  of  Eastern  and   South-eastern
    Afghanistan, particularly in rural areas.  Pashtuns who had grown up in
    cities  tended  to  follow  Pashtunwali  less  closely.  Dr   Giustozzi
    confirmed that Pashtun society was set up along family, kin and  tribal
    lines.  Pashtuns would be aware of those who were their ancestors, even
    if the connections might be mythical - they would know the genealogy of
    the tribe and how close or far they were related  to  others  in  their
    area.

50.  In his oral evidence Dr Giustozzi said that if  there  was   a  dispute
    between a family and the Taliban, the closest analogy would be that  of
    a tribal conflict. If there was no specific  individual  on  the  other
    side, an attempt at settlement would be much more difficult  and  there
    would be no one to make a suitable offer and  in  practical  terms,  if
    there was not a dispute between individuals or a tribe and the Taliban,
    there would be practical difficulties in effecting  a  settlement.   In
    any event settlement would be impossible with the Taliban  as  if  they
    executed an individual they would say that they  were  carrying  out  a
    sentence because of that individual's guilt and that they had the right
    to punish him.

51.  Dr Giustozzi said that the appellant would be bound by the  Pashtunwali
    Code to exercise Badal. Because of the expectation that  the  Appellant
    would want or be under pressure to take revenge for the  death  of  his
    father, the Appellant might avenge his  father  simply  by  passing  on
    information about Taliban movements/activities to the authorities.  Few
    would expect him to take a rifle and kill them, but the Appellant might
    be expected to join the Afghan Army or police  or  security  forces  or
    become an informer to get revenge.  He might also join a local militia.
    Dr Giustozzi said that he had interviewed many Afghanis  who  had  done
    just that.

52.  The risk was that the Taliban would  be  inclined  to  suspect  him  of
    being  a  government  informer  every  time  somebody  tipped  off  the
    authorities about the Taliban in any area  where  the  Appellant  might
    settle in the future. In Mr Zadeh's view the natural assumption of  the
    Taliban in the case of the Appellant as far as Badal was concerned, was
    that he would be viewed as someone likely to cause  harm  to  them.  Dr
    Giustozzi said that the  Taliban  were  banned  from  executing  people
    arbitrarily and if they did so, they would not admit it  and  it  would
    not be possible to know what had happened.

53.  With regard to the appellant's father Dr Giustozzi  stated  that  there
    might be an attempt to see if he could be produced, but this would have
    to be done through tribal elders who would have to start a  discussion.
    It was almost impossible that the situation would lead to a settlement.
     If the Appellant's father had been killed without a trial, that  would
    be denied.  If there had been a trial and it was  stated  that  he  had
    been found to be guilty, then there would be  nothing  to  discuss.  Mr
    Zadeh stated that the Taliban and Hezb-i-Islami were aware of destitute
    Afghans in areas of their activity and would welcome the appellant  and
    see him as a new recruit for their terrorist causes.  If  some  members
    of the Taliban recognised him to be from his  home  area  in  Nangarhar
    Province then they can  find  out  about  his  father  and  the  family
    background.  This could make them suspicious of the appellant  and  the
    accusation that he was  an  informer  for  the  Afghan  government  and
    foreign forces.  If the Taliban observed his western behaviour and  his
    English language skills, he would be harmed rather  than  recruited  to
    become a Taliban member.

54.  The fact of having lived six years in the  UK  would  not,  in  itself,
    increase risk to the Appellant but he might be at increased risk if  he
    had adopted  westernised  attitudes  during  his  stay  here.   If  the
    Appellant was perceived to have such westernised ways,  he  could  come
    under serious pressure in the rural areas and in the more  conservative
    towns.  Particularly if he kept refusing  to  join  the  Taliban,  they
    could put pressure on him by accusing him of having become westernised.
      In practice, westernised Afghans never lived in rural areas or  small
    towns for this reason.  In Kabul and in the main cities of Northern and
    Western Afghanistan  however,  he  would  hardly  be  noticed  as  more
    westernised attitudes were quite common there.

55.  Asked what the Appellant would be expected to do if he   did  not  know
    whether or not the Taliban had killed his father and it was  not  clear
    that his father had been abducted by the Taliban, Dr  Giustozzi  stated
    that it would be relevant  what the people in the village thought -  if
    they thought his father  was  alive  there  would  be  expected  to  be
    negotiation.  If the Taliban failed to produce an answer, then it would
    be assumed that the Appellant's father was dead.  For the Code to apply
    the death or crime would have to be established.

56.  We asked Dr Giustozzi how the appellant would know with  which  Taliban
    group to negotiate and he explained that this would be  at  a  district
    level where there would always be a Taliban shadow  governor  and/or  a
    military commander in charge of the combined troops of the  Taliban  in
    that district and around  him,  a  commission  comprised  of  the  most
    important Taliban commanders.  They would meet up with people from  the
    Appellant's tribe or village including relatives.

57.  When it was pointed out to Dr Giustozzi that Badal would appear  to  be
    something that had not emerged in the past in terms of asylum cases and
    that that in  turn  raised  the  question  as  to  its  prevalence,  Dr
    Giustozzi responded that Badal  was most prevalent in remote areas, but
    that around the cities and Kabul where people were  more  educated,  it
    was less prevalent.

58.  Notably, he confirmed that the cost of leaving Afghanistan to  come  to
    the West would be around $10,000 and  therefore  it  was  not  landless
    people who could afford that amount - we  would  not  be  dealing  with
    those from the peasantry. Often land might be sold or  assets  disposed
    of to raise money.

59.  When asked about the issue of return to Kabul to see  relatives  there,
    Dr Giustozzi stated that large parts of Kabul were  safe  -  those  who
    were government officials lived in the centre of North or Western Kabul
    where the work of government carried on or where Tajiks lived and where
    it was difficult for the Taliban to penetrate those areas.  However, as
    a Pashtun from Nangarhar it would be difficult  for  someone  like  the
    Appellant to settle in such an area because of costs  unless  he  could
    get a good job.

60.  Dr Giustozzi stated that the Taliban would not authorise a  pre-emptive
    strike.  Arbitrary killing  was  not  allowed  and  he  referred  to  a
    situation where Taliban members had killed  an  individual  in  a  pre-
    emptive strike and had been punished by the Taliban for that.  However,
    he stated that if it was  a  situation  where  an  individual  who  was
    considered to be a threat was rounded up, there could well  be  a  fake
    trial which could lead  to  his  being  killed.  Information  regarding
    individuals would not be published by the Taliban courts. Nobody  could
    be punished or executed without trial.  The trial had to  be  based  on
    evidence.

61.  Mr Zadeh was of the view that if the Appellant relocated to Kabul,  the
    likelihood of the local Nangarhar Taliban finding him was "very high".

62.  Dr Giustozzi was referred to an article within the  Appellant's  bundle
    from Strategy World.com dated 10 June 2014 entitled  "Afghanistan:  the
    Taliban refuse to talk" where it was stated that in  August,  2013  the
    Taliban had murdered five  aid  workers  and  seven  other  accused  of
    working for foreign troops.  All the dead were Afghans.   It  had  been
    stated that while that was supposed to discourage Afghans from  working
    with  foreigners it just increased public hatred  of  the  Taliban  and
    caused more Afghans to take up arms (joining the security forces  or  a
    tribal militia) to fight back.  The Taliban does not want this  popular
    opposition but has been forced to use terror to control the  population
    because religion or promises of a better life under  Taliban  rule  has
    not worked. Dr Giustozzi agreed that it did contribute  to  recruitment
    of the security forces and was a negative factor for the  Taliban,  but
    that at the same time, it would be difficult for the Taliban  to  allow
    such people to join the armed forces without retaliation.  The  Taliban
    would thus send a strong message of  threats  to  behave  according  to
    their rules.  It was understood that  following  usually  two  warnings
    over weeks or months in order to give such  people  an  opportunity  to
    change their minds, there would be  a  serious  backlash.  The  Taliban
    would want to avoid indiscriminate killing as this would paint  a  poor
    picture for the Taliban but the  commanders  in  the  field  were  more
    worried about a hostile individual spying on them and reporting them to
    the authorities.

63.  Mr Zadeh said that the majority of rural parts  of  Nangarhar  Province
    did not recognise the Afghan judiciary.  Thus  issues  of  arbitration,
    honour, familial disputes, various crimes including murder, were  often
    the responsibility of the tribal elders to determine who issued  verbal
    rulings and verdicts.

64.  Mr Zadeh took issue with the claims of  the  Secretary  of  State  that
    Kabul was a safe place and insisted that it  was  not  safe  and  "very
    dangerous".  This he stated, accorded with the Foreign  &  Commonwealth
    Office's travel advice to Afghanistan that several major  districts  of
    Kabul were  very  dangerous  and  he  proceeded  to  identify  what  he
    described as unsafe areas of Kabul that were mainly  populated  by  the
    Pashtuns that were "hotspots of the Taliban and Hisb-e-Islami".

65.  Mr Zadeh pointed out that the Afghanistan government  did  not  have  a
    nationwide computerised register of  Afghan  citizens  to  monitor  new
    arrivals in the capital.  There was  no  register  such  as  a  Polling
    Register.  In each small area of Kabul  known  as  a  "Gozar"  all  the
    residents' affairs would be dealt with by an  appointee  of  the  local
    residents.  Such  a  person  was  known  as  a  Vakil-e-Gozar  (Council
    Representative) who was an influential person and an outstanding member
    of his community.  Such a person  would  work  with  the  local  police
    stations, landlords and estate agents and  would  have  to  verify  the
    identity of the newly arrived residents.  This meant  that  the  Afghan
    government would become aware of who was residing in which part of  the
    country.      Such information had to be used as  the  verification  of
    suitability and good  character  references  for  a  tenant.   In  such
    circumstances, the Appellant would be required to provide a copy of his
    Taskira ID card to provide full details of his  parents,  grandparents,
    place of former residency.

66.  Mr Zadeh said that in a situation where the  Taliban  as  an  insurgent
    group do not recognise the legitimacy of the  Afghan  government,  they
    are highly  likely  to  exert  their  religious  views  of  eliminating
    infidels from earth.  He said that it was  possible  that  the  Taliban
    would pre-empt the revenge taking and take the life  of  the  appellant
    before he had a chance to harm them.

67.  He said that Pashtunwali was widely  followed  in  Afghanistan  and  in
    consequence of being marginalised by the "war on terror"  the  Pashtuns
    were much more determined to defend  their  rules  as  changes  in  the
    Afghan society for the purpose of consolidation of  "some  aspects"  of
    democratic governance was perceived as a real threat to  tribalism  and
    Pashtunwali.

68.  The knowledge and practical use of Pashtunwali that the  Appellant  had
    learnt by meeting young Afghans in the United  Kingdom  and  by  living
    with his cousin here, was "a very enlightened form, from which one  can
    'pick and choose' certain things".  Thus the Appellant would be  likely
    to  respond  differently  to  a  given  situation  than  a  Pashtun  in
    Afghanistan.

69.   Mr  Zadeh  continued  that  the  Taliban  would  first  and  foremost,
    eliminate the possibility of revenge taking in the  case  of  Appellant
    which would be by killing him.  In doing so they  would  attribute  his
    killing to the fact that they found his father as a collaborator.   His
    westernised behaviour  and  rejection  of  the  Taliban  actions  would
    substantiate the Taliban's claim of him being a  collaborator.  If  the
    appellant decided to remain indifferent about Badal this did  not  mean
    that the Taliban would not view him as a threat and if he did not  take
    revenge of his father's abduction and death then he would be  "shunned,
    discriminated  against  and  disrespected  by  the   members   of   his
    community".  Hostility that the Appellant  could  be  thought  to  have
    against the Taliban was "highly likely to put his life at risk".

70.  Mr Zadeh said that when he had asked  Dr  Qazizada  was  asked  whether
    during his time as a Judge he had  decided  revenge  (Badal)  cases  Dr
    Qazizada had responded  that  in  Afghanistan  more  than  50%  of  the
    killings among Pashtuns were for Badal although that term would not  be
    used in the media as although in 99 out  of  100  cases  'Badal'  takes
    place among Pashtuns, they do not want to be seen as barbaric by  other
    Afghan ethnicities.  Disallowing the use of 'Badal' in Afghanistan is a
    political measure.

71.  Mr Zadeh said that he had  found  several  hundred  articles  in  Dari,
    Pashto and English concerning Badal - these were in an addendum to  his
    report. Between 1 March and 31 May 2014 the UN recorded 5,864 security-
    related incidents  relevant  to the  work,  mobility  and   safety   of
    civilian   actors   in  Afghanistan,  particularly  those  events  that
    affected the delivery of mandated activities and  programmes.   From  1
    September 2013 to 31 August 2014 9,604 civilians  had  been  killed  or
    injured.

72.  Mr Zadeh explained that in the more cosmopolitan areas  such  as  Kabul
    Pashtun customs had been in effect "watered down" before  stating  that
    even in the outer suburbs of Kabul there was  no  evidence  that  these
    people do or don't perform Badal - but the majority of the  inhabitants
    in those areas come from Nangarhar Province which is only 90  miles  or
    so from Kabul or other nearby provinces.  It is open to them to perform
    Badal according to the custom but there is no evidence that they do. Mr
    Zadeh however, emphasised that he was  essentially  talking  about  the
    rural areas when talking about Badal. He said that:

         "The Taliban do not get involved in pre-emptive strikes but certain
         elements are likely to be involved by bending the rules".

73.  It was put to Mr  Zadeh  that  notwithstanding  that  he  had  provided
    various English articles of which some he had  translated  there  still
    seemed to be a distinct lack of objective material that the  Badal  was
    the trigger for male members to join the army, police and militia.   Mr
    Zadeh was asked the reason for this absence  of  evidence.  He  replied
    that not everything was written down.   He confirmed  that  pre-emptive
    attacks were very common in Afghanistan, but that  newspapers  and  the
    media did not refer to Badal at all.

74.  Turning to the evidence of Dr Qazizada we note  that  he  had  been   a
    prosecutor in the Appeals Courts of Nangarhar, Central and  Dar-ul-Aman
    between 1977 and 1997.  He had been the Head of the Oversight Committee
    of  the  Directorate  of   Public   Oversight   responsible   for   the
    investigation an oversight of  all  legal  affairs  of  the  government
    between 1993 and 1995.  Dr Qazizada was involved with a law consultancy
    and was a qualified attorney-at-law  specialising  in  Commerce,  Civil
    Crime and Qisas and  Hadd  between  1996  to  2001.   In  2001  he  was
    appointed a Justice to the Supreme Court of Afghanistan.

75.  His official duties were as head of the Baghlan  Appeal  Court  between
    2004 to 2005 and then the head of Appeal Courts of Afghanistan in 2006.
    He  was  a  Judge  to  Level  Three  Courts  (Judge  for   high   level
    reconsiderations) between 2008 to 2009.  Dr Qazizada stated that he was
    also head of the Public Security Department of the Nangarhar  judiciary
    where he decided on cases of opium-smuggling,  Taliban,  terrorism  and
    forgery of documents between 2009 to 2010. In  2010  he  was  appointed
    head of Appeals Courts in Nurestan Province for three months  and  then
    transferred back to Nangarhar because of the deterioration of security.
    In 2011 he headed the appeal courts of Qurnar  Province  and  led   the
    Commerce Department of the Nangarhar judiciary.

76.  Based upon his experience of Badal, Dr Qazizada explained that  it  was
    not necessary to see a dead body to exact revenge.   This  was  because
    when the Taliban took someone  and  if  no  contact  was  made  by  the
    Taliban, perhaps to request a ransom payment which was  often  demanded
    when Taliban detained returnees from Europe and if no-one had seen  the
    missing person or heard from him after some time "usually a few months"
    it was "usually assumed that the missing person is  presumed  dead"  as
    the Taliban did not have the ability and capacity to detain people  for
    very long.  They did not have many detention places.

77.  In his statement, Dr Qazizada continued  that  Badal  meant  "that  you
    should do to the person's family what they have done to you".  However,
    nothing required the response to be proportionate.   Therefore  someone
    could do something less than killing a family member for Badal but that
    even if there  might be a disproportionate response, it would still  be
    possible to justify it as Badal because a response does not have to  be
    proportionate.

78.  Dr  Qazizada  continued  that  Pashtunwali  required  that  if  someone
    kidnapped or killed a member of a Pashtun's family he had  the  options
    of attacking the kidnapper  and  releasing   the  person  kidnapped  or
    killing  one of them or taking  another member of  their  family  as  a
    captive.  This would depend on the power and influence of their family.

79.  In his statement, Dr Qazizada dealt with the  question  as  to  whether
    the Taliban took pre-emptive action  before  someone  took  revenge  on
    them.  He answered in the affirmative.  During his time as a  Judge  80
    to 90% of the murder cases that came to court in the Pashtun areas were
    for issues related to Badal.  The rest related to honour killings.

80.  Dr Qazizada continued that all murders would come to the  attention  of
    the authorities or come to court.  It was, however, not usual to record
    Badal in the verdicts recorded by the courts. He said  that in  all  of
    his experience as a Pashtun man and in all of my working life,  he  had
    not seen or heard of anyone from the family of the dead  forgiving  the
    offending family. Dr Qazizada maintained that in his experience 70%  of
    the  Pashtun  people  who  joined  either  the  warring   factions   in
    Afghanistan did so to exact revenge.

81.  Dr Qazizada stated that the concept  of  "blood  feud"  but  it  was  a
    principle that covered concepts that included Badal  but  it  was  "not
    coterminous with Badal".  If a perpetrator of violence took pre-emptive
    action on the family member of the offended, this might be  part  of  a
    blood feud but not be Badal.

82.  As regards pre-emptive strikes on  the  part  of  the  Taliban  against
    Pashtuns, Dr Qazizada was asked as to what evidence  he  had,  to  show
    that revenge was taken as a pre-emptive action.  He responded that   it
    is not the whole group of  the  Taliban  that  would  take  pre-emptive
    strikes but some of them might - that was  a possibility.

Other Background Material

The `UNHCR  Report  dated  6  August  2013  relating  to  their  Eligibility
Guidelines for  assessing  the  International  Protection  Needs  of  Asylum
Seekers from Afghanistan.

83.  We note that in this report of 88 pages no more than half of  one  page
    concerns  itself  with  individuals  involved   in   Blood   Feuds   in
    Afghanistan.  It was stated that  blood feuds are primarily  a  Pashtun
    tradition  and  are  rooted  in  the  Pashtun  customary  law   system,
    Pashtunwali. The report states that blood feuds  can  be  triggered  by
    murders, but  also  by  other  offences,  such  as  the  infliction  of
    permanent, serious injury,  the  kidnapping  or  violation  of  married
    women, or unresolved disputes over land, access to  water  supplies  or
    property and they may give rise to long cycles of retaliatory  violence
    and revenge.  A blood feud may lie  dormant  until  such  time  as  the
    victim's family believes it is capable of taking revenge.  Revenge  can
    thus be taken years or even generations after the original offence.

The Country of Origin Research and Information  (CORI)  Thematic  Report  on
Afghanistan; Blood Feuds dated February 2014

84.  This report  was  in  fact  commissioned  by  the  UNHCR,  Division  of
    international protection and was designed to  aid  decision  making  on
    issues of refugee status.  We note that their source material  included
    a reference to the July 2003 report of Professor Thomas Barfield on the
    importance of honour in the Pashtunwali Code and an interview with  him
    in January 2014 in which he said that  blood  feuds  are  triggered  by
    personal violence,  sometimes  deliberate,  sometimes  unplanned,  that
    arises out of a dispute.  In other words it is not the  dispute  itself
    but actions arising from it that start blood feuds.

85.  The report refers to the view of Professor  Barfield  in  January  2014
    that the usual procedure in terms of settlement mechanisms was  to  get
    the offended side to accept a blood money payment for their  relative's
    loss, obtain an apology from the offender's kin, and have some form  of
    reconciliation ceremony.  Among Pashtuns there was also an exchange  of
    women in marriage (baad) between the two groups designed  to  forestall
    future conflict. He had also said that most non-Pashtuns did not follow
    this custom and today it seems on the wane and replaced by blood  money
    and that, ironically this may have been due in part  to  the  Taliban's
    condemnation of the practice as unislamic.

LandInfo  Report  on   Afghanistan   -   "Blood   Feuds,   Traditional   Law
(Pashtunwali) and Traditional Conflict Resolution" dated 1 November 2011

86.  LandInfo is an independent body that collects and analyses  information
    on current human rights situations and issues in foreign countries.  It
    provides the Norwegian Directorate of Immigration, Norway's Immigration
    Appeals Board and the Norwegian Ministry of Justice and the Police with
    the information they need to  perform  their  functions.   The  reports
    produced by LandInfo are based on information from both public and non-
    public sources.

87.  This  report  presents  some  key  aspects  relating  to  blood  feuds,
    traditional laws and conflict resolution in Afghanistan but the  report
    stresses that it does not, however, provide a comprehensive picture  of
    all matters relating to Afghan subjects. The report points out that the
    term customary laws refers to  an  informal  shared  understanding  and
    perception of right and wrong, way of life, behaviour and morals  in  a
    social group or a local community, and also includes principles, rules,
    procedures and systems for  conflict  resolution.   There  is  a  close
    relation between customary law and Sharia Law in Afghanistan.

88.  Notably, further reference is made to the views expressed by  Professor
    Barfield not least in his report of 2003, in particular that it  is  in
    "rural areas, however, that there is such melding of their  tribal  law
    with Islamic religious law that the two are often viewed as inseparable
    and mutually supportive".

89.  Pashtunwali is described as "the most comprehensive  and  elaborate  of
    the customary law systems in Afghanistan" and  that  it  serves  "as  a
    manual for the Pashtun population's way of life, social  order,  rights
    and obligations, morals and code of honour guiding most  aspects  of  a
    Pashtun's life. Theft, rape and murder are  considered  to  be  immoral
    behaviour,  but  sanctioning   perpetrators   is   not   considered   a
    responsibility of the community; this  responsibility  rests  with  the
    victim and revenge is an acceptable reaction.  Local tradition,  public
    opinion and Pashtunwali sets limits on the legitimacy of the revenge  -
    how, who and where.

90.  Interestingly, LandInfo point out that:

         "It can be problematic or impossible for the victim's kin group  to
         exact revenge.  This is the case, for example, if the  murderer  is
         from a more powerful family than the victim and revenge could  have
         fatal consequences.   If  it  is  deemed  impossible  to  avenge  a
         killing, the victim's family will often leave to  avoid  the  shame
         they may face by failing to exact revenge and  having  to  live  in
         proximity to the murderer(s).....

         However, a blood feud can lie dormant  until  the  victim's  family
         believes it is capable of exacting  revenge.   Young  sons  can  be
         given a responsibility to avenge their murdered  father  when  they
         reach  adulthood  -  revenge  can  be  taken  months,  years,  even
         generations after an offence".

91.  The report goes on to say that:

         "LandInfo is  not  aware  of  any  sources  presenting  information
         indicating the prevalence of pre-emptive  revenge  (i.e.  murdering
         the male relatives of a victim in order to  make  the  other  group
         unable to avenge the initial murder).   In  LandInfo's  experience,
         such scenarios are unlikely, as they violate Pashtunwali  and  most
         possibly will be considered unacceptable by local communities.   It
         is likely that the  local  community  would  intervene  and  impose
         serious sanctions, for example expulsion from the area.   Moreover,
         in the Afghan context, it would be extremely difficult to kill  all
         male family members in a family who could be  given  responsibility
         for carrying out revenge.  This  would  normally  involve  a  large
         number of men".

92.  It is clear  that  the  Taliban  are  not  bound  in  any  way  by  the
    Pashtunwali Code but that it is further clear at least insofar  as  the
    Taliban  high/central  command  is  concerned,  that  their  rules  and
    Constitution similarly do not permit pre-emptive strikes.

93.  Reference is made to a 2007 interview with a senior Judge and the  head
    of the "Studies and Investigation  Department  of  the  Afghan  Supreme
    Court" who estimated that "close to 80% of all murders are due to blood
    feuds or private  revenge".   We  note  that  this  conforms  with  the
    evidence of Dr Qazizada.

94.  The report also states that in  2009  the  Cooperation  for  Peace  and
    Unity (CPAU) carried out conflict analyses for the period 2002  -  2008
    in selected districts in five different provinces that included  Kabul.
    In their report the extent of blood feuds and murders relating to other
    types of conflict were discussed. CPAU stated  that  2%  of  the  total
    number of conflicts registered in the analysed districts  were  due  to
    blood feuds/murder.  If the figures are limited  to  conflicts  in  and
    between families, the percentage of  blood  feuds/murder  is  3%.  That
    report indicted  that  blood  feud/murder  was  the  smallest  conflict
    category by far.

COI Report on Afghanistan - prepared for the Independent Advisory  Group  on
Country Information (IAGCI) by Peter Marsden and dated February 2013

95.  Peter Marsden is described as a Middle East specialist who  has  worked
    as a specialist on Afghanistan since the beginning of 1989.  From  1989
    until 2005, he worked as a political analyst in support of a network of
    British NGOs operating in Afghanistan and to this  end  he  produced  a
    monthly analysis of the political, security, economic and  humanitarian
    situation in Afghanistan through the BAAG Monthly Review.  This came to
    be distributed, globally, to governments, UN  agencies,  NGOs  and  the
    media and continued to be published until 2007.

96.  The report states that, building on the experience of British  NGOs  in
    working with the Taliban Government of 1992 - 1996, Mr Marsden  carried
    out further research into the movement, culminating in the  publication
    in  2008  of  "The  Taliban:  War,  Religion  and  the  New  Order   in
    Afghanistan".  In support of the operations of British  NGOs,  he  also
    undertook  two  field-based  studies  each  year  on  aspects  of   the
    humanitarian situation in Afghanistan and on the situation of  refugees
    in Pakistan and Iran as well as of returnees to Afghanistan.   In  2011
    he was commissioned by the University of York  under  contract  to  the
    Afghan  Government  to  contribute  to  an  in-depth   study   of   the
    effectiveness  of  the  Government's  rural  development  programme  in
    facilitating the return of refugees from Pakistan and Iran.    He is an
    author of a number of publications in relation to Afghanistan.

97.  For the purposes of the report before us, it is said  that  Mr  Marsden
    was  commissioned  by  the  Independent  Advisory  Group   on   Country
    Information to evaluate the UKBA's Country of Origin Information report
    on Afghanistan.

98.  Mr Marsden  points  out  "the  considerable  difficulties  involved  in
    accurately capturing the reality on the ground  in  Afghanistan,  given
    the complex political dynamics of the country and the fact that  access
    to  that  reality  is  heavily  constrained  by  the  adverse  security
    environment, even in the urban areas such as Kabul".  In the course  of
    his report, Mr Marsden deals with blood feuds and in relation  to  pre-
    emptive violence he states:

         "It has always been my understanding that pre-emptive violence does
         occur within blood feud situations, even though it is not a  stated
         element within Pushtunwali.  In  other  words,  an  individual  who
         expects to be killed under a blood  feud  situation,  may  seek  to
         first kill an individual within the other party to the  blood  feud
         who feels duty-bound to avenge the death  of  his  relative.   This
         would be particularly the case if the individual  who  feels  duty-
         bound to avenge the death of his relative is in a  relatively  weak
         position - i.e. if he has no or very few male relatives to  protect
         him."

99.  Mr Marsden continues that he is not aware  of  Pushtunwali  prohibiting
    such pre-emptive violence and also not aware of any evidence  that  the
    community would impose serious sanctions in such  an  eventuality.   He
    maintains that there is nothing in the documentation that he  has  read
    on Pushtunwali to suggest that this is the case.  He goes  on  the  say
    that:

         "However, I have not been able to find any alternative  documentary
         evidence to definitively establish that pre-emptive  violence  does
         take place, in order to prevent a revenge attack, within blood feud
         situations.  I have  also  been  unable  to  find  any  documentary
         evidence, other than the Landinfo source quoted in  paragraph  9.17
         to  state  that  pre-emptive  violence  does  not  occur  in   such
         situations.  It is not clear, therefore, what  experience  Landinfo
         is drawing on to state that pre-emptive  violence  is  unlikely  to
         occur, that this would violate  Pushtunwali,  that  it  would  most
         possibly be considered unacceptable by local communities  and  that
         the local community would intervene and impose  serious  sanctions.
         It is important to note that Landinfo is relying on the absence  of
         documentation, to provide evidence that pre-emptive  violence  does
         occur in revenge situations, to suggest that this does not occur"

100. Mr Marsden expresses concern, that there will  be  many  situations  in
    which returning asylum seekers would have lost family  members  through
    acts of violence and in which they would be expected to feel duty-bound
    to avenge these deaths.  He continues:

         "Such returnees would, in my view, have a legitimate fear that they
         would be killed by the perpetrators of those deaths to prevent them
         acting out their revenge.  The Landinfo  source  may  therefore  be
         used to exclude such returnees from  protection,  while  lacking  a
         strong evidential base for such exclusion".

101. Mr Marsden continues, that given the absence of "hard  evidence  either
    to prove or disprove the existence of  pre-emptive  violence  in  blood
    feud situations" he would recommend that the LandInfo's  source  should
    be excluded.

102. In that regard the report bears a footnote on behalf of the  COIS  that
    for the sake of completeness we feel important to include as follows:

         "COIS: Not accepted.

         While we recognise that the Landinfo information is in  part  based
         on the absence of facts and therefore interpretation, we note  that
         the reviewer does not have any information  to  the  contrary.   As
         Landinfo  are  a  respected  and  generally  reliable   source   of
         information and analysis, we do not  think  it  correct  that  this
         information is removed from the  report.   However,  we  accept  Mr
         Marsden's concern and as a compromise  we  propose  to  retain  the
         Landinfo material but include his comments (or a variation of these
         if would prefer) in the next update".

103. We would  add  that  whilst  the  parties'  voluminous  and  respective
    bundles further  made  included  other  country  material  and  various
    articles, we have taken into account the fact that many are dated  some
    years back and others might be said by their source and  authorship  to
    lack the necessary objectivity such  that  would  enable  us  to  place
    particular  weight  and  reliance  upon  them.  Properly  analysed,  we
    consider that much of this material consists  mainly  of  opinions  and
    unsubstantiated assertions and that the  persuasiveness  and  value  of
    much of it is limited by its vintage.  In regard to  that  material  we
    prefer the further evidence in  the  public  realm  that  intrinsically
    qualifies for greater weight.

104. We have noted and taken into account the skeleton  arguments  and  oral
    submissions from Mr Bramble for the Respondent and Mr  Bazini  for  the
    Appellant. We trust that we have taken into account  their  submissions
    in our discussions of the issues in this appeal below.

Burden and standard of proof

105. In considering this  appeal  we  note  that  the  burden  lies  on  the
    appellant to show to the lower standard of reasonable  likelihood  that
    he has a well-founded fear that on return to Afghanistan  he  would  be
    persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of  a
    particular social group or political opinion; he must also show, to the
    same standard that there is a real risk of his suffering  a  breach  of
    his rights under Article 3 of the European  Convention of Human Rights.



106. With regard to  the rights of the Appellant  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR  we  have  followed  the  structured  approach  set  out  in   the
    determination  in  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-interrelationship  with   Rules)
    [2015] UKUT 415 (IAC).  We have therefore first considered  whether  or
    not the Appellant meets the requirements  for  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules  and  have  also  considered
    whether or not there are any compelling or  exceptional  factors  which
    would make his removal disproportionate and, when  considering  whether
    his removal would be  disproportionate  have  taken  into  account  the
    provisions of Sections 117A - D of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Paragraph 276ADE reads as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on
         the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the  date  of
         application, the applicant:

         (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section
             S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20  years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
             UK  for  at  least  7  years  (discounting   any   period   of
             imprisonment) and it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

         (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent  at
             least  half  of  his  life  living  continuously  in  the   UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
             lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than   20   years
             (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would  be
             very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
             the country to which he would have to go if required to  leave
             the UK. "

    The provisions of section 117 A-D have been taken into account when  we
    consider the fifth question posed in the House  of  Lords  judgment  in
    Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKHL 27.

Discussion

107. The focus of this appeal was whether  or  not  ,  as  a  Pashtun,   the
    appellant, would,  because of the Pashtunwali Code  and  in  particular
    the concept of Badal, be bound to  avenge  his  father's  death  if  he
    believed that he had been killed by the Taliban and would therefore  be
    at real risk on return because the  Taliban   would  take   pre-emptive
    action against him.

108. It is clear from the evidence before us that the  Pashtunwali  Code  is
    the main code for Pashtuns.  The LandInfo Report on  Afghanistan  of  1
    November 2011 (above) describes Pashtunwali as "the most  comprehensive
    and elaborate of the customary law systems in Afghanistan" and that  it
    serves "as a manual for the Pashtun population's way  of  life,  social
    order, rights and obligations, morals and code of honour.   Pashtunwali
    regulates and guides most aspects of a  Pashtun's  life".  However,  Dr
    Giustozzi pointed out that  it is not followed by all Pashtuns  because
    many Pashtuns have migrated to the cities and become separated from old
    traditions and are less  bound  to  them.  Mr  Zadeh  in  his  evidence
    explained that in the more cosmopolitan areas of  Afghanistan  such  as
    Kabul, Pashtun customs had been in  effect  "watered  down".  Professor
    Barfield said that it was most widespread in  marginalised,  rural  and
    often poor areas beyond government control.

109. Dr Giustozzi stressed that  the  Pashtunwali  Code  did  not  apply  to
    ethnic groups other than  Pashtuns  but  that  among  Pashtuns  it  was
    followed most closely by the tribal populations of Eastern  and  South-
    eastern Afghanistan and more in general in the rural areas.

110. We are therefore satisfied that the practice of  the  Pashtunwali  Code
    is one that is most prevalent in the rural areas and mountainous  areas
    of Afghanistan and in particular the remote  areas,  but  that  in  and
    around  the  cities  such  as  Kabul  it  is  far  less  prevalent.  In
    consequence the extent that a Pashtun was likely  to  consider  himself
    closely bound to the Pashtunwali Code, it is a fact-sensitive issue.

111. If the code were  followed  the  concept  of  Badal  -  taking  revenge
    against the wrongdoer - comes into play.   There is considered to be no
    time limit to the period in which revenge can be taken.  Badal may lead
    to a blood feud but it is important to note that normally  blood  feuds
    in this male-dominated society are settled in a number of ways and  not
    just be a revenge killing.

112. Dr Giustozzi when accepting that Pashtunwali was followed more  in  the
    villages and that it would be followed among  tribal  members  gave  an
    example that if a Pashtun was murdered, the  relatives  of  the  victim
    would be expected to take revenge. The male  relatives  of  the  victim
    over  puberty,  would  come  first,  starting  with  the  closest  male
    relative.  As to whether the murderer would  have  to  be  specifically
    identified for Badal to be exercised, he stated that this  depended  on
    the reason for the killing, if it was personal or not and  whether  the
    tribe or the culprit were willing to cooperate or not,  because  before
    taking  revenge  it  was  usual  to  attempt  to  negotiate  with   the
    family/tribe/culprit to find a settlement.  The elders of  the  village
    or a member of the family in a different village would negotiate.  Such
    settlement could be the transfer of land to the family of a  victim  or
    the giving of a daughter in marriage or it could be cash or some  other
    type of property, for example a shop or a car.  We  see  no  reason  to
    disagree with Dr Giustozzi's views  as  to  how  such  matters  may  be
    settled.

113. Dr Giustozzi confirmed that where the  death  of  the  victim  was  the
    trigger Badal the tribal elders would decide if  the  victim  had  been
    killed - the establishment of the death was an  essential  prerequisite
    to trigger Badal. Badal could be triggered by other circumstances, such
    as by adultery or a violation of  honour.  In  areas  where  Badal  was
    practised a person would be considered to be weak and  could  become  a
    target of further abuse if they did not take revenge.

114. Although it was Mr Zadeh's evidence that pre-emptive attacks were  very
    common in Afghanistan, Dr Giustozzi  and  Mr  Zadeh   agreed  that  the
    elders would not support a pre-emptive strike so as to avoid a massacre
    and that it  would break the  tribal  rules.  Despite,  the  fact  that
    tribal elders would never approve of a  pre-emptive  strike,  a  strong
    landowning family might ignore this requirement.

115.  Whilst  therefore  we  accept  that  the  Pashtunwali  Code  and   its
    traditions are largely followed  in  the  rural  and  remote  areas  of
    Afghanistan, we are not satisfied that the  evidence  before  us  shows
    that such pre-emptive strikes are in any way common.

116. While we are aware that  Mr  Marsden  does  not  rule  out  pre-emptive
    strikes (although he could  find  no  evidence  of  the  same)  we  are
    fortified in this conclusion  by the  terms  of  the   Landinfo  report
    which  we consider correctly summarises the position thus:

         "Landinfo is  not  aware  of  any  sources  presenting  information
         indicating the prevalence of pre-emptive  revenge  (i.e.  murdering
         the male relatives of a victim in order to  make  the  other  group
         unable to avenge the initial murder).   In  Landinfo's  experience,
         such scenarios are unlikely, as they violate Pashtunwali  and  most
         possibly will be considered unacceptable by local communities.   It
         is likely that the  local  community  would  intervene  and  impose
         serious sanctions, for example expulsion from the area".

117. When considering the position of someone who has been family  has  been
    harmed by the Taliban the reality is that it would be very difficult to
     trace who the perpetrator against whom the individual  might  wish  to
    take revenge was and the  various mechanisms, through the  local tribal
    leaders of seeking redress in any form  would not  be  effective  given
    that not only  do the Taliban not consider that they are  bund  by  the
    Pashtunwali Code but  moreover they would not accept that they had done
    anything other than they were entitled to do and  that  therefore  they
    would not provide any  form of compensation.

118. The evidence of Dr Giustozzi and Mr Zadeh was that  the  Taliban  would
    not authorise  a  pre-emptive  strike.   Arbitrary  killings  were  not
    allowed. Dr Giuistozzi referred to a situation  where  Taliban  members
    that killed an individual in a pre-emptive strike had been punished  by
    the Taliban for so doing and our clear conclusion is that  the  Taliban
    would  not  consider  it  appropriate  to  exercise    any  pre-emptive
    action.  Dr Giustozzi also explained that when it came  to  pre-emptive
    strikes arising between the Taliban and a Pashtun, it was important  to
    bear in mind that the Taliban described themselves  as  the  legitimate
    government of Afghanistan.  They had their own rules that were  printed
    and available in booklets and mainly  held  in  the  hands  of  Taliban
    members and more particularly other high-ranking commanders.

119. However, violation of these rules did happen at the  instance  of  some
    commanders, as it was difficult to adequately supervise  what  happened
    in the mountains, and villages. In all, however, we can  only  conclude
    that although there may be cases where a particular  Taliban  commander
    might  decide to make a pre-emptive strike  that would be  unusual  and
    that there is not a real risk of that happening.

120. On the evidence before us we find that the  Taliban  clearly  have  the
    means potentially to monitor and keep an eye  on  people  even  in  the
    Pashtun areas of Kabul. Moreover, they have informers in  the  villages
    who would report to the Taliban when they visited.  However,  they  are
    interested in such matters as to who worked for the  government  or  if
    anyone had recently joined the army. If such a person returned  to  his
    village, the Taliban would question why he was returning and  where  he
    had been.

121. Our conclusion, reinforced from our consideration of  the  CORI  Report
    of February 2014, that tallies with the evidence of Dr Giustozzi and Mr
    Zadeh, is that an individual unable to directly harm the Taliban, might
    discharge his obligation in terms of Badal, by joining  the  police  or
    the army or pass on information to the Afghan authorities which may  be
    true or indeed false. The reality is that although we fully accept that
    in rural areas of Afghanistan Badal is practiced, the evidence that the
    practise of Badal, as  part of the  Pashtunwali  Code,    is  practiced
    when revenge is sought  against  other local individuals or tribes  and
    indeed is one of the  main reasons for murder in Afghanistan  there  is
    no evidence to  show that a Pashtun would  be  expected  to,  or  would
    decide to  directly seek   revenge  against  the  particular  group  of
    Taliban that he might consider had harmed his  family.  In  particular,
    there is little evidence that  those  who  have  lived  abroad  and  no
    longer live in   rural areas  of  Afghanistan  would  be   expected  to
    exercise Badal by directly taking up arms to  attack a particular group
    of Taliban whom he believed might have harmed his family.

122. Moreover, although we accept that even in  Kabul,  whilst  the  Taliban
    might become aware of  the  presence  of  a  returning  Pashtun  asylum
    seeker, someone such as the appellant would be of  little  interest  to
    them.

123. Turning to the  Appellant's particular claim we note that his  evidence
    has developed in two ways; firstly,  about what may  or  may  not  have
    happened to his father and secondly,  what the Appellant's own position
    would be regarding the exercise of Badal.

124. With regard to the position of the Appellant's father, the  reality  is
    that the Appellant initially said that his father had disappeared after
    a dispute with the Taliban or that he  had  "gone"  with  the  Taliban.
    What he did not say was that his father had been killed by the Taliban.
     It was the view of Mr Zadeh and Dr Qazizada that the Taliban would not
    be able to hold anyone against their will for any length  of  time  and
    therefore that they would be likely to kill such an individual, because
    they had no prisons in which to hold him.  Despite  that  we  note  the
    evidence of the Appellant  that his father may be alive.

125. The second issue is whether or not the Appellant would himself wish  to
    exercise Badal against the Taliban.  That is not something which he had
    ever stated until just before the hearing that he  would  wish  to  do.
    The reality is that he simply does not know with whom his  father  went
    or by whom he was taken.  He did not  know  this  when  he  arrived  in
    Britain in 2008 and neither of the communications  from  his  uncle  or
    from the village headman gave any indication as to  who  the  Appellant
    might consider had been responsible for his father's disappearance.

126. In any event, we do not accept that the  Appellant  would  be  able  to
    exact Badal against a member or members of the Taliban of whom he knows
    nothing and given that he did not say  that he  would  wish  to  do  so
    until he stated  just before the  hearing  that  he  would  follow  the
    Pashtunwali Code and there is no evidence as to whom he might  consider
    responsible for his father's disappearance we conclude that there is no
    likelihood of the Appellant  endeavouring  to  exact  Badal  against  a
    member or members of the Taliban.  We would add that we do not consider
    that there would be any societal pressures on him to do so,  given  the
    lack of evidence that any individual member of the Taliban or group  of
    Taliban took his father. It follows that we do not find to be credible,
    even to the lower standard of proof, that the Appellant  on  return  to
    Afghanistan would intend  to  or  consider  himself  to  be  under  any
    obligation to exact Badal against anyone on his father's  behalf  under
    the Pashtunwali Code.

127. We accept that it may well be the  case,  that  if  the  Appellant  had
    strong feelings against the Taliban because he believed his father  was
    taken by them, that he might decide that he wished to join  the  police
    or the army, although the reality is that he has  given  no  indication
    that that is what he would wish to do.  If he did so, then as a  member
    of the police or the army he might be considered to be a target by  the
    Taliban.  That is a different matter and is not, in any event, a  basis
    upon which the appellant puts his claim.

128. Even if that were the case, we are mindful of the determination of  the
    Tribunal in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT  00348  (IAC)  in
    which the guidance in AMM and others  (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;
    returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011] UKUT 445 (IAC) was followed, namely;

         "562.    As  we  stated  in  Part  H,  we  do  not  consider  that,
             notwithstanding its  status  as  a  'living  instrument',  the
             Refugee Convention  can  be  construed  as  affording  refugee
             protection to a person who is in favour of inflicting harm  on
             another, whether or not the societal and religious  background
             of that person might be responsible for her having that  wish,
             and whether the harm is inflicted by that person or by someone
             else, with her approval.

         ...

         591. A person is not  entitled  to  protection  under  the  Refugee
             Convention, the Qualification Directive or Article  3  of  the
             ECHR, on the basis of a risk of harm  to  another  person,  if
             that harm would be willingly inflicted by the  person  seeking
             such protection (paragraphs 238 - 240 and 561 - 567)'."

129. Given the uncertainty around  the  Appellant's  father's  disappearance
    and the fact that the Appellant has been out of  Afghanistan  for  many
    years, we conclude that there is not a real risk of the Appellant being
    sought by the Taliban on return. We accept Dr Giustozzi's evidence that
    the Appellant would be very low down on their radar.

130. We note the clear evidence that, in any event, they would not seek  the
    appellant out. There is also clear  evidence  that  that  they  do  not
    operate on the basis of pre-emptive strikes. While there may  be  rogue
    commanders who do operate outside the Taliban's  own  code  of  conduct
    there is nothing to indicate that that would be relevant in this  case.



131. If the Appellant's evidence is to be believed (and, indeed,  we  accept
    his evidence that his family have moved and indeed that his mother  has
    disappeared and that his paternal uncle is now in  Pakistan)  there  is
    little reason why the Appellant should return to his home area.  If  he
    does, then for the above reasons, we do not consider that  there  would
    be a real risk of his facing persecution there, but in  any  event,  we
    have considered the position of whether or not it would be  appropriate
    for him to relocate to Kabul. We have taken into account the fact  that
    there are between 3,000,000 and 4,000,000 people in Kabul.

132. The evidence was that a person such as the Appellant would have  to  go
    to the areas with the  most  Pashtuns  where  the  network  of  Taliban
    informers and sympathisers was most prevalent, but for the  reasons  we
    have set out above we do not consider that that in itself would lead to
    his having a real risk of persecution from the Taliban there.

133. We accept that the appellant might well have to register in  Kabul  and
    therefore there would be a channel through which the Afghan authorities
    would be aware that he had returned, but there  is  simply  nothing  to
    indicate that a person whose family member may or  may  not  have  been
    abducted by the Taliban, would be considered,  particularly  when  they
    have been out of the country for many years, to be a supporter  of  the
    Taliban.  We therefore do not consider that there is any real  risk  of
    his facing persecution in Kabul from either the  Taliban  or  from  the
    authorities there.

134. We note that Mr Zadeh asserted that Kabul was  not  a  safe  place  and
    that as  a Pashtun the appellant would not be  trusted  in  Hazara  and
    Tajik populated parts of Kabul and that in  those  areas  he  would  be
    treated with suspicion but the reality is that we do not  consider that
    he would have to go to those areas.

135. We accept that it may well be the  case,  that  if  the  Appellant  had
    strong feelings against the Taliban because he believes his father  was
    taken by them, he might decide that he wished to join the police or the
    army, although the reality is that he has given no indication that that
    is what he would wish to do.  If he did so, then as  a  member  of  the
    police or the army he might be considered to be a target by the Taliban
    but as we have stated above that issue is a completely different matter
    from the issues in this appeal.

136. For the above reasons we have concluded that  the  appellant  therefore
    does  not  have   well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on   return   to
    Afghanistan  and that  if he did not want to return to his   home  area
    he  would be able to seek internal relocation in Kabul.

137. We note that Mr Bazini accepted at the beginning of the  appeal  before
    us that should the appellant not be entitled to refugee  protection  he
    would also not be entitled to humanitarian protection. He  was  correct
    to make that concession.  We have  therefore  decided  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on both asylum and humanitarian grounds. Moreover, for the  same
    reasons we find that the Appellant would not suffer treatment  contrary
    to his rights under Article 3 of the ECHR.

138. There were two arguments raised by Mr Bazini which can  be  dealt  with
    in short form. In his first skeleton argument, Mr  Bazini  argued  that
    the failure of the Respondent to trace the Appellant's parents was such
    that the Appellant should  have  been  granted  leave  to  remain.   We
    consider, having applied the terms of the judgment in EU  (Afghanistan)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 32 that there is no merit in that argument  nor  indeed
    is there any merit in the argument that,  applying  the  terms  of  the
    determination in LQ, the Appellant was entitled to leave to remain.

139. Mr Bazini also argued that  given  that  the  Appellant  had  leave  to
    remain under Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 from  2011  onwards
    he was entitled to be treated as  a  child  who  had  been  in  Britain
    legally for seven years and that therefore, on that basis he was  again
    entitled to leave to remain.  Again that is an argument which we do not
    accept as we do not consider that leave  under  Section  3C  was  leave
    which was anything other  than  precarious  in  the  terms  of  Section
    117B(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

140. We now turn to the issue of the appellant's right under  Article  8  of
    the ECHR. We have set out above the relevant  structured  approach.  We
    accept, as indeed was accepted by Mr Bramble, that  the  Appellant  has
    established a private life here.  Indeed, notwithstanding  the  age  of
    the Appellant, we have concluded that given his vulnerability  when  he
    arrived and his acceptance by the family of Mr Waris Khan Sherzad, that
    he is a member of that family and, of course, the fact is  that  he  is
    closely related to them:  we conclude  that  he  has  also  established
    family life in Britain. Even taking into account   the   ratio  of  the
    judgement in Kugathas and the appellant's age  we   consider  that  his
    family life with the  family of Waris Khan Sherzad is  so  strong  that
    it is worthy of protection.

141. We have considered the terms of paragraph 276ADE of the rules.  Clearly
    the appellant does not qualify under subparagraphs  (i)  to  (v).  When
    considering subparagraph (vi) we must consider  whether  or  not  there
    would be very significant obstacles to  the  appellant's  reintegration
    into Afghanistan if he were required to leave the county.  We  consider
    that there would be: we place weight on the fact that he no longer  has
    any family either in his home area or in Kabul: we accept his  evidence
    and that of Waris Khan Sherzad in that regard.  There would  simply  be
    nothing for him in his home area and  we  consider  that  he  would  be
    destitute there. Moreover, in Kabul the lack of family would mean  that
    he  would  have  extreme  difficulty  in   either   finding   work   or
    accommodation.  The evidence of both Dr Giustozzi and Mr Zadeh was that
    there would be difficulties for a returning Pashtun  asylum  seeker  to
    Kabul to earn  a  livelihood  on  his  own.  Unskilled  work  or  daily
    labouring in the building  industry,  are  the  most  widely  available
    options but due to massive unemployment (35  -  50%  depending  on  the
    estimates) most workers only get a few days of work each  week.   Daily
    labour rates in Kabul are low and work is not always available.

142. The Appellant arrived in Britain at a young age and  we  consider  that
    his case can be distinguished from that  of  other  young  Afghans  who
    arrived at the ages of 16 onwards who will have far clearer memories of
    their own country and indeed of Afghan  society.  In  that  regard  the
    Appellant has been out of Afghanistan not only for all his adult  years
    but for all his teenage years as well. We  believe  that  it  would  be
    extremely difficult for him to cope,  as,  effectively,  a  westernised
    young man, with life in Kabul, a city of which he has no knowledge, and
    a country of which, effectively, he  has  no  experience  either  as  a
    teenager or as an adult.

143. We therefore conclude that the obstacles  to  his  re-integrating  into
    life in Afghanistan are so great  that  he  should  succeed  under  the
    provisions of paragraph   276 ADE (vi).

144. Even if we are wrong in that regard it is incumbent on us  to  consider
    whether or not there are any exceptional or compelling factors in  this
    case which would mean that the appellant's appeal should be allowed  on
    human rights grounds under Article 8, outside the rules, effectively  a
    consideration of the fifth question posed in the judgment in Razgar.

145. We have taken into account the terms of Section  117B.   We  note  that
    the Appellant speaks good English and that not only is he not a  burden
    on the UK taxpayer at present, his academic ability  as  shown  by  the
    qualifications which he has already obtained and the offers  of  places
    at university which he has received would indicate that he would not be
    a burden on the taxpayer in the future or would be anything other  than
    financially independent. We have already taken into  account  the  fact
    that his  immigration  situation  is  precarious  but  although,  quite
    clearly, the factors set out in Section 117B  are  not  factors  which,
    should they be met, would mean that removal would be  disproportionate,
    it is of note that the applicant does fulfil certain of these factors.

146. We refer to our conclusions set out in paragraphs 143-145  above  which
    we need  not repeat. We have further taken into account the Appellant's
    academic achievements while here and his  obvious  application  to  his
    studies. With regard the nature of the Appellant's family life with  Mr
    Sherzad and his family we accept that he is looked on as  a  member  of
    their family - and looked on as  a sibling  by   Waris  Kahn  Sherzad's
    children.  We also place weight on the fact that they are now his  only
    close family: we accept his evidence that he has lost contact with  his
    mother and siblings.  He has lived with Mr Waris Khan Sherzad  and  his
    family for seven years  and  we  consider  that  the  strength  of  his
    relationship with that family is an important  element  when  assessing
    the proportionality of removal.

147. We place particular emphasis on the fact  that  the  appellant  has  no
    relatives either in Kabul or in his home area to which he could return.
    However, the reality is that the appellant has spent  all  his  teenage
    years and adult years here. We consider that is a  particularly  strong
    factors in assessing his rights der Article 8 of the ECHR and  we  find
    those factors together with the difficulties which  he  would  face  on
    return to Kabul are sufficiently compelling for us to conclude that the
    removal of this appellant would be a breach of his rights under Article
    8 of the ECHR.

148. Even therefore if therefore if we were wrong  in  concluding  that  the
    obstacles faced by this appellant in reintegrating  on  return  do  not
    reach a level of significance such as  to  engage  276ADE(1)(vi),  when
    taken cumulatively with the other factors we have identified above,  we
    are satisfied that  the  balance,  when  considering  this  appellant's
    Article 8 claim outside the rules,   should  be struck in  his  favour.
    We therefore find that, on the  evidence  before  us  the  decision  to
    remove the Appellant would be a disproportionate interference with  his
    rights under Article 8 of the ECHR. Accordingly we allow the appeal  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Decision

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law and has been set aside.

    Our decision is that the appeal is dismissed on asylum and humanitarian
    protection grounds, but allowed on human rights grounds under Article 8
    of the ECHR.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date     15 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

                                   Annex:

The Pashtunwali Code

    This is the Pashtunwali Code as defined in Wikipedia that Dr  Giustozzi
    accepted with some clarification as  an  accurate  description  of  the
    code:

         "1.  Melmastia (hospitality) -  Showing  hospitality  and  profound
             respect  to  all  visitors,  regardless  of  race,   religion,
             national affiliation or economic status and doing  so  without
             any hope of remuneration or favour.  Pashtuns will go to great
             lengths to show their hospitality.

         2.   Nanawatai (asylum) - Derived from the verb meaning to  go  in,
             this refers to the protection given to a person against his or
             her enemies.  People are protected at all  costs;  even  those
             running from the law must be given refuge until the  situation
             can be  clarified.   Nanawatai  can  also  be  used  when  the
             vanquished party in a dispute is prepared to go into the house
             of the victors and ask for their forgiveness

         3.   Badal (justice) - To seek justice or take revenge against  the
             wrongdoer.  There is considered to be no  time  limit  to  the
             period in which revenge can be taken.  Justice in Pashtun lore
             needs elaborating: even a mere taunt (or 'Peghor') is regarded
             as an insult which usually can only be redressed  by  shedding
             the taunter's blood.  If he is out of reach, his closest  male
             relation must suffer the penalty instead.  Badal may lead to a
             blood feud that can last generations and involve whole  tribes
             with the loss of hundreds of lives.  Normally blood  feuds  in
             this male-dominated society are settled in a number of ways.

         4.   Turah (bravery) - A Pashtun must defend  his  land,  property,
             family and women from  incursions.   He  should  always  stand
             bravely against tyrants and be able to defend  the  honour  of
             his name.  Death can follow if anyone offends this principle.

         5.   Sabat (loyalty) -  Loyalty  must  be  paid  to  one's  family,
             friends and tribe members.  Pashtuns can never become disloyal
             as this would be a matter of  shame  for  their  families  and
             themselves.

         6.   Imandari (righteousness) - A Pashtun must  always  strive  for
             good  in  thought,  word,  and  deed.   Pashtuns  must  behave
             respectfully to people, animals  and  the  environment  around
             them.  Pollution of the  environment  or  its  destruction  is
             against the Pashtunwali.

         7.   Isteqamat - Trust in God  (known  as  'Allah'  in  Arabic  and
             'Khudai' in Pashto).  The notion of trusting  in  one  Creator
             generally comports to Islamic ideas of belief in only one  God
             (tawheed).

         8.    Jhayrat  (respect,  honour  and  courage)  -  Pashtuns   must
             demonstrate  courage.   Their  honour,  or  pride,  has  great
             importance in Pashtun society and  must  be  preserved.   They
             must respect themselves and others in order to be able  to  do
             so, especially those they do  not  know.   Respect  begins  at
             home, among family members and relatives.   If  one  does  not
             have 'jhayrat 'they are not classed as a Pashtun.

         9.    Naamus (protection of women) -  A  Pashtun  must  defend  the
             honour of women at all costs and must protect them from  vocal
             and physical harm.

         10.  Nang (honour) - a Pashtun must defend the weak around him".



