

                                    [pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05185/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 10 June 2015                     |On: 02 July 2015                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                              Ms Ermira Hassani
                         No anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T D H Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones QC promulgated on 3 November 2014.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on  30  August  1983.  The
    appellant  had  appealed  against  an  immigration  decision   of   the
    respondent, served on 18 July 2014 to refuse her leave to enter the UK.



 3. It was accepted that the appellant was a victim  of  trafficking.   She
    had failed to claim asylum in Italy or France but there were  a  number
    of concessions made by the respondent and her claim was accepted in its
    entirety.  The  issues  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  related   to
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation.

 4. The Judge  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the  core  of  her  account
    concerning her being pressed into prostitution was to be accepted [27].
    He found that there was not sufficient medical  evidence  justifying  a
    finding that the appellant has any ongoing psychiatric or psychological
    problems. There was no objective evidence  to  support  her  contention
    that she would be at risk from her trafficker, George, upon  return  to
    Albania. [32] He found that the  appellant  is  a  "would  be  economic
    migrant" notwithstanding her troubled past [35].

 5. It was contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal  that  the
    Judge arguably erred in law  in  failing  to  properly  consider  those
    issues in the  light  of  these  concessions  as  to  her  credibility.
    Moreover,  the  background  evidence  and  country  guidance  was   not
    considered. Nor were adequate reasons given  for  the  conclusion  that
    there was no evidence that she could not live independently  in  Tirana
    [34].

 6. It was on this basis that permission to appeal was granted.  There  had
    been allegations made regarding alleged procedural impropriety.

 7. On 1 May 2015, the respondent provided a response  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24.  The respondent did not  oppose  the  appellant's
    application for permission to  appeal,  and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    consider referring the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    hearing  on  the  relevant  matters  left  as  a  consequence  of   the
    respondent's full acceptance of the appellant's credibility.

 8. At the hearing on 10 June 2015, Mr Hodson considered  the  "invitation"
    with the appellant, who attended the hearing. He subsequently  informed
    the Tribunal that the matter should, in the circumstances, be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.  The  parties  accordingly
    agreed that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. I have had regard to the President's Practice Statement  regarding  the
    issue of remitting an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    decision. I am satisfied that the effect  of  the  error  has  been  to
    deprive the appellant of a fair and proper opportunity for her case  to
    be properly put and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The appeal is accordingly  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (at
    Hatton Cross) for a  fresh  decision  to  be  made  on  the  issues  of
    sufficiency of protection and internal relocation, having regard to the
    respondent's full acceptance of the appellant's credibility.

11. There is an agreed hearing date of 26  November  2015.  The  matter  is
    consequently remitted to Hatton Cross. The time estimate is 2 hours. An
    Albanian interpreter is required.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and is set aside.   The  case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a fresh determination to be made.

    No anonymity direction was sought or made.






    Signed   Date 10 June 2015


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
