

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05653/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 March 2016                       |On 21 March 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                     AAK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A White, instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary
    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction in relation to  the
    appellants  because  of  the  nature  of  the  case.   I  consider   it
    appropriate to make  a  similar  order  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
    Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the disclosure or publication of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    To give effect to this order the appellant is to be referred to by  the
    initials above.

 1. The appellant  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes that
    was  promulgated  on  23  August  2015.   Judge  Parkes  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal because he did not believe  she  was  a  refugee  or
    otherwise in need of humanitarian or article 3 protection.  His reasons
    were that her account was not credible and in any event it was possible
    for her and her husband (who was dependent on  her  refugee  claim)  to
    live safely in another part of Pakistan.

 2. The central issue raised in the ground of appeal and at the hearing was
    whether the judge  had  made  adequate  credibility  findings.   Having
    discussed the arguments for and against with Ms White and Mr  Mills,  I
    have decided that the decision  is  legally  flawed  for  a  number  of
    interwoven reasons.

 3. At paragraphs 16 and 20, the judge correctly  identified  that  it  was
    necessary for him to apply paragraph 339L of the immigration  rules  to
    decide if  the  appellant's  statements  that  were  not  supported  by
    documentary or other evidence were credible.

 4. Paragraph 339L contains the following provisions.

         339L. It is the duty of the person to substantiate the asylum claim
         or establish that he is a person eligible  humanitarian  protection
         or substantiate his  human  rights  claim.  Where  aspects  of  the
         person's statements are  not  supported  by  documentary  or  other
         evidence, those aspects will not need confirmation when all of  the
         following conditions are met:

         (i) the person has made a genuine effort to substantiate his asylum
         claim or establish  that  he  is  a  person  eligible  humanitarian
         protection or substantiate his human rights claim;

         (ii) all material  factors  at  the  person's  disposal  have  been
         submitted, and a satisfactory explanation  regarding  any  lack  of
         other relevant material has been given;

         (iii)  the  person's  statements  are  found  to  be  coherent  and
         plausible and do not run counter to available specific and  general
         information relevant to the person's case;

         (iv) the person has made an asylum claim  or  sought  to  establish
         that he is a person eligible for humanitarian protection or made  a
         human rights claim at the earliest possible time, unless the person
         can demonstrate good reason for not having done so; and

         (v) the general credibility of the person has been established.

 5. There was agreement between the parties regarding  factors  (i),  (ii),
    (iv) and (v); so much is clear from the reasons for refusal letter.  In
    the same letter, the Home Office argued that  the  appellant's  account
    was not credible regarding the date the  Jirga  (tribal  meeting)  took
    place or what happened at  that  meeting.   This  was  central  to  the
    appellant's claim to have a well-founded fear  of  persecution  because
    the threats against her and her husband are  said  to  have  originated
    from that meeting.

 6. I am satisfied the judge was aware of the significance of this event to
    the appellant's case because he refers to it  in  paragraph  6  of  his
    decision, albeit  obliquely,  by  referencing  the  Home  Office's  own
    summary of the appellant's claim.  More importantly he deals  with  the
    evidence at paragraph 14.

        14. There is no written evidence of the Jirga, that  is  apparently
        the nature of the meeting and decisions taken.  The  only  evidence
        is that of the Appellant's husband from  what  he  had  been  told.
        Whilst it is possible that such a meeting took place, there is some
        confusion over the involvement of the Taliban  and  no  independent
        evidence of the realistic reach of the meeting within Pakistan.

 7. In essence, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal turns  on  this  paragraph
    because Ms White and Mr Mills could not agree as to what  findings  had
    been made.  Having analysed the passage in light of their submissions I
    can see why they cannot reach agreement; the judge failed to make clear
    findings on a material issue.

 8. Ms White explained that the first sentence of paragraph 14 sets out the
    judge's acceptance that there is no record of a  Jirga.   The  evidence
    from this was from the appellant  herself  and  was  not  supported  by
    independent  evidence.   It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  judge
    implicitly accepted the appellant to be credible on  this  aspect  even
    though there was no documentary evidence to support her  account.   The
    next sentence in paragraph 14  adds  nothing;  it  merely  records  the
    source of the evidence about  the  Jirga  being  from  the  appellant's
    husband.

 9. The third sentence is more complicated.   The  first  clause  indicates
    that the judge found it  was  possible  that  a  Jirga  took  place  as
    claimed.  The second and third clauses indicate  that  there  was  some
    confusion as to who took part and the extent to which the appellant and
    her husband would  be  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm  elsewhere  in
    Pakistan.

10. Mr Mills suggested that in the second clause the judge had  found  that
    the account given by the  appellant  was  not  consistent.   I  am  not
    satisfied this is the correct interpretation  because  a  finding  that
    evidence is confused requires a judge to resolve the confusion  through
    other evidence or to make  a  finding  that  the  confusion  cannot  be
    resolved, in which case there needs to be a finding that  the  evidence
    is inconsistent.  As the judge did  not  make  a  clear  finding  about
    consistency of the evidence, I cannot accept what Mr Mills suggested.

11. I will deal later with the issues arising from the third clause of  the
    third sentence of paragraph 14.  At this juncture it is  apparent  that
    the decision is unsustainable because the judge has not made a  finding
    about whether the statements of the appellant's accounts are  coherent.
    Without such a finding he could not say that  paragraph  339L  was  not
    satisfied.  It is not possible to infer  such  a  finding  because  the
    conclusions in paragraph 14 are  mixed.   Therefore,  this  failure  is
    fatal to  the  judge's  assessment  of  credibility  and  requires  the
    decision to be set aside.

12. As this is at the heart of the  case,  none  of  the  findings  can  be
    preserved and it is appropriate to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision.   Although  none  of  the  findings  are
    preserved, the Tribunal will assume that the concession  given  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter will be maintained as to the  agreed  facts.
    If that is not the case, then it will be for the parties  to  put  each
    other and the Tribunal on notice well ahead of any rehearing date.

13. I return to the last clause of paragraph 14, where the judge said there
    was no independent evidence of  the  realistic  reach  of  the  meeting
    within Pakistan.  This is a factor which only becomes relevant  if  the
    appellant and her family have a well-founded fear of  persecution  only
    in their home area.  At the moment, therefore, it is not a  matter  for
    the Upper Tribunal since there has yet to be a sound finding as to  the
    risk of persecution.

14. If the First-tier Tribunal were to find  that  the  appellant  and  her
    family faced such a risk in their home  area,  then  it  will  have  to
    consider whether the appellant and her family  could  live  in  another
    part of Pakistan.  In such circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal, like
    the parties, will have to consider the  provisions  of  paragraph  339O
    (internal relocation) of the Immigration Rules.

15. I mention this simply because this is the second ground  of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal and is one that I have not had to consider given the
    findings I have already made.  However, as set out in  the  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it is far from clear  that  Judge  Parkes
    had proper regard to the law on this issue or to the  facts  presented.
    But as I say, there has been no need for me to examine those issues  or
    make a decision on them.



Decision

The decision and reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
contains an error on a point of law and is set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  afresh  by  a
judge other than Judge Parkes.

The parties are directed to file and serve all documents on which they  will
seek to rely at least seven calendar days  before  the  next  hearing.   The
parties are at liberty to  submit  any  additional  evidence  they  wish  to
submit but do not have to resubmit  any  document  submitted  in  connection
with the previous hearings in either Tribunal.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
