
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
AA/05483/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 8 March 2016                       |         On 7 April 2016              |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                                     PK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Butterworth, Counsel, instructed by Ravi
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order.
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. Although the Secretary of State is the Appellant in this appeal I refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse  her
    application for asylum in  the  United  Kingdom.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Sweet dismissed the asylum appeal (there is no challenge to  that
    decision) and allowed the  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  The Secretary of State  now  appeals  with
    permission to this Tribunal against the decision to  allow  the  appeal
    under Article 8.

 3. The background to this appeal is  that  the  Appellant  (now  aged  74)
    entered the UK on 4 June 2006 with a visit visa valid until 19 November
    2006. She made two unsuccessful applications for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as a dependent relative. These were refused on 8  December  2006
    and 5 April 2007.  Her appeal against the second refusal was  dismissed
    in June 2007.   She  made  further  representations  in  October  2008,
    February 2009 and October  2010  and  was  served  with  IS151A  as  an
    overstayer on 19 December 2013.  She then claimed  asylum.   She  lives
    with her daughter and is supported by her daughter and son in  the  UK,
    both of whom have been granted asylum in the UK.

 4. Having dismissed the asylum appeal the judge went on  to  consider  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    judge found that it would be a disproportionate interference  with  the
    Appellant's private and family life to return her to Sri Lanka.

 5. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State contends that the judge
    made a material misdirection in law in relation to  Article  8.  It  is
    contended that the judge failed to take into account  the  guidance  in
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31 in assessing the family life between the  Appellant  and  her  adult
    children.  It is further contended that the judge failed to point to  a
    relationship where something more exists than the normal emotional ties
    between an adult and his parent and  other  siblings.   It  is  further
    contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take account  of
    the guidance in Akhalu (Health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 00400
    (IAC) when assessing the proportionality of removal.  It  is  contended
    that the Appellant  is  currently  receiving  National  Health  Service
    treatment for her medical condition and this has played a part  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  proportionality  assessment.   The  final
    ground of appeal contends that the judge  failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for finding that the Appellant has family life with  her  adult
    children.  It is contended that the judge failed  to  provide  adequate
    reasons  for  deciding  that   the   Appellant's   removal   would   be
    disproportionate  to the legitimate aim.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  the  grounds  were
    arguable and it was stated to be further arguable that the judge failed
    to give adequate consideration to  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the weight to be  attached  to  the
    public interest.





Error of Law

 7. Mr Nath contended that at paragraph 41 of his decision the judge relied
    on the Appellant's health issues and that this amounted to an error  of
    law in light of the case law.  He submitted that this conclusion places
    undue emphasis on the  Appellant's  medical  condition  without  taking
    account of the decision in the case of Akhalu.

 8. The judge dealt with the Article 8 issues at paragraphs 40  and  41  of
    the determination.  The judge noted  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not meet a claim for family life under Appendix FM   as
    an adult dependent relative and went onto consider the case outside the
    Immigration Rules.  the judge set out the five stage approach  set  out
    in Razgar.  At paragraph  41  the  judge  made  his  main  findings  in
    relation to Article 8.   I accept that these findings could  have  been
    clearer and would have been better had the judge followed the structure
    of the five stage approach set out at paragraph 40  from  the  case  of
    Razgar.   However, I accept that it  is  sufficiently  clear  that  the
    judge found that the Appellant has established  a  private  and  family
    life in the UK.  This is because the judge, having found  a  number  of
    factors  against the Appellant concluded

         "Above all, having been in the UK  since  2006  and  accepting  her
         close relationship with her two children and grandchildren in  this
         country - although I do not think her  medical  condition  is  such
         that she would not been able to obtain  medical  treatment  in  Sri
         Lanka - I consider it would be disproportionate for her  to  return
         to that country at this point in her life."

 9. In my view this sentence shows that the judge did accept that there was
    family life between the Appellant and her  children  and  grandchildren
    over and above that normally found between adults and their parents.  I
    accept that this was on the basis of the evidence before the  judge  as
    to the Appellant's medical condition and  as  to  any  assistance  that
    would be available to her in Sri Lanka.

10. I do not accept Mr Nath's submission that this sentence demonstrates an
    over-emphasis on the medical condition because in my view it  is  clear
    that the judge does not consider the Appellant's medical  condition  to
    be such that she would not be able to obtain medical treatment  in  Sri
    Lanka. Also, the conclusion of this sentence indicates that in  fact  a
    weighty factor in the judge's mind is the Appellant's age.  In my  view
    the phrase "at this point in her life" refers to  the  Appellant's  age
    and the length of time that she has been in the UK.

11. I accept it would have been better had the  judge  set  this  out  more
    clearly.  However I accept the submission made by  Mr  Butterworth  and
    his reliance on the case of Dasgupta (Error of law - proportionality  -
    correct  approach)  [2016]  UKUT  00028  (IAC).   In  that   case   the
    Presidential panel emphasised the  principles  in  Edwards  v  Bairstow
    [1956]  AC14  where  the  House  of  Lords  employed  the  language  of
    "perversity" which they defined as a case in which "the facts found are
    such that no person acting judicially and properly instructed as to the
    relevant law could come to the determination under appeal" and  that  a
    decision should be set aside only where it appears that the  judge  has
    "... acted without any evidence or upon a view of the facts which could
    not reasonably be entertained." [17].

12. The Upper Tribunal went on to apply these principles in  the  following
    way [18]

          "In the decision of the FTT there is an underlying  acceptance  of
         Article 8 family life involving all five people  in  question.   We
         consider that our scrutiny of the decision of  the  FTT  must  take
         into account both the evidence  available  to  it,  its  undisputed
         nature and the significant contextual factor,  also  uncontentious,
         that  the  existence  of  family  life  among  the  five  relatives
         concerned was not contested.  In JB (India) the test formulated  by
         Sullivan LJ was whether the Tribunal could  rationally  have  found
         that there was family life if it had expressly applied the Kugathas
         principles.  Weighing all of the evidence in  tandem  with  the  de
         facto concession on this issue, which illuminates  the  content  of
         the FtT's decision, we conclude that it withstands the Secretary of
         State's challenge.  In our judgment the assumption, or finding [the
         precise formulation matters not]  of  family  life  underlying  and
         underpinning the decision of the FtT was properly open to the judge
         having regard to the findings express or implicit in the  decision,
         the available evidence, the terms of the ECO's decision and the  de
         facto concession.  In these particular circumstances, while a  more
         structured approach coupled with more extensive findings by the FtT
         would have been preferable, this does not vitiate its decision ..."

13. I consider that this guidance is particularly relevant  in  this  case.
    In the context of the evidence before the  judge  the  implied  finding
    that there is family life in terms of the Kugathas  principles  between
    the Appellant, her children and her grandchildren in the context of the
    evidence is sustainable given the Appellant's age, her length  of  time
    in the UK, the length of time she has resided with  her  daughter,  and
    her family members in the UK, and the findings made  by  the   previous
    Tribunal in a decision promulgated on 11th June 2007 in relation to the
    short term limited nature of any support available to the Appellant  in
    Sri Lanka.

14. It is my view the decision of the judge in this case  is  not  perverse
    being open to the judge conducting a proper proportionality  assessment
    on the basis of all of the evidence.

15. Mr Nath submitted that the judge failed to  properly  consider  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   I  accept
    that the judge gave a cursory consideration  to  Section  117B  at  the
    first sentence of paragraph 41.  However, the judge properly said  that
    in  relation  to  private  life  Section  117B  militates  against  the
    Appellant's stay in  the  country  while  her  immigration  status  was
    precarious, so the judge was  therefore  aware  of  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B and  I  am  satisfied  that  the  reasoning,  reading  the
    decision as a whole, was sufficient to deal with Section 117B.

Notice of Decision

16. In conclusion, I am satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge contains sufficient and adequate reasons in relation  to
    the  conclusion  that  the  removal  of  the  Appellant  would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with her private and family life  in  the
    UK.  In these circumstances I conclude that there is no material  error
    of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision  and  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


Signed                              Date 21 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 21 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


