
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05107/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2016                           |On 21 December 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     J S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Sane, instructed by Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was  born  on  28  November
    1988.  She arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 October 2009 with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 Student  valid  from  8  October  2009  until  26
    February 2013.  On arrival, however, her leave was cancelled  at  port.
    She appealed against that decision but  her  appeal  was  dismissed  by
    Immigration Judge Chohan in a decision promulgated on 22 December 2009.
     Her application for reconsideration was refused by the High  Court  on
    22 January 2010.

 3. Thereafter, the appellant failed to report and absconded.

 4. On 29 July 2013, she claimed asylum at the Asylum Unit in  Croydon.   A
    substantive asylum interview took place on 2 March 2015.

 5. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim was principally that she  had
    been detained and seriously ill-treated, including being raped,  whilst
    detained by the Sri Lankan authorities on 10 August 2009.  The basis of
    her detention was that it was claimed she had helped  the  LTTE  (which
    she denied) and her connection with the LTTE was said to be  through  a
    school  friend  ("VP")  who  had  been  arrested  by  the  Sri   Lankan
    authorities in May 2009 and whose whereabouts were unknown.

 6. The appellant claimed that she had been released on 25 August 2009 as a
    result of a payment to an army  officer  arranged  by  her  uncle  and,
    having stayed with a friend of her uncles, on 27 August 2009 she met an
    agent who arranged for her to  stay  in  Colombo.   The  appellant  had
    previously obtained a  passport  in  June  2009.   She  obtained  entry
    clearance as a student and left Sri Lanka for  the  UK  on  24  October
    2009.

 7. In December 2009, her uncle told her that the authorities had  come  to
    the house looking for her as she had escaped detention.  The  appellant
    claimed that she had not had any contact with  her  family  since  that
    time.

 8. Whilst in the United Kingdom, in November 2012 she met  "AR"  and  they
    have had a daughter together who was born on 13  February  2014.   They
    underwent a religious marriage ceremony on 14 January 2015.

 9. In her claim to the Secretary of State, the appellant claimed that  she
    would be at risk on return to Sri  Lanka  on  two  bases.   First,  she
    feared the Sri Lankan authorities would detain and seriously  ill-treat
    her as she had escaped detention and was considered to be a  member  or
    supporter of the LTTE.  Secondly, she would  not  be  accepted  by  the
    community in Sri Lanka as she would be returning as a woman who had had
    a child out of wedlock.

10. On 5 March 2015, the Secretary of State rejected her claim for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.  The Secretary  of
    State rejected the appellant's account that she had been  arrested  and
    detained on 10 August 2009 and had been seriously  ill-treated  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities.  In addition, the Secretary of State  concluded
    that, in the light of the Country Guidance case of GJ and Others (post-
    civil war; returnees) [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC), the appellant had failed
    to establish that, even taking her claim at its highest, that  she  was
    at risk on return to Sri  Lanka.   Secondly,  the  Secretary  of  State
    rejected the appellant's claim that she would be at  risk  as  a  woman
    returning with a child born out of wedlock.  Finally, the Secretary  of
    State rejected the appellant's claim under Arts 3 and 8.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  detailed
    determination  dated  5  May  2016,  Judge  S  Goodrich  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

12. First, the judge found the appellant's account to have  been  arrested,
    detained and seriously ill-treated by the Sri Lankan authorities not to
    be credible despite supporting medical evidence that the appellant  had
    scarring and marks on her body "typical of the trauma described."

13. Secondly, the judge rejected the appellant's claim that she was at risk
    as a woman returning with a child out of wedlock because the judge  did
    not accept that others would become aware of her child's status  unless
    the appellant  told  them  which  the  judge  considered  to  be  "most
    unlikely".

14. Finally, the judge considered a ground raised at the hearing  that  the
    appellant as a Tamil woman returning to the North of Sri Lanka  was  at
    risk of persecution as a member of  a  particular  social  group.   The
    judge accepted that the "conditions in Sri Lanka for women are very far
    from satisfactory".  However, having considered the background evidence
    and the fact that the appellant would be returning to her  family  with
    her husband, the judge was not satisfied that there was a real risk  of
    persecution or serious harm contrary to Art 3 on the basis of,  as  the
    judge put  it,  "gender  persecution  at  the  hands  of  the  security
    services".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the judge's adverse credibility finding, her  finding  that
    the appellant would not be at risk as a returning woman  with  a  child
    born out of wedlock and, finally, her finding that the appellant  would
    not be at risk of gender-based violence and was not a member of a  PSG.



16. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal.
    However, on 5 July 2016 the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Kamara)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on all grounds.

17. On 20 July 2016, the Secretary  of  State  filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's findings  and  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

18. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Submissions

19. Ms Sane, who represented the appellant, relied upon the  three  grounds
    in the appellant's "Grounds of Appeal" which she developed in her  oral
    submissions.  Grounds 1 and 2 challenge the judge's adverse credibility
    finding rejecting the appellant's account (and therefore basis for  any
    future risk) that she had been arrested, detained  and  seriously  ill-
    treated, including raped by the Sri Lankan authorities in  August  2009
    and also the judge's adverse finding in relation to  the  risk  to  the
    appellant returning as a woman  with  a  child  born  out  of  wedlock.
    Ground 3 challenges the judge's finding that the appellant  had  failed
    to establish a real risk of gender-based violence if  she  returned  to
    the North of Sri Lanka.

20. The grounds may be summarised as follows.

21. Ground 1:

         (1)  The appellant relied upon medical evidence  which,  the  judge
             accepted,  demonstrated  that  the  appellant   had   scarring
             "typical of the trauma" she had described.  In  the  light  of
             that, the judge had erred  in  law  by  failing  to  give  the
             appellant an opportunity to deal  with  a  number  of  adverse
             points relied on by the judge to find the appellant's  account
             not to be credible:

             (a)  The appellant was not given an opportunity to  deal  with
                  any  allegation  that  her  injuries  were  caused  by   a
                  different mechanism from that  supported  by  the  medical
                  evidence.

             (b)  The judge appears to have doubted the credibility of  the
                  appellant's claim to have left Sri Lanka at  short  notice
                  with her student visa on the basis that she must have been
                  able to establish she had the required funds for  a  prior
                  28-day period as set out in the  respondent's  PBS  Policy
                  Guidance (in force  from  31  March  2009).   That  policy
                  document had not been in evidence before the judge.

             (c)   The  judge  was  wrong  to  disbelieve  the  appellant's
                  evidence that she re-sat her A levels in 2008 on the basis
                  that the  certificates  provided  were  dated  2007  which
                  called into question her claim that she had been  studying
                  at the time with her friend VP  whom  she  claimed  was  a
                  member  of  the  LTTE  without  giving  the  appellant  an
                  opportunity to deal with the discrepancy.

             (d)  The judge was wrong to doubt the appellant's  account  of
                  her arrest and detention in respect of which she said that
                  her  hair  had  been  cut  short  in  detention  when  the
                  photograph on her entry  clearance  application  dated  29
                  September 2009 (after she had been released)  showed  that
                  her hair was tied back.  The photograph was not  shown  to
                  the appellant and she was  not  given  an  opportunity  to
                  comment on it.

22. Ground 2 challenges the judge's credibility findings on  the  basis  of
    irrationality or that they are inadequately reasoned as follows:

         (1)  The judge was wrong  in  law  to  disbelieve  the  appellant's
             detailed account of her rape whilst in detention simply on the
             basis that her account  was  "implausible"  as  it  "would  be
             physically very difficult indeed" to rape the appellant in the
             way she described.

         (2)  The  judge  was  wrong  to  conclude,  in  the  light  of  the
             background evidence, that it was not  credible  that  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities would have  any  adverse  interest  in  the
             appellant in August 2009 based solely on her  past  attendance
             at LTTE events as she claimed.  Reliance is  placed  upon  the
             UNHCR "Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing the  International
             Protection Needs of  Asylum-Seekers  from  Sri  Lanka"  (2009)
             which supported the position that Tamils originating from  the
             North and East were frequently associated with the LTTE and of
             interest, at that time, to the Sri Lankan authorities.

         (3)  The judge was wrong to count adversely against  the  appellant
             that she had no explanation why the Sri Lankan authorities had
             not sought  to  arrest  her  earlier,  although  VP  had  been
             arrested in May 2009 and VP's family had  not  been  detained.
             The appellant was not in a position to  offer  an  explanation
             and the judge's doubt failed to have regard to the  fact  that
             repressive regimes might not behave reasonably.

         (4)  The judge had been wrong to doubt the appellant's  credibility
             on the basis that it was implausible that, having applied  for
             a passport, it would take six weeks  to  reach  her  by  post.
             Further, the appellant had advanced a  reasonable  explanation
             why she had applied for a passport before  she  was  detained,
             namely that by  June  2009  she  was  in  fear  for  her  life
             following the arrest of her friend VP in May 2009.

         (5)  In relation to the appellant's claim to be at risk as a  woman
             returning with a child out of  wedlock,  the  judge  had  been
             wrong to  find  that  it  would  only  be  discovered  if  the
             appellant told her  family  which  was  unlikely  because  the
             appellant's evidence as set out in paras 19-20 of her  witness
             statement was that in order  to  obtain  a  passport  for  her
             daughter she would need, in effect, to add her daughter to the
             "family  book"  which  would  require  her  to  establish  her
             marriage and, therefore, disclose that her child was born  out
             of wedlock.

23. Ground 3 argues, on the basis of the background evidence, including the
    UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines that the North and East of  Sri  Lanka  is
    "highly militarised" and that, as a consequence, there  is  a  risk  of
    gender-based violence for Tamil women in general from  the  Sri  Lankan
    military and authorities.  In her oral submissions, Ms  Sane  submitted
    that the judge at para 78 had, in rejecting the appellant's  claim,  in
    effect, wrongly identified a number of risk categories into  which  the
    appellant did not fall.  Ms Sane submitted that the background evidence
    identified a more general risk to women which included  the  appellant.
    Secondly, she submitted that in finding that there was no real risk  to
    the appellant the judge's finding was perverse  or  irrational  in  the
    light of the background evidence.

The Respondent's Submissions

24. As regards Grounds 1 and 2, Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State, submitted that there had been no procedural unfairness.  It  was
    clearly recognised before the judge that the appellant was a vulnerable
    individual and, therefore, it was only appropriate that the  Presenting
    Officer did not engage in aggressive  cross-examination.   However,  it
    was clear  from  the  outset  that  the  appellant's  account  was  not
    accepted.  Mr Richards submitted that the Presenting  Officer  was  not
    required to challenge every specific part of the evidence.   The  judge
    correctly was well aware of the appellant's vulnerability.  The  report
    of the medical expert (Dr Cohen) was accepted by the judge as providing
    "strong support" did not mean that the report was  determinative.   The
    judge had come to her  own  conclusions  based  on  the  whole  of  the
    evidence and had given detailed reason at paras 60-62 for  her  adverse
    credibility finding.

25. That said, Mr Richards accepted that the judge's reliance in paras  45-
    46 on the fact that the appellant's  entry  clearance  application  had
    been supported by documentation which the judge must have taken  to  be
    inconsistent  with  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  left  Sri  Lanka
    unexpectedly was confusing.

26. Further, whilst Mr Richards did not accept that the photograph  of  the
    appellant on her entry clearance application had not been shown to  the
    appellant at the hearing, he expressed the view  that  there  might  be
    difficulties with the judge's reasoning which assumed  that  the  entry
    clearance application made on 25 September 2009 included  a  photograph
    taken at that time rather than an earlier point in time  prior  to  her
    detention.

27. With those caveats, Mr  Richards  submitted  that  there  had  been  no
    procedural error and the judge's reasoning was  sufficient  to  sustain
    her adverse credibility finding.

28. Mr Richards accepted that if the adverse credibility finding could  not
    stand, although there might be an argument as to whether the  appellant
    would be at risk applying GJ and Others taking, in effect, her case  at
    its  highest,  the  judge  had  not  dealt  with  that  point  in   her
    determination.

29. As  regards  ground  3,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    considered in detail the background evidence  in  relation  to  gender-
    based violence at paras 70-79 of her determination.  He submitted  that
    the judge accepted that there was a high degree  of  militarisation  in
    the North and East of Sri Lanka and had recognised that  the  situation
    for women was "very difficult".  Nevertheless, the judge found that the
    evidence did not establish a real risk of sexual violence.  Her reasons
    for doing so were adequate and her finding was not irrational.

Discussion

30. I deal first with Grounds 1 and 2 which challenge the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding and reject the appellant's claimed past persecution
    and, therefore, her claimed risk on return as a member or supporter  of
    the LTTE.

31. I have reached the conclusion that Ms Sane has made good sufficient  of
    the points raised in Grounds 1 and 2 to establish a material  error  of
    law such that the judge's adverse finding cannot stand.

32. First, the judge failed, in my judgment, to give sufficient  regard  to
    the expert report of Dr Cohen in the absence of  any  cross-examination
    alleging that the scarring and  injuries  of  the  appellant  were  not
    caused by the events  she  described  as  having  occurred  during  her
    detention by the Sri Lankan authorities in August 2009.

33. The starting point is the judge's findings in relation  to  Dr  Cohen's
    report which she accepted.  Those findings are set out at  para  35  as
    follows:

         "35.     Dr Cohen saw and examined the appellant  on  11th  January
             2016.  Within the history she noted the  appellant's  account.
             In summary in her report:

             a)   She found that the appellant has 19 lesions to  her  body
                  including her breast area and thighs which are typical  of
                  cigarette burns and which are a strong indicator of sexual
                  abuse.  The appellant also has unusual pigmentation change
                  to the skin of her neck which she finds typical of  petrol
                  bag asphyxia.

             b)    She  considered  but   rejected   the   possibility   of
                  fabrication  of  the  physical  evidence  in   line   with
                  paragraph 105 f of the Istanbul Protocol.   There  was  no
                  evidence   of   exaggeration   and   embellishment.    The
                  psychological evidence supports the account of the torture
                  described.

             c)   When considered self infliction as a possible  cause  she
                  noted that the commonest site for self-infliction  is  the
                  inside of the non-dominant forearm but  only  one  of  the
                  lesions  is  situated  there  and  the  pattern   of   the
                  appellants' burns is not usually found  in  self-inflicted
                  injury.

             d)   The appellant  has  intrusive  recall  of  her  traumatic
                  experiences, difficulty sleeping and  nightmares  reliving
                  her experiences and low mood.  She  demonstrates  triggers
                  to her re-experiencing symptoms such  as  having  to  talk
                  about her experiences  and  avoids  doing  so  as  far  as
                  possible.  She has not disclosed her experience of  sexual
                  violation to her husband for fear that he  or  his  family
                  may reject her.  She has coped with these  symptoms  since
                  2009 and has only recently had any treatment (Fluoxetine).

             e)   She considers that the appellant fulfils the criteria for
                  PTSD.  She bases her diagnosis not  only  on  the  history
                  related to her but  on  her  observations  throughout  the
                  examination, the responses made to specific questions  and
                  her objective findings as to the appellant's mental state.
                    She  considered  other  causes  but  PTSD  requires   an
                  experience of overwhelming fear or threat to life such  as
                  the experience of torture described.

             f)   She notes from the medical records that the appellant had
                  had fluctuating symptoms over the last  several  years:  a
                  similar symptom profile has at times been  identified  and
                  at others she has not  been  recorded  as  suffering  from
                  significant mental health problems.  She considers that it
                  is usual for the severity and predominance of symptoms  to
                  vary other time (see para 58).

             g)   She considers that the experiences and  specifically  the
                  sexual  violence  the  appellant  describes,  would   have
                  affected her ability to recount her experiences  to  claim
                  asylum earlier than she did so.  The difficulty in  making
                  disclosure is well recognised in the  asylum  context  and
                  more generally.  She noted that  the  appellant  has  said
                  that she had not even  told  her  husband  of  the  sexual
                  violence for fear that he or his family may reject her.

             h)   Dr Cohen considered that the  appellant  is  in  need  of
                  continued treatment with  the  anti-depressant  and  would
                  benefit from psychological therapy.

             i)   If returned to Sri Lanka, where she would be without  her
                  current  supports,  there  are  many  more   triggers   to
                  intrusive recall of her traumatic experiences and  she  is
                  in fear of further  detention  and  torture,  her  current
                  mental state is likely to be  seriously  exacerbated.   If
                  she were returned without the support of her  husband  she
                  would be less likely to be able to  access  mental  health
                  care and less able to care for her child.

             j)   Her ability to give evidence may be affected by her  wish
                  to keep the experience of sexual  violation  confidential.
                  She may, even in a  closed  and  all  female  court,  have
                  difficulty in describing what occurred  as  she  found  it
                  difficult and distressing even in the relative privacy  of
                  the examination room."

34. At para 36, the judge noted that she must consider  all  the  evidence,
    including the "medical/psychiatric and country evidence" in the  round.
    At para 38, the judge set out her conclusion in respect of  Dr  Cohen's
    evidence as follows:

         "38.     The overall effect of the evidence of  Dr  Cohen  is  that
             viewed as a whole, and in the context of the appellant's PTSD,
             the cigarette burns and changes in pigmentation  at  the  neck
             seen are typical of the trauma described (meaning that this is
             an appearance usually found with this type of trauma but there
             are few other possible causes).  I note that Dr Cohen did  not
             consider the possibility of self infliction by  proxy  despite
             the guidance in KV (scarring -  medical  evidence)  Sri  Lanka
             [2014] UKUT 00231 as to best practice (in terms  of  assisting
             the Tribunal) in this regard (see para 294)."

35. The judge there noted that the injuries to the appellant, including the
    cigarette burns and the rather particular injuries to her neck said  to
    have occurred as a result of an act  of  "petrol  bag  asphyxia",  were
    "typical of the  trauma  described",  noting  in  accordance  with  the
    Istanbul Protocol that this meant that there was "an appearance that is
    usually found with this type of trauma, but there  are  other  possible
    causes" (see page 23 of Dr Cohen's report).   Dr  Cohen's  report  was,
    therefore, highly supportive of the detailed events which the appellant
    had described in her evidence.  The "typical  of"  category  under  the
    Istanbul Protocol lies above a description of "consistent" and  "highly
    consistent" but below that of "diagnostic of" - the latter meaning that
    the appearance "could not have  been  caused  other  than  in  the  way
    described".  Nevertheless, the "typical of" descriptor which the  judge
    did not seek to dispute provided, despite comments made  by  the  judge
    set out in para 38 and then in para 39, evidence which the judge  found
    provided "strong support for the appellant's case" (see para 39).

36. Whilst I accept, indeed it was conceded by Ms  Sane,  that  Dr  Cohen's
    report  was  not  determinative  of  the  appellant's  credibility,  it
    nevertheless stood,  so  to  speak,  presumptively  as  supporting  the
    appellant's  case.    In  the  light  of  this,  I  accept  Ms   Sane's
    submission, based upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RR
    (Challenging evidence) Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT 000274 (IAC), that it  was
    incumbent upon the Presenting Officer to cross-examine the appellant on
    any alternative "possible causes" but that that did not happen.  In RR,
    the Upper Tribunal said this at [154]-[156]:

         "154.    Once it is apparent that the appellant is scarred we  have
              to ask ourselves how he came to be scarred.  He says that  he
              was tortured.  The other possibilities  are  that  the  scars
              were the result of some innocent but unimaginable  mechanism,
              or that they are the result  of  torture  in  very  different
              circumstances to those advanced by the appellant.  One  might
              speculate  that  they  were  self-inflicted,  presumably   to
              promote the appellant's case.  None of these explanations  is
              beyond belief but they do not appear to us to be likely.

         155.     Ms Kiss was not able in her  cross-examination  to  lay  a
              foundation to support any suggestion that the scars were self-
              inflicted or otherwise the result of bad faith on the part of
              the appellant.  As we have already mentioned it was  not  put
              to the appellant  that  the  scars  were  self  inflicted  or
              otherwise caused in a way inconsistent with  the  appellant's
              case.   That  implies  no  criticism  of  Ms  Kiss.   On  the
              contrary, it seems to us to reflect the reality of the case.

         156.     In the absence  of  any  evidence  tending  to  suggest  a
              different mechanism we do not see how we  can  fairly  reject
              the  appellant's  evidence  about   their   cause   when   no
              alternative mechanism was put to him and he  was  not  cross-
              examined on the basis that he was making up his entire case."

37. That was, in effect, the position in this appeal as regards the medical
    evidence and the absence of  any  cross-examination  or  suggestion  of
    alternative causes which were put to the appellant.

38. In my judgment, in the absence  of  cross-examination  which  gave  the
    appellant an opportunity to deal with any suggested alternative  causes
    of her specific injuries, the judge failed to give adequate reasons for
    not accepting the import of Dr Cohen's evidence and also, as  [156]  of
    RR points out, acted unfairly in  rejecting  the  appellant's  evidence
    about the cause of her injuries.

39. In itself, given the strength and indeed the judge's own  view  of  the
    importance of Dr Cohen's evidence, the judge's failure properly to deal
    with this evidence in itself is, in my judgment, a  material  error  of
    law.

40. However, I also accept a number of other criticisms made  by  Ms  Sane,
    some of which are accepted by Mr Richards.

41. Mr Richards accepts that the  judge's  reasoning  at  paras  45-46  was
    confusing where she doubted the appellant's  claim  to  have  left  Sri
    Lanka "wholly unexpectedly" on a student  visa  following  her  release
    from detention based upon the fact that she must  (as  the  PBS  Policy
    Guidance requires) have been able to produce bank statements  from  her
    father (as her sponsor) showing substantial funds  were  held  in  that
    account from 28 August 2009 which was  three  days  after  her  claimed
    release on 25 August 2009.  The judge said this at para 46:

         "46.     ...On the appellant's case her departure on a student visa
             was wholly  unexpected  and  only  came  about  following  her
             release from detention.  It follows on her case  that  (unless
             her father had already the  substantial  funds  shown  in  his
             account) funds would  have  to  have  been  found,  deposited,
             cleared and the necessary letter provided very quickly  indeed
             given that, on the appellant's account, she  was  released  on
             25th August and the agent's plan that she would leave for  the
             UK was made on about 27th August 2009."

42. Why the judge considered that it was in  some  way  sinister  that  the
    appellant was able to produce bank statements from her  father  showing
    that he had the required funds within three days of her being  released
    from detention is wholly unclear.  It is pure speculation why this  was
    the case.  It could have simply been that her  father  always  had  the
    money in the account and, in any event, even if he obtained it at short
    notice, there is nothing inherently implausible in him doing  so  in  a
    few days or that the bank statements could be obtained in short notice.
     The judge's adverse inference was pure speculation and not based  upon
    any evidence.  That was, in my judgment, also an error in  the  judge's
    reasoning.

43. Further, although it is unclear whether the  appellant  was  shown  the
    photograph of her  on  her  entry  clearance  application  made  on  25
    September 2009, Mr Richards accepted that it was problematic  that  the
    judge had assumed that photograph had been taken after her release from
    detention.  Only if it had would there  be  an  apparent  inconsistency
    between her account that her  hair  had  been  cut  very  short  during
    detention and a photograph which apparently showed that  she  had  hair
    tied back behind her head.  Mr Richards acknowledged that there was  no
    basis for the judge's assumption that this was a photograph taken after
    her detention rather than a photograph  which  had  been  taken  at  an
    earlier point in time.

44. Having consulted the judge's Record of Proceedings it is unclear to  me
    whether the appellant was, in fact, shown the photograph although  what
    the judge says in para 60(e) of  her  determination  strongly  suggests
    that she was shown the photograph.  Ms Sane indicated that that was not
    her recollection of the hearing.  In the event, it is not necessary for
    me to resolve that issue because it is plain to me that the  judge  was
    not entitled to identify the inconsistency in the  appellant's  account
    by reference to this  photograph  unless  it  was  the  case  that  the
    evidence established the photograph was  taken  after  the  appellant's
    release from detention.  I am unable to detect  any  evidence  on  that
    specific issue and that it was a point put to the appellant in her oral
    evidence.  In the light of that, the judge's  reasoning  is  inadequate
    and amounts, in itself, to an error of law.

45. I am, therefore, to  that  extent  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    established the points raised in Ground 1 (a), (b) and (d).

46. Ms Sane accepted the point raised under Ground 1(c) (above) in relation
    to the failure to put to the  appellant  the  discrepancy  between  her
    claim to  have  re-sat  her  A  levels  in  2008  whilst  her  A  level
    certificates are dated 2007, was not her  strongest  point.   I  agree.
    The matter was raised in cross-examination  and  Ms  Sane  had  a  full
    opportunity to deal with it in re-examination but did not do so.  There
    was  nothing  unfair,  therefore,  in  the  judge   relying   on   this
    discrepancy.

47. There is, also, a further error in the judge's reasoning  raised  under
    Ground 2(1) (above) which adds to the unsustainability of  the  judge's
    adverse credibility finding.

48. In her evidence the appellant gave a detailed description  of  how  she
    had been  raped  by  three  men  while  she  was  in  detention.   That
    description is set out at paras 20-21 of the judge's  determination  as
    follows:

         "20.     I explained to Ms Sane that I needed clarification of  the
             appellant's description of the rape as set out at para  24  of
             the statement dated 26th February 2015 (RB/B9) and  I  invited
             her to deal with that.  In answer to  Ms  Sane  the  appellant
             said that on the fourth day she was sitting in the  room  tied
             to a chair.  The men  tied  both  her  legs.   Her  legs  were
             stretched and they put her legs on the window.  Her legs  were
             tied at the ankle.  What happened next was that  one  man  was
             sitting on her legs below her knees.  The  person  behind  her
             was hugging her from the back.  The man  seated  on  her  legs
             tried to divide her legs.  The window sill was level with  the
             chair.  Her legs were stretched out, resting on the sill.  The
             man sat below her knees and divided her thighs with his hands.
              Her ankles were still tied.  Whilst one man  was  sitting  on
             her legs beneath the knees another was holding  her  from  the
             back and another one came  and  raped  her.   When  the  first
             person raped her she was  unconscious.   She  had  a  blackout
             because it was hurting badly.  Asked by Ms Sane if  all  three
             raped her she said that she wanted to explain that  that  when
             they came in to the room they tied  her  legs.   One  man  was
             seated on her legs facing her.  He opened  her  legs  and  the
             third man penetrated her.  When the first  person  was  raping
             her she felt faint.  When the second person tried to rape  her
             she lost consciousness.  After that  she  did  not  know  what
             happened.  Although she was unconscious  she  felt  the  pain.
             When she regained consciousness there was no one  there.   She
             was still seated on the chair.  She saw  that  her  legs  were
             untied.  She saw that her clothes were torn.   Wire  had  been
             used to tie her legs.

         21.  In answer  to  my  request  for  clarification  the  appellant
             pointed to her shins to describe where the man was sitting  on
             her legs which had been tied at the ankle and were resting  on
             the window sill.  I asked her to describe  his  position:  she
             said that he was sitting with his legs either side of hers  on
             the floor and was facing her.  Both his hands  were  close  to
             her "thing" and he opened it wide.  He was sitting in the same
             position at this time.  The third man then positioned  himself
             in between and he was facing her.   The  man  sitting  on  her
             shins continued sitting on her shins whilst the other man  was
             raping her."

49.  Having set out that evidence, at para 60(d)  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's account, in effect, on the basis that it was implausible as
    follows:

         "d.  The appellant has maintained broad consistency in her  account
             that she was raped and what happened to her.  I do not  attach
             any weight to  differences  in  her  account  about  how  many
             officers were present when she left the camp or the fact  that
             she  said  in  evidence  that  the  asphyxiation   incident(s)
             happened before the rape whereas she told Dr Cohen that it was
             after.   I  recognise  that  the  difficulty  in   maintaining
             consistency when speaking of traumatic events is  well  known.
             I refer to her evidence set out at paragraphs 20 and 21 above.
              On her evidence her ankles were tied after  the  men  entered
             the room and remained tied until after the event.  I  consider
             that it would be physically  very  difficult  indeed  to  rape
             someone sitting in a chair  with  her  legs  in  the  position
             described, with her ankles tied and with another  man  sitting
             on her shins."

50. Whilst it is not necessarily wrong for a judge to rely in her reasoning
    on an aspect of an appellant's account as being implausible, there  are
    clear dangers in doing so as was recognised by the Court of  Appeal  in
    HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1037.  Of course, a judge must be aware  that
    what might appear to be implausible viewed from the cultural standpoint
    with which the judge is familiar may, in fact,  be  entirely  plausible
    when viewed from a different cultural standpoint.  That, of course,  is
    not the issue in this appeal.

51. However, when a judge has recourse to  reasoning  which,  expressly  or
    implicitly, doubts  the  plausibility  or  possibility  of  the  events
    occurring as an individual claims, in the  absence  of  other  evidence
    such as documents to substantiate that reasoning, the  judge  runs  the
    risk that his or her conclusion is simply speculation  or  a  purported
    commonsense conclusion which does not stand up to  objective  scrutiny.
    That, in my judgment, is the error into which the judge in this  appeal
    fell.  There is nothing inherently implausible in the appellant's claim
    that she was raped in the circumstances that she describes.

52. Rape is recognised in the background evidence  (and  that  was  not  in
    dispute before me) as a possibility when an individual is  detained  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities with a suspected LTTE connection.  The judge
    in this appeal  considered  that  it  was  "physically  very  difficult
    indeed" for someone to rape the appellant when she  was  sitting  in  a
    chair with her ankles tied, her legs  raised  up  and  resting  on  the
    window sill with one man sitting on her shins.  Her evidence  was  that
    her legs were opened by the man sitting on her shins  and,  whilst  she
    was held behind by a second man, a third  man  raped  her.   I  do  not
    accept that that description makes it implausible  that  the  appellant
    was raped in the way that  she  describes.   It  does  not  offend  any
    commonsense notion of what is possible physically or otherwise.  In  my
    judgment, the judge was not entitled to reject the appellant's  account
    of her claimed rape on  the  implied  basis  that  it  was  implausible
    because it was "physically very difficult indeed" for her to  be  raped
    in the way that she described.  The judge's  reasoning  was  inadequate
    and amounted to an error of law.

53. It is not necessary for me to address the remaining points made on  the
    appellant's behalf under Ground 2 which challenge the  judge's  adverse
    credibility  finding  in  respect  of  the  appellant's  claimed   past
    persecution.  Although the judge gave a number  of  additional  reasons
    for doubting the appellant's  credibility,  the  errors  which  I  have
    identified above were material to her adverse credibility  finding.   I
    am unable to conclude that, had the judge not fallen into these errors,
    she would nevertheless have reached the same conclusion in  respect  of
    the appellant's credibility.

54. Consequently,  for  these  reasons,  the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding cannot stand.

55. In relation to ground 2, that leaves one  matter  raised  under  Ground
    2(5) set out above in respect of the judge's finding that the appellant
    had not established she was at risk as a returning woman with  a  child
    born out of wedlock.

56. The judge dealt with this briefly in para 63 where she  concluded  that
    no risk arose because the appellant's position would only be  known  if
    she told her family which was unlikely.  There was evidence in paras 19
    and 20 of the appellant's witness statement set out in full at para  21
    of the appellant's Grounds of Appeal which state a factual  basis  upon
    which it is said that the appellant, in order to obtain a passport  for
    her  daughter,  would,  in  effect,  have  to  disclose  the  documents
    concerning her marriage which would show that her daughter was born out
    of wedlock.

57. In reaching her finding in para 63, the judge did not take into account
    the appellant's evidence which, if accepted,  might  have  justified  a
    finding that the status of the appellant's child could become known  on
    return to Sri Lanka.  The judge's failure to consider  the  appellant's
    evidence was an error and her factual finding cannot stand.  I did  not
    hear any argument in relation to how, even if this were established, it
    was contended that the appellant was at real  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious ill-treatment contrary to Art 3 either from  the  community  at
    large or from her family.  But, equally, it was not  contended  by  the
    respondent that the appellant could not establish a real risk to her if
    the judge had made a factual finding in  the  appellant's  favour.   It
    seems to me that this basis of the appellant's claim  is  probably  the
    weaker one.  As this appeal will inevitably require a rehearing on  the
    basis of the appellant's claimed risk on return as someone perceived to
    have LTTE connections, proper findings need to be made in  relation  to
    this basis of the appellant's claim also and whether, on the  basis  of
    those findings, the appellant has established a real risk on return.

58. For these reasons, therefore, I set  aside  the  judge's  findings  and
    decision in respect of the appellant's  asylum  claim  based  upon  her
    claim to be at risk as a result of an LTTE supporter  and  her  arrest,
    detention and ill-treatment in August 2009 as well as her claim  to  be
    at risk as a returning woman with an illegitimate child.

59. I now turn to consider Ground 3 which challenges the judge's finding at
    para 79, that the appellant has failed to  establish  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm contrary to Art 3 by reason of gender-based
    violence.

60. At paras 70-77, the judge set out in detail the gist of the  background
    evidence including the UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines of 2012 as follows:

         "70.     This had not been advanced previously but I gave leave  to
             the appellant to add this ground.  Ms Sane  submits  that  the
             appellant is at real risk of gender persecution at  the  hands
             of the security services by reason  of  her  membership  of  a
             particular social group  on  return  to  Jaffna.   The  innate
             characteristic in which she  relies  is  that  of  gender  and
             ethnicity.  The case advanced is that  the  militarisation  in
             the north has led to an increased  risk  of  rape  and  sexual
             violence.  She submits that the extent of violations is likely
             to have been obscured by chronic under-reporting.  She  relies
             in particular on background evidence at AB2/122  and  134  and
             refers  also  to  the  UNHCR's  Eligibility   Guidelines   for
             assessing the International Needs of  Asylum  seekers  in  Sri
             Lanka dated 21st December 2012.

         71.  I have considered all of the background evidence on which  the
             appellant relies but will focus on that to which Ms Sane  made
             specific  reference.   I  have  read   the   report   of   the
             International Crisis Group 'Sri Lanka: Women's  Insecurity  in
             the North and East Crisis Group 20th December  2011'  (AB2/115
             to 128).  The document,  as  a  whole,  analyses  the  complex
             situation of vulnerability of Tamil women  and  girls  in  the
             North and East in view of the events since 2008.  It  examines
             a number of strands in a complex picture: death,  displacement
             and detention; militarised and  centralised  control;  poverty
             trauma and fragility;  continuity  and  change  in  post  LTTE
             society.    It   considers   under   the   heading   'Alarming
             Consequences: Gender Based  Violence'  accounts  of  rape  and
             sexual assaults by the security forces in  homes  (and  has  a
             specific section concerning homes and villages post war);  sex
             work, trafficking and exploitation; sexual violence within the
             Tamil community  and  the  collapse  of  previous  norms;  the
             'grease devil'  saga:  danger,  rumour  and  distrust  of  law
             enforcement and the military.

         72.  I consider that the report provides a  potent  description  of
             the broad impact of very many factors impacting adversely upon
             the lives of Tamil women in the North and East in 2011 in  the
             context of aftermath of a civil war that lasted for 25  years.
             The civil war has left tens of thousands of widows and  female
             headed households.  Single women are heavily over represented.
              Another factor that places women at risk is  the  search  for
             missing family members which imposes tremendous financial  and
             emotional toils.

         73.  The section on which reliance  is  placed  AB2/122  refers  to
             domestic abuse and domestic violence  in  general  but  states
             that explicit allegations of sexual abuse by  security  forces
             are more readily picked up by Tamil  media  outlets.   Dealing
             with gender based violence on a generic basis it comments that
             many incidents are  not  reported  at  all  while  others  are
             exaggerated.  This leaves the Tamil community, the  government
             and the rest of the country with an incomplete picture of  the
             experiences of women in the north and east.  It  states,  with
             reference to rape and sexual assault by security forces,  that
             the information deficit is perhaps greatest.   It  notes  that
             'in the final months of the war and in the initial  stages  of
             screening and internment in the Vanni, there were various acts
             of  sexual  violence  by  the  military,  including  rape   of
             civilians and suspected cadres.  But as life in  these  crowed
             camps continued, sexual violence within  the  Tamil  community
             increased.  Now, for women in the  resettled  villages  across
             the north and east, domestic  violence  within  the  community
             (including sexual violence) as well as sex work  and  coercive
             relationships more broadly are serious problems.  The fear and
             potential for more widespread sexual violence by the  security
             forces also  remain.'   Other  sources  quoted  refer  to  the
             substantial challenge for human rights activists and others in
             documenting incidents reliably.   The  authors  consider  that
             this is partly due to fear and stigma, which  both  perpetuate
             rumours and deter real victims from reporting  incidents.   It
             is noted that there is also a sense now  among  the  many  who
             live and work in the north that women 'are not scared  of  the
             army like before and the army is not seen openly to engage  in
             violence against women.'

         74.  My view of the report is that it deals with a  wide  range  of
             issues affecting Tamil women.  Indeed, the authors  note  that
             publicising information available about this  population,  and
             the collecting and sharing more should be a priority  for  the
             government and international partners.  In effect the  authors
             themselves question the extent to which reliance can be placed
             on the differing views.  Additionally, written as  it  was  in
             2012 and reflecting on largely anecdotal sources in  2009  and
             2011 I am not persuaded that this paper  necessarily  reflects
             the  current  situation   regarding   the   impact   of   high
             militarisation.

         75.  I have considered the article 'What Women Say  Elusive  Peace,
             Pervasive Violence: Sri Lankan's Women's Struggle for  Society
             and Justice' published in Spring  2013  by  the  International
             Civil Society Action Network.  This too  emphasises  the  high
             proportion of single women households.  While the majority  of
             the 280,000 to 300,000 IDPs have returned to  their  areas  of
             origin, the population and the  region  remain  fragile.   The
             vulnerability is  most  evident  in  women  -  especially  the
             widowed,  wives  of  the   disappeared   and   those   heading
             households.  The government  claims  to  be  addressing  their
             needs yet much of the assistance is not  targeted  adequately.
             A 2011 study of by  the  Sri  Lankan  Medical  Association  of
             Colombo shed light on the extent of SGBV (sexual gender  based
             violence) among the displaced  populations.   The  study  took
             place in 12 localities including Jaffna  with  findings  drawn
             together from police reports,  hospital  records  and  welfare
             centres revealed that most victims were  between  20-44  years
             old: most  perpetrators  were  men  and  related  to  victims;
             violations mostly took place  in  domestic  environments;  the
             authorities did not have the capacity or resources to  collect
             and maintain SGBV data and were unable to recognise SGBV as  a
             specific type of offence.

         76.   The  Operation  Guidance  Note  provides  further  background
             material.  I have paid particular attention to section  3,  13
             et seq which concerns the  treatment  of  women.   At  section
             3.13.5 the OGN states:

             UNHCR in their 2012 'Eligibility Guidelines for Assessing  the
             International Protection Needs  of  Asylum  Seekers  from  Sri
             Lanka state:

                . Reports have documented high levels of sexual and  gender-
                  based violence against women and girls in the final  phase
                  of the armed conflict, as well  as  in  the  post-conflict
                  phase, including in parts  of  the  country  not  directly
                  affected by the conflict.  However, this type of  violence
                  remains  under-reported  and,  if  reported,  inadequately
                  investigated according to several sources.

                . Rape, assault with the intention to commit rape and 'grave
                  sexual abuse not amounting to rape' are  prohibited  under
                  Sri Lankan penal law.   Other  sex-based  crimes  such  as
                  trafficking and  sexual  harassment  are  also  prohibited
                  according to the Penal Code.  Marital rape is not a  crime
                  in  Sri  Lanka  unless  a  judge  has  ordered  a  spousal
                  separation.  Sri Lanka is described as a  sources  country
                  for women and girls (as well as men and boys) subjected to
                  forced labour and sex trafficking  abroad.   Domestically,
                  women are also reportedly  subjected  to  sex  trafficking
                  into brothels.  While Sri Lanka  prohibits  all  forms  of
                  trafficking through an April 2006 amendment to  its  penal
                  code,  legal  protection  may  not  always  be  effective,
                  including as a result of reported complicity on  the  part
                  of police and  other  government  officials.    Internally
                  displaced persons, war  widows,  and  unregistered  female
                  migrants are reported to remain particularly vulnerable to
                  human trafficking.

                . A number of factors have been cited in various reports  as
                  contributing to increased insecurity and vulnerability  of
                  women in the north  and  east  of  Sri  Lanka.   The  most
                  relevant include the following: a) large numbers of female
                  headed households in the areas most affected by the  armed
                  conflict; b)  women's  weak  economic  position;  c)  high
                  militarization, including dependency  on  security  forces
                  for access to detained family  members;  d)  impunity  and
                  weak  administration  of  justice;  e)  prostitution   and
                  vulnerability to  trafficking  in  displacement  or  post-
                  relocation; and  f)  the  vulnerable  position  of  former
                  female LTTE cadres and war widows.

                . Information from different sources  on  the  situation  of
                  women, including the CEDAW [Convention  to  Eliminate  All
                  Forms  of   Discrimination   Against   Women]   concluding
                  observations, indicate that state protection, both in  law
                  and  in  practice,  is  not   necessarily   available   or
                  accessible to all women throughout the country.

             The US State Department HR Practices  report  (19.04.13)  also
             states 'Human rights groups in northern districts alleged that
             widows of men killed in the conflict often became  victims  of
             prostitution because of their economic vulnerability.'

             3.13.6  The  Organisation   for   Economic   Cooperation   and
             Development (OECD) social institutions and gender index (SIGI)
             profile adds that 'The war in Sri Lanka has resulted in a rise
             in the number of female-headed households, particularly in the
             northern and  eastern  provinces.   This  has  meant  that  an
             increasing number of  women  have  become  breadwinners,  thus
             challenging the social institution of the male breadwinner  in
             the  family.   However,  there  are  a  number  of  legal  and
             administrative barriers facing women as heads of the household
             --- the legal superiority of male headed  households  suggests
             that  negative  attitudes  towards  female  headed  households
             persist.  Tamil women and girls  have  historically  been  the
             targets of various forms of  sexual  assault  following  their
             arrest  or  detention  at  checkpoints.   Such  assaults  were
             justified on the grounds that they  or  their  family  members
             were suspected members of the  Tamil  insurgency.   Widespread
             sexual violence and crime has also been  a  serious  issue  in
             internment camps during the conflict.  A  major  challenge  to
             ensuring women's physical integrity in Sri Lanka is  the  lack
             of enforcement of laws, gender insensitivity within the police
             and judiciary and the reluctance of women to report  violence.
             The Asian Development Bank reports that sexual  harassment  is
             trivialised and  there  is  a  culture  of  acceptance  around
             violence against women.'

         77.  I reminded myself also  of  the  guidance  in  the  OGN  cited
             earlier (3.13.7)."

61. Having done so at para 78 the judge analysed the evidence as follows:

         "78.     I have  considered  the  factors  outlined  in  the  UNHCR
             Eligibility Guidelines in 2012 in the context of  my  findings
             concerning this appellant.  She is not a former LTTE cadre  or
             a war widow.  She will not be head of a female household or  a
             lone female but will return to her family which is  headed  by
             her father and with three brothers aged  between  18  and  25.
             The current economic circumstances of the family  are  unknown
             but I find that this is because the appellant has not revealed
             her family circumstances in order to advance her  claim.   The
             past evidence  suggests  this  was  a  family  with  financial
             resources judged by the entry clearance application.  I accept
             that Jaffna, like other areas in the North and East is  highly
             militarised.  There is  no  suggestion  that  the  appellant's
             family are, or have been, detained or displaced."

62. Ms Sane submitted that the judge had failed properly to have regard  to
    the  background  evidence  and,  in  particular,  the  high  level   of
    militarisation in the North and East of  Sri  Lanka  which  led  to  an
    increased risk of rape and sexual violence for Tamil women by the army.
     Ms Sane submitted that the judge had  failed  properly  to  apply  the
    UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines for 2012  by  setting  out  categories  of
    individuals at risk in para 78 of  her  determination  into  which  the
    appellant did not fall.  However, Ms  Sane  submitted  these  were  not
    categories at all and that  the  risk  was  broader  and  included  the
    appellant.  Alternatively, Ms Sane submitted that the  judge's  finding
    was irrational or perverse in the light of the background evidence.

63. In my judgment, the judge did not fall into error  in  concluding  that
    there was no "real risk" of persecution or serious harm falling  within
    Art 3 of the ECHR to the appellant by reason of gender-based violence.

64. First, in para 78, the judge did not delimit the risk  to  Tamil  women
    based upon a number of risk categories, for example as a war  widow  or
    the head of a female household or a lone female.  The  judge  correctly
    identified these as risk factors which had to be taken into account  in
    assessing whether there was a "real  risk"  to  an  individual.   Those
    factors contributed to the risk to any individual Tamil woman.

65. Secondly, as I pointed out to Ms Sane in her submissions, if  she  were
    correct as to how the  judge  should  have  understood  the  background
    evidence there would be a real risk to every Tamil woman  returning  to
    the North or East  of  Sri  Lanka.   In  my  judgment,  the  background
    evidence did not establish such a "real risk" to Tamil woman  returning
    to those areas.  As the judge noted, there was a generalised  risk  and
    increased risk factors  existed  where,  for  example,  the  individual
    returned as the head of a female household or as  a  lone  female.   In
    this appeal, the judge was entitled  to  take  into  account  that  the
    appellant would be returning with her husband  to  a  place  where  she
    previously had family whom it had not been shown had been  detained  or
    displaced.  The precise circumstances of her family  were  unknown  but
    that was simply because the appellant had chosen not  to  reveal  them.
    In these circumstances, it was properly open to the judge to find  that
    this appellant had failed to establish a "real risk" of persecution  or
    serious harm by reason of gender-based violence.  On the basis  of  the
    evidence, I am unable to conclude that that  finding  was  perverse  or
    irrational.

66. Consequently, for these reasons, the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in
    reaching her adverse finding on the appellant's claim  to  be  at  real
    risk of gender-based violence as a member of a particular social group.
     I reject Ground 3.  As a consequence, her finding on that basis of the
    appellant's claim stands.

Decision

67. For the reasons I have given above, the judge's decision to dismiss the
    appellant's  appeal  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds
    involved the making of an error of law.  That decision is set aside.

68. It was common ground between the parties that if this was my  decision,
    the proper course was to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to
    remake the decision.

69. In my judgment, given  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  fact  finding
    required and having regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, the correct disposal of this appeal is to remit  it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade but limited to
    the issues of whether the appellant has established that she is at risk
    because of her perceived LTTE connections or as a returning woman  with
    an illegitimate child.  Fresh factual findings will have to be made  on
    all relevant issues, including the appellant's credibility

70. The judge's decision to dismiss the appeal in respect of her  claim  to
    be at risk of gender-based persecution as  a  member  of  a  particular
    social  group  stands.   The  Judge's  findings  in  that  regard   are
    preserved.

71. There has been no challenge to the judge's  decisions  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's  appeal  under  Arts  2,  3  and  8  of  the  ECHR.   As  a
    consequence, those decisions also stand.

72. The appeal is, therefore, remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    hearing before a judge other than Judge Goodrich limited to  the  basis
    set out above.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date 21/12/2016
