
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05904/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 August 2015                     |On 21 August 2015                    |
|Oral Decision                        |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 agron xhafa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Lee, Counsel, instructed by Salmon & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Rozanski promulgated on 24 February 2015.  In
    that determination Judge  Rozanski  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse his claim  for  asylum
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant did not attend the hearing.  The hearing  had  previously
    been adjourned from 17 September 2014 until 3 February  2015.   As  the
    judge records in her determination at paragraph [2], the appellant  was
    aware of that and noted that  he  had  submitted  a  witness  statement
    stating that he would be at the hearing on Tuesday 3 February 2015.  He
    did not (and this  is  accepted),  appear  at  the  hearing  but  on  4
    February, the day after the hearing, the appellant wrote  a  letter  to
    the First-tier Tribunal stating that he  had  telephoned  Taylor  House
    that day and had  been  told  that  the  hearing  had  taken  place  as
    scheduled.  He explained also that he received a  letter  from  the  UK
    Border Agency (a copy was enclosed and  we  will  turn  to  it  in  due
    course), and it is noted by the judge at [3] of her determination  that
    the appellant had not in fact requested another opportunity  to  attend
    the hearing.

 3. The judge took these matters into account and concluded that in all the
    circumstances of the case it would be appropriate and in the  interests
    of justice to  proceed  with  the  hearing  in  this  case,  noting  in
    particular the significant lack of  credibility  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal against that decision for the
    grounds which are set out in the bundle.  In essence the  challenge  is
    that the appellant was unrepresented at the time and that he  had  been
    confused as to whether the hearing was to take  place  because  of  the
    letter which he had received from the UK Border Agency  refers  to  him
    being informed in due course by the IAC as to a date of hearing. It  is
    the appellant's case that he took that to mean that a fresh date was to
    be given, the letter having been sent out on 26 January 2015  and  thus
    after the date of 3 February had been fixed.

 5. A further ground is that there was unfairness  as  there  had  been  an
    incorrect procedure as there had been no Case Management Review but was
    not pursued with any vigour before us by Mr Lee.  It is also said  that
    in the circumstances as there had  been  an  unfair  hearing  then  the
    decision was in its findings of fact unsafe.

 6. On 22 March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen  granted  permission
    and it is on that basis the matter appeared before us.

 7. Mr Lee submitted that there had in this case  been  unfairness  of  the
    type identified  by  Mr  Justice  McCloskey,  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC),
    submitting that there were two possibilities  here:   first,  that  the
    appellant was telling the truth and had in fact been confused, and thus
    the judge should then either have adjourned the hearing or, given  that
    she only became aware of this after the event, have relisted the matter
    for hearing. He submits that there were two stages to be  gone  through
    in assessing whether there was unfairness. Firstly, whether the  letter
    from the Home Office  was  capable  of  confusing  the  appellant  and,
    second, whether the  judge  had  properly  assessed  and  given  proper
    attention to the explanations given  by  the  appellant  for  his  non-
    attendance.  It is noted in submissions and in  the  witness  statement
    that has now been produced by the appellant that the appellant had,  it
    is said, tried  to  contact  the  Home  Office  or  that  there  is  no
    sufficient indication that he had attempted  to  contact  the  Tribunal
    prior to 4 February.

 8. Mr Jarvis has submitted that on the facts of this  case  there  had  in
    fact been no unfairness and that the judge had  properly  set  out  the
    reasons why she had decided to proceed with the appeal and  to  make  a
    determination although informed of  the  appellant's  reason  for  non-
    attendance.  He submitted further that there was no material  error  in
    this case given the judge's assessment at paragraphs 24 to  26  of  the
    case taken at its highest.

 9. In response Mr  Lee  submitted  that  materiality  was  not  except  in
    extremely unusual circumstances a factor to be taken  into  account  in
    assessing whether a  matter  should  be  set  aside  or  not  following
    procedural irregularity.

10. In assessing this case we bear in mind two  matters.  First,  that  the
    requirements of fairness vary from case to case and what is required is
    specific to a situation.  We note also that this  is  an  international
    protection case and that accordingly a commensurately high standard  of
    procedural fairness or, as  it  is  often  put,  anxious  scrutiny,  is
    required.

11. We note that in this case the appellant was  clearly  informed  of  the
    date of hearing. He knew of it and set it out in his witness  statement
    which was received by the First-tier Tribunal on 11 November 2015.   We
    note also that the letter of 4 February 2015 that he  sent  in  to  the
    Tribunal makes no request for an adjournment and makes no request for a
    fresh hearing, stating only that he had made a  phone  call  to  Taylor
    House and had been told on 4 February that the appeal  had  been  heard
    the previous day but records that he had received  a  letter  from  the
    Home Office on 26 January.

12. A copy of the relevant letter of 26 January 2015  is  attached  to  the
    letter of 4 February.   It is a standard letter of  the  type  normally
    sent to appellants when the Secretary of State has forwarded papers  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  It  records  that  the  documents  have  been
    forwarded and sent to the Tribunal and states "The IAC will contact you
    directly regarding the date,  time  and  place  of  any  oral  hearing.
    Please note the following" and gives instructions about changes of date
    or similarly if he no longer wishes to proceed with the appeal.

13. We consider that in the  circumstances  of  this  case  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the appellant had been aware of  the  hearing
    and had chosen not to attend.   There is a degree of  inconsistency  in
    the explanations  given  by  the  appellant;  there  is  no  sufficient
    indication that the appellant had tried  to  contact  the  Tribunal  to
    resolve any issues of doubt he may have had, and if he was in doubt  it
    begs the question as to why he then decided to contact the IAC the  day
    after the hearing when there was inevitably a  risk  that  the  hearing
    would have taken place in his absence.

14. We do consider also that as the judge records in  her  decision,  there
    was no request for the matter to be adjourned or relisted.   Whilst  we
    accept that the appellant was unrepresented and the judge was aware  of
    that, and whilst the appellant has been, we accept, deprived of an oral
    hearing, we do not consider that that is any  fault  of  the  Tribunal,
    nor, for that matter,  of the Home Office.   Whilst the letter  may  at
    worst have been unhelpful it clearly came from a source other than  the
    Tribunal with whom the appellant had already been  in contact and it is
    clear from reading the file that he had been  at the  previous  hearing
    which had been adjourned. The judge was clearly  aware  of  the  letter
    from the Home Office as is shown in her determination at [2] to [4] and
    took it into account.

15. We consider that in all the facts of this case that  fairness  did  not
    require the judge to have relisted the case, given not least that there
    was no request made by the  appellant  to  do  so,  and  there  was  no
    sufficient explanation for the failure to attend on the date listed.

16. The judge in her decision at paragraphs [2] - [4] sets out in  adequate
    detail why she decided to proceed in the  appellant's  absence  and  we
    consider that notwithstanding the fact that this is a protection  claim
    that she was entitled to do so, and we are not satisfied by the reasons
    given by the appellant for his non-attendance.

17. In those circumstances and bearing in mind  the  degree  of  heightened
    scrutiny applicable we are nonetheless not satisfied that there was  in
    this case any unfairness in the judge  proceeding  in  the  appellant's
    absence, given his decision not to attend,  and  that  accordingly  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
    an error of law.

18. For the sake of completeness we have considered also the  determination
    of the judge  and we consider that the findings that she reached as  to
    findings of fact were clearly  ones  open  to  her  and  that  she  was
    manifestly entitled to make the adverse findings of credibility reached
    on the basis of the material before her, not least the  fact  that  the
    appellant accepts that he had previously made an application for asylum
    in a different identity and claiming to  be  of  different  nationality
    from that which he now says he is.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and we uphold it.


Signed   Date: 18 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

