
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/05552/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th February 2016                         |On 15th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                 [faycal b]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, instructed by South Yorkshire Refugee
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, [Faycal B], was born on 27  July  1973  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Algeria.  He is in the United Kingdom with his wife and  two
    children who claim as his dependants.  The  appellant  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom in August 2013 on a visit visa.  He applied  for  asylum
    in September 2013.  His application was refused by a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 21 July 2014.   Directions  were  also  made  for  his
    removal  to  Algeria.   The  appellant  appealed  against  that  latter
    decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Law)  who  dismissed  the
    appeal in October 2014.  The decision was subsequently set aside by the
    Upper Tribunal (Judge Taylor).  The matter was remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Lever) which, in a decision promulgated on 12 June
    2015 dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission,
    to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are five grounds of appeal.  First, the  appellant  asserts  that
    the judge failed to approach the appeal with an open  mind.   At  [24],
    Judge Lever wrote:

         "I am also bound to observe the assertion  made  before  the  Upper
         Tribunal that had their legal representatives been aware no  record
         was available [of an asylum  interview]  they  will  have  taken  a
         witness statement from the son and had therefore been  deprived  of
         such opportunity, is without merit."

    Frankly, I can see no problem with the judge's observation.  Indeed, in
    the remainder of the same paragraph he gives  reasons  for  considering
    that the  submission  had  been  "without  merit"  none  of  which  are
    particularly contentious.  Previous proceedings before other  Tribunals
    (including the Upper Tribunal) are not sacrosanct  in  the  sense  that
    they are incapable of being criticised by subsequent judges.  Viewed as
    a whole, Judge Lever's decision is both detailed and even-handed.

 3. The second ground of appeal concerns the  welfare  of  the  appellant's
    child M.  Evidence had been given about the child's state  of  mind  by
    two teachers, JG and VH.  The judge is criticised for having failed  to
    take their evidence "in the round".  At [41] the judge found there  was
    nothing in the  school  reports  to  demonstrate  "anxiety,  moodiness,
    withdrawal or any other features that may suggest post-traumatic stress
    disorder or anxiety regarding alleged kidnap".  The grounds set  out  a
    number of  quotations  from  the  evidence  of  both  witnesses  noting
    behaviour in the child which had been "out of character" and  recording
    that the child occasionally sat at lunchtime "quietly and  is  sombre".
    One of the witnesses stated that she was "seriously concerned that  [M]
    would attempt to take his life if faced  with  removal".   The  grounds
    record that the judge observed at [46], "professional teachers who have
    seen [M] daily and by their professional live  and  sensitive  children
    and their emotions [may] be  far  more  reliable  than  an  immigration
    worker who has seen the appellant twice and the  doctor  has  seen  the
    appellant's son once".  The criticism made of the judge  is  that  that
    latter observation is in direct contradiction to  his  finding  (quoted
    above) as to the absence of symptoms of PTSD.  It is asserted that "the
    evidence of the teacher points in the same direction  as  that  of  the
    other professional".

 4. There is no requirement on the judge to deal with each and  every  time
    of a witness's evidence.  The child's teachers were witnesses of  fact;
    they were not expert witnesses capable of offering  a  medical  opinion
    regarding the child's mental state, pathology or welfare.   The  school
    evidence does indicate some low mood on the part of M but also, as  the
    judge points out at [41] M's "enthusiasm and habit of shouting  out  in
    class the answers to questions posed".  Also, as I  have  noted  above,
    the witnesses indicated that M's low mood  was  "out  of  character"  a
    remark carrying the obvious implication that, generally, M's  mood  was
    not low. It is clear the judge has viewed the evidence as a  whole  and
    his conclusion, that the child was not suffering from PTSD, was plainly
    available to him.   Likewise, the judge gives cogent and clear  reasons
    for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account  that  the  child  had   been
    kidnapped.  In any event, as the respondent points out in her  Rule  24
    statement, the judge considered the risk on return of the family in the
    alternative and on the basis that M had been kidnapped as alleged [47].
     The judge was not compelled to conclude the child would, seek to  take
    his own life if returned or, indeed, that the kidnap (if it did  occur)
    was  any  more  than  an  isolated  criminal  incident  which  was  not
    reasonably likely to be repeated.  I note there is no  criticism  about
    the judge's finding in the alternative [47] in grounds of appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.

 5. Ground 4 concerns the judge's observation at [50]  that  "the  evidence
    does not all inevitably point to the concept of trauma as a  result  of
    the kidnap".  It asserted the judge has departed from the  standard  of
    proof of reasonable likelihood and has  replaced  this  to  the  higher
    standard of "inevitability".  I find that the ground has no  merit  and
    is little more than a descent into  a  semantic  argument;  read  as  a
    whole, there is no reason to suppose the judge has  departed  from  the
    correct standard of proof in the asylum and Article  2/3  ECHR  appeal.
    His use of the word "inevitably" occurs not in a finding of fact but in
    the judge's description of part of the evidence concerning the child M.
     By analogy, it is similar to medical evidence  which  indicates  that,
    for example, scars on an individual's body can only have  one  specific
    cause; in such a case, there would  exist  "inevitability"  as  to  the
    cause.  All that the judge is  saying  in  his  decision  is  that  the
    anxiety possibly demonstrated by M may have a cause other than  a  fear
    of being kidnapped in Algeria.

 6. Ground 5 has no merit.  The judge has referred to  some  pages  in  the
    appellant's bundle of documents.  He says that these are "written by  a
    variety of teaching staff who would have had  daily  contact  with  M".
    The cited pages, in fact, relate to M's brother,  R.   I  am  satisfied
    that this is no more than a typographical error  on  the  part  of  the
    judge and does not indicate a misdirection by him as to the  facts  and
    evidence or any lack of care or anxious scrutiny of the evidence.

 7. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 28 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
