
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: AA/05322/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4 September 2020                             |On 18 November 2016        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                J J P (India)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic, instructed by A H Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly. This order applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure
to comply with this order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of India, appealed with permission against the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    O'Garro), promulgated on  18  September  2013,  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the respondent's decision on 15 May 2013 to remove her to India
    after refusing refugee status, humanitarian  protection,  or  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

Background

 2. The appellant was a member of a rather conservative Indian  family,  in
    Gujarat province.  Her father worked in a factory.  Her  mother  was  a
    housewife.  Her brother was a  local  newspaper  reporter.  She  speaks
    Gujarati.  She was born in 1978 and is therefore  now  about  38  years
    old.  While at school, the appellant had strong feelings for  a  female
    friend.  She never told anyone, and in 2005 the friend moved away.  The
    appellant never had a  lesbian  relationship  in  India,  nor  did  she
    investigate the various LGBT organisations which exist in India.

 3. From about 2006, the appellant was a  member  of  a  professional  folk
    dance group, who  toured  regularly  outside  India.   The  appellant's
    parents were happy for her to dance with the troupe, as  the  appellant
    earned money from time to time, which she handed over  to  them.   They
    objected to, and obstructed, any involvement by the appellant in  disco
    dance, or other modern dance, which  they  equated  with  prostitution.
    The appellant did not complete her education, preferring to pursue  her
    dance career.

 4. The troupe undertook a dance tour to Poland lasting 18 days:  when  the
    appellant returned, the family talked of marriage, but  she  said  that
    she was not ready to marry and wanted instead to build her career.  The
    family were understanding and did not press the matter.  The  tours  to
    other  countries  continued  annually,  with  the  appellant's   family
    mentioning marriage more often, but again,  not  pressing  the  matter.
    While on tour, the appellant developed unrequited lesbian feelings  for
    another performer in the troupe, but said nothing to the object of  her
    affections.

 5. In July 2011, while visiting London, the appellant met a lesbian couple
    who were living together openly, which was a revelation  to  her.   The
    appellant returned home to India, where  she  found  that  her  family,
    concerned about the possible effect of her travelling  with  the  dance
    group, had decided it was time she was married.  They  had  arranged  a
    match, an older man, a police inspector.

 6. The appellant kept quiet for a while, but then told  her  mother  about
    her lesbian sexual orientation.  Her  mother  flew  at  the  appellant,
    hitting her, pulling out her hair, and beat the appellant  with  heated
    tongs, causing burns.  The appellant's mother told her father, who  hit
    the appellant about the face, causing  bruises  and  a  nosebleed,  and
    kicking her stomach.  The appellant's parents locked her  in  her  room
    for 10-12 days , at first with no food or drink, and without change  of
    clothes or washing facilities.

 7. The marriage was arranged, despite the appellant's objections,  but  on
    the day when the husband's family were coming, she was let out  of  her
    room for a bath and managed to escape to a  friend's  house,  about  an
    hour away.  She told her friend about her sexuality.  The  friend  paid
    for her to come to the United Kingdom.

 8. The appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  October  2011  and
    continued to live a rather private life.   She  has  not  attended  gay
    clubs, had any lesbian relationships, nor engaged with any of the  LGBT
    organisations in the United Kingdom.

 9. On 17 April 2013, the appellant was discovered working in  a  Pakistani
    shop, selling beauty products to Gujarati people. She was arrested  and
    claimed asylum at a local enforcement office, two days later.

Refusal letter

10. On 15 May 2013, the  respondent  refused  protection.   She  took  into
    account the delay of 18 months in claiming  asylum,  and  rejected  the
    appellant's claim of lesbian sexual orientation.  She  considered  that
    if the appellant had a family dispute, there  was  sufficient  domestic
    protection for her in India and even  if  there  was  a  risk,  it  was
    limited to the appellant's home area.  The respondent did not  consider
    it credible that the  appellant's  jilted  suitor,  or  her  journalist
    brother, would be able to locate her if she  returned  somewhere  other
    than her home area exercising the internal relocation option.

11. The respondent rejected the appellant's account  of  the  beatings  her
    family inflicted on her, and refused to give her  the  benefit  of  the
    doubt as to the proposed forced marriage.  The  appellant's  Article  8
    ECHR claim also failed.

12. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also  did  not  believe  the  appellant's
    account of her sexual orientation; she considered the account  to  have
    been invented, to bolster her asylum claim, and found  her  credibility
    damaged overall. The appellant had sought an adjournment for a  medico-
    legal report but the Judge refused to adjourn for that purpose.

14. The appeal was dismissed.

15. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission  was  granted
    primarily  on  the  basis  of  a  reasons  challenge  to  the   adverse
    credibility findings and in particular, those regarding the appellant's
    claimed abuse at her parents' hands on account of her sexuality.

Error of law decision

16. On 18 February 2014, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  held  that
    there was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's approach
    and set aside the decision.  The question of  the  appellant's  lesbian
    sexual orientation was accepted by the respondent, and Judge  McWilliam
    was satisfied that the delay in claiming asylum should be fatal to  the
    appellant's overall credibility.

17. Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam found the following facts and matters to
    be established, at [34] in her error of law decision:

         ""34.    I summarise my findings:-

                i) The appellant is a lesbian.
               ii) The appellant was seriously assaulted by her parents as a
                   result of her sexuality and refusal to marry.
              iii) Should the appellant return to her home area, her  family
                   would attempt  to  seriously  harm  her  because  of  her
                   sexuality, but  their  reach  would  not  extend  to  the
                   appellant should she relocate.
               iv) The appellant has not established that she  would  be  at
                   risk at all from the man that her family intended her  to
                   marry.
                v) The  Tribunal  needs  to  go  on  to  consider  risk  and
                   sufficiency of protection in the  appellant's  home  area
                   (from  her  parents  specifically,  and  generally  as  a
                   lesbian) and on relocation (a general risk as a result of
                   her sexuality).
               vi) The Tribunal will consider risk on return/sufficiency  of
                   protection applying the approach  in  HJ  (Iran)  v  SSHD
                   [2010] UKSC 31.  The appeal was  adjourned  to  give  the
                   appellant the opportunity to produce expert  evidence  in
                   light of the Indian Supreme Court  decision  in  December
                   2013."

Procedural history

18. The appeal was adjourned to await the outcome of the  Upper  Tribunal's
    country guidance in what became AR and NH (lesbians) (CG)  [2016]  UKUT
    66 (IAC) which was promulgated on 1 February 2016.

19. On 10 February 2016, I gave directions aimed  at  establishing  whether
    the appellant wished  to  proceed  with  the  appeal,  and  asking  for
    evidence and arguments.  The appellant changed her  solicitors,  twice,
    which delayed response to the directions order.  There  was  a  further
    delay while the appellant obtained a medico-legal report and the appeal
    was finally heard on 18 October 2016.

Upper Tribunal hearing

20. The appeal before me  proceeded  by  way  of  submissions  and  written
    evidence only.  The appellant was not called to give evidence,  on  the
    advice of her representatives and having regard to  paragraph  [57]  in
    the medical evidence of Dr Malcolm McCoubrie.  It was not suggested  on
    her behalf that she was unfit to testify.

21. The updated evidence was contained in two bundles filed on  17  and  18
    October 2016. The first bundle contained two medical  reports  from  Dr
    Juliet Cohen dated 7 October 2016, and from Dr McCoubrie of  the  Helen
    Bamber Foundation on 20 November 2013, and all the  previous  decisions
    of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal.  The  second  bundle
    contained all of  the  appellant's  witness  statements,  including  an
    unsigned statement of 17 October 2016, a statement  dated  22  February
    2016, an earlier undated statement  said  to  be  in  response  to  the
    refusal letter in May 2013 and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
    and the appellant's witness statement of 30 April  2013.  It  contained
    another copy of the November 2013 report from Dr McCoubrie, and  copies
    of the appellant's medical records.

22. That was the evidence before me for the Upper  Tribunal  hearing.   For
    the purposes of  the  exercise  I  must  now  undertake,  the  relevant
    documents are Dr Cohen's report,  the  two  2016  statements  from  the
    appellant, and the medico-legal report of Dr  McCoubrie,  supported  by
    the appellant's medical records.

Appellant's updated evidence

23. The appellant was not cross-examined on her witness statement  and  the
    later document, which is more in the nature of a proof of evidence,  as
    it is unsigned and undated.  That limits the weight I can give to those
    documents, but I give them such weight as they will bear.

24. In the appellant's dated and signed statement of 22 February 2016,  the
    appellant repeated her assertion  previously  that  her  jilted  suitor
    might find and marry, or kill, her on return. She said she had no other
    language but Gujarati, and in particular, no Hindi,  so  would  not  be
    able to communicate other than in Gujarat on her return,  and  that  in
    Gujarat, she had many uncles and aunts, members of her extended  family
    across Gujarat, who would be able to do what they wished with her.  She
    had cousins all over India who  would  let  her  parents  know  if  she
    returned, putting the appellant at risk throughout India.

25. The second problem the appellant's  statement  identified  on  internal
    relocation was that she had only limited education.  She  had  finished
    school before taking her 'A' levels, and after  that,  apart  from  her
    dancing, she had just undertaken domestic work in the family home.  She
    was too old now for professional dancing and had never  had  any  other
    job in India while she was there.  Given her low education,  she  would
    be unable to find a job in India now, particularly as she had no Hindi,
    only Gujarati.

26. In her second statement, faxed to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  17  October
    2016, the  appellant  expanded  on  her  account.   That  statement  is
    unsigned, and again, the appellant did  not  give  the  respondent  the
    opportunity to cross-examine on this account.  The following additional
    information is provided  in  that  document:  the  appellant  says  her
    journalist brother considers her  sexuality  as  a  'demon'  which  has
    possessed the appellant and that if she married  a  man,  it  would  be
    defeated and she would become 'normal':  if  she  is  not  prepared  to
    marry, her brother had said he would rather she  died.   The  appellant
    had not been able to convince any member of her family that her  sexual
    orientation was real and permanent.

27. The  appellant  repeated  her  assertion  that  she  was  too  old  for
    professional employment as a dancer, and that 'when I was  living  with
    my parents, they provided for me', although, of course, her evidence is
    that she gave her dancing pay to her parents.

28. Even after several years in the United Kingdom, the appellant speaks no
    English and stays home.  She feels safer at home, and is afraid to talk
    to people she does not know outside the home, in case  they  hurt  her.
    She forgets things, like when to take something out  of  the  oven,  or
    whether she has completed something she set out to do.   She  got  lost
    walking home from the supermarket once, because she could not read  the
    signs, and spent hours walking up and down,  looking  for  her  street.
    After that experience, which 'scared' and 'scarred' her, the  appellant
    stopped going out.

29. During the day, the appellant lacks the  energy  or  conviction  to  do
    anything, because she is too tired from battling her demons  at  night.
    She does not like sound of any kind, whether  from  the  television  or
    radio, or  unexpected  noise,  which  makes  her  jump.   Instead,  the
    appellant sits in silence in her room for most  of  the  day,  thinking
    about the past and how her life could have been different.

30. The appellant is frightened of returning to India.  She  has  told  her
    general medical practitioner that she will kill herself before  getting
    on a plane to India, because she knows that she  will  die  a  horrible
    death there.  Even if she relocated to another city, she would  be  all
    alone, and would not have an understanding doctor, nor  counselling  to
    deal with her sexuality and  torture  issues.    The  appellant's  fear
    keeps her awake at night,  revisiting  the  occasion  when  her  mother
    pulled out her hair in rage.  She gets  nightmares,  and  wakes  up  at
    night, sweating and sometimes screaming, then staring  at  the  ceiling
    for hours when she tries to go back to sleep.

31. Even in the United Kingdom, although she has one  friend,  a  lifeline,
    the appellant feels isolated from the Gujarati community, with whom she
    shares her only language, because they  do  not  accept  or  understand
    homosexuality.  Most of her friendships  wither  immediately  when  she
    tells people she is lesbian.  The appellant is open about her sexuality
    when speaking to others, to avoid upsetting, repulsive questions  about
    when she will get married, or if she has a  partner.   If  returned  to
    India, the appellant will kill herself, rather than be  killed  by  her
    jilted suitor, her brother, or her extended family members.

Medical evidence

32. There are two reports.  The first, from November 2013, is  that  of  Dr
    Malcolm McCoubrie MB BS FRCGP DPMSA, of the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation.
    His report is properly oriented against the Istanbul Protocol  and  the
    relevant  Practice  Directions.  Dr  McCoubrie  considered   that   the
    appellant  would  have  difficulty  in  recalling  and  recounting  her
    traumatic history in Court, in a coherent and accurate manner: if cross-
    examined  in  an  adversarial  manner,  Dr  McCoubrie  considered   the
    appellant was 'likely to become confused, agitated, and have difficulty
    answering questions'.  He advised that her therapist should be present,
    if the appellant gave  evidence,  to  offer  appropriate  psychological
    support and reassurance, and that any chronological questions as to the
    exact order of events should be asked in a non-adversarial  manner  and
    kept to a minimum.

33. Dr McCoubrie did not consider that the appellant was  exaggerating  her
    symptoms.  He saw, and recorded,  burn  marks  on  her  arms  which  he
    considered to be permanent scars, 'typical of  mature  organised  burns
    inflicted on arms flexed to protect face and chest' and compatible with
    being assaulted with a small hot implement.  He observed that  although
    the appellant was medically fit, she was tense and ill at ease, with no
    spontaneous conversation, moving her hands continuously for the  entire
    4-hour interview.  She was quiet and  undemonstrative,  with  poor  eye
    contact, looking mainly at the interpreter rather than the doctor.  She
    became  distressed  and  tearful  several  times,  settling  only  with
    physical contact with the interpreter, such as hand holding.

34. Dr McCoubrie found the appellant to be anxious, depressed, and to  have
    severe PTSD, which might remit spontaneously if her immigration  status
    were settled, or by the use of  behavioural  psychological  treatments.
    Her prognosis then would be good,  enabling  her  to  resume  a  normal
    social life and return to dancing, if she wanted  to.  The  appellant's
    suicidal ideation was not a function of her illness but more a question
    of her not intending to return to India to the harm  her  family  might
    cause her.

35. That evidence was before Judge McWilliam and is taken into  account  in
    her acceptance of the appellant's history and the  previous  harm  from
    her parents, referred to above.

Evidence in 2016

36. The appellant's general medical practitioner is Dr R  Bhardwal  at  the
    Sunflower Medical Centre.  Her medical records show that  she  has  low
    iron and low vitamin D levels, for  which  she  takes  medication.   He
    referred her to Brent Asian Women's Resource Centre on 18  March  0216,
    but  she  did  not  go,  initially.   He   prescribed   anti-depressant
    medication.  The appellant had no suicidal ideation  when  seen  on  14
    April 2014.   She  continued  to  take  her  medication,  although  she
    sometimes forgot.

37. On 16 May 2016, Ms Hoosna Bhaimia of the Central and North West  London
    Talking Therapies Service Brent (CNWL) wrote to the  appellant,  saying
    that as she had not been able to contact the appellant to  assess  her,
    she would shortly be discharged from CNWL Talking Therapies.  On 25 May
    2016, Ms Bhaimia wrote to  Dr  MP  Mamtora  at  the  Sunflower  Medical
    Centre, to say that the appellant had  been  seen.   She  had  reported
    having suicidal thoughts nearly every day in the last 2  weeks,  though
    she had no past history of suicide attempts  or  suicidal  plans.   She
    could keep herself safe, with good supportive friends, but she reported
    thinking about her past torture, and  having  difficulty  sleeping,  as
    there was no point living. She was  waiting  to  hear  from  the  Asian
    Women's Resource Centre (AWRC) about counselling, and  knew  that  they
    provided free English classes, but due to having no  money  to  travel,
    she had not been able to go to the classes.

38. The attached safety plan recorded that the appellant had no recourse to
    public funds, had been tortured by her family in India, fled  a  forced
    marriage there and had suicidal thoughts every  day,  considering  that
    there was no point living.  She had two friends she knew she could  ask
    for help and support.  She sometimes went out with her friends, and had
    found that helpful, as well as living  with  and  talking  to  friends,
    taking medication (recently), visiting her doctor, and  being  referred
    to the AWRC.  She was waiting to hear from them.

39. On 1 June 2016, Ms Bhaimia wrote to Dr Mamtora at the Sunflower Medical
    Centre from and said the appellant reported  low  mood,  isolation,  no
    contact with her family, but was emotionally and financially  supported
    in London by her friends, with whom she was living.  She did  not  have
    the money to come for assessment.  She spoke only Gujarati,  and  could
    not read, speak or write English.  She had been referred  to  AWRC  for
    counselling, and to access various free courses  such  as  English  for
    Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL).  Her solicitor  was  worried  about
    the appellant's mental health.  The attached safety plan was  the  same
    as before.

40. When seen by Dr Bhardwal on  23  June,  the  appellant  said  she  felt
    frustrated, as no one was helping her, but she had not contacted any of
    the agencies suggested.  The appellant reported that she had increasing
    thoughts of suicide, but would not act upon it;  her friends were  very
    good, but she was ashamed of constantly  asking  them  for  help.   Her
    Citalopram dose was increased.

41. When seen by Dr Bhardwal  on  30  June  2016,  the  appellant  had  not
    contacted either ESOL or CAB for help, as she said she had no money for
    transport.  Dr Bhardwal suggested the appellant could walk, resting  on
    the way.  She agreed to try: he told her it would be good exercise  and
    would get her out of the house.   However, when seen on  28  July,  the
    appellant had not made much progress. She lacked motivation  and  found
    it difficult to keep ringing and chasing up appointments.  She did  not
    feel like going out, was not using the  available  counselling,  having
    given up when the  telephone  was  not  answered.   The  appellant  was
    uncertain if the medication was  helping.    She  still  had  ideas  of
    suicide, but no intention to carry them into effect.

42. On 7 October 2016, Dr Juliet Cohen MA  MB  BS  Dip  RACOG  MRCGP  FFFLM
    reported that she had seen the appellant on 30 September  2016  at  the
    Manor Hospital, Headington, in Oxford.  Her report was  based  on  that
    interview, together with the  screening  interview,  asylum  interview,
    refusal letter, Dr McCoubrie's  medico-legal  report,  the  appellant's
    earlier witness statement, Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam's  decision,
    and two letters from solicitors.  Dr Cohen  interviewed  the  appellant
    through a Gujarati interpreter.

43. Dr Cohen sets out in her opinion a history which broadly replicates the
    account already given.  She recorded that the  appellant  had  a  happy
    childhood, with no significant injury or illness, and  enjoyed  school,
    though she had, perhaps, more difficulty than others in learning.   She
    lost interest in schooling when she became involved with dance, and did
    not sit her Year 12 examinations.  Even at school, the appellant  hated
    being around boys, or any physical contact by a boy.   The  account  of
    the ill-treatment by the appellant's parents when she refused to  marry
    is consistent with that already set out.

44. The part of Dr Cohen's report which  deals  with  her  current  medical
    condition begins at paragraph 12.  In 2011, when she came to the United
    Kingdom, the appellant had initially worked, in a shop 'doing  eyebrows
    and serving Gujarati-speaking people'.  She coped, and the other  women
    in the shop were nice to her, but  she  was  already  having  intrusive
    recall 'all the time' of the events in India.  The  appellant  did  not
    feel that she could do the work now; her condition had worsened in  the
    5 years which followed.

45. Her time in immigration detention had frightened the appellant, because
    she was afraid of going back to India and being  killed  there  by  her
    parents.  Before the family dispute she had been a good  sleeper,  both
    at night, and during  daytime  naps.  Now,  the  appellant  slept  very
    little, because of her intrusive memories: when she did sleep, she  had
    nightmares of being locked in and  beaten  by  her  parents,  and  woke
    startled and disoriented.   Others said that she shouted in her  sleep.
    The appellant kept the lights on all night, as she was scared to  sleep
    in the dark.

46. In the daytime, the appellant prefers to be  alone,  rather  than  with
    others; in consequence, she makes no progress in learning English.  The
    appellant has no money for travel, so does not think she can get to any
    classes, even if they are free.  She  does  not  watch  television  and
    cannot read English so during the day, she has little to occupy her.

47. A friend shops for the appellant and helps her with most activities  of
    daily life, giving practical and emotional support,  as  the  appellant
    can only walk to a shop near home, in case she gets lost and cannot get
    help finding her way home. The friend also cooks for the appellant,  as
    she is forgetful and likely to burn the food.

48. The appellant is anaemic.  She feels weak and tired all the  time,  and
    sometimes dizzy.  Her appetite is variable and her  weight  fluctuates.
    She takes Citalopram 40 mg  (an  antidepressant)  and  vitamins  (iron,
    folic  acid,  and  vitamins  B12  and  D).  The  appellant  had   begun
    counselling but had not been very often yet, only a few  sessions  from
    which she felt little benefit so far.

49. The appellant sat in a hunched, defensive  posture  during  Dr  Cohen's
    examination, with her fingers  clasped  together  all  the  time.   Her
    expression was sad and anxious.  She was often  tearful  and  Dr  Cohen
    assessed her mood as 'subjectively and objectively low'.  Her behaviour
    was appropriate and there were no symptoms of psychosis, or  damage  to
    her insight.  The appellant had 'biological symptoms of poor sleep  and
    intermittently poor appetite'.  She had no wish to return to dancing as
    a career.  Dr Cohen assessed the appellant  as  having  severe  anxiety
    (19/21 on the GAD7 Anxiety Scale) and severe depression (24/27  on  the
    PHQ9 Depression Scale).

50. Dr Cohen's opinion was that the appellant met the  diagnostic  criteria
    for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as set out in ICD-10:

         "36. She has psychological symptoms linked to her account.  She has
         re-experiencing  symptoms  with  intrusive  recall  and  nightmares
         reliving her experiences. She has avoidance  and  numbing  symptoms
         with avoidance of conversations, activities and people,  diminished
         interest in or participation in activities, and restricted range of
         affect.  She has hyper-arousal symptoms with difficulty in  falling
         asleep  and  staying  asleep,  difficulty  in   concentration   and
         jumpiness. ..."

51.  The appellant also met the diagnostic criteria  for  depression,  with
    'depressed mood, loss of any interest in or  enjoyment  of  activities,
    low energy and fatiguability...ideas  of  guilt,  bleak  views  of  her
    future, sleep disturbance, poor appetite and ideas of self harm'.

52. Dr Cohen considered whether the  appellant  could  be  exaggerating  or
    embellishing her condition.  She  noted  that  the  evidence  from  her
    general medical practitioner and counsellor, over the previous 3 years,
    was  consistently  that  the  appellant  was  unwell  and  in  need  of
    medication and therapy. Dr McCoubrie's findings  3  years  earlier  had
    been similar to those of Dr Cohen.  Dr Cohen's opinion was that it  was
    'highly  unlikely  that  [the  appellant]  could  be  fabricating   her
    condition', which had not changed much in the 3 years since she saw  Dr
    McCoubrie.   Nor was it likely that any other cause, such as being  far
    from home and an asylum seeker, could  account  for  her  PTSD,  'which
    requires experiences of overwhelming  fear  or  threat  to  life  as  a
    cause'.  There was no other such element in the appellant's history.

53. Dr Cohen considered that the appellant's condition was  made  worse  by
    her lack of status and her fear of honour-based violence, if  she  were
    returned to India, and might well be significantly  exacerbated  during
    the returns process.

54. The core of Dr Cohen's opinion is at [42]-[44]:

         "42. I have been asked to consider [the appellant's] vulnerability.
          As a single woman suffering  from  PTSD  and  depression,  she  is
         vulnerable in a number of ways.  She is currently depending on  her
         friend for support in most activities of  daily  living,  including
         shopping and cooking.  While she was able to work when she came  to
         the United Kingdom, her condition appears to have worsened  to  the
         extent that she would not in her current state be able  to  support
         herself economically.  She is therefore vulnerable, if removed from
         her current supports, to destitution,  exploitation,  and  violence
         from others.  She would also be at  increased  risk  of  harm  from
         herself, if her suicidal ideas should increase.   Suicide  risk  is
         affected by many factors, but  for  example,  the  removal  of  her
         current only protective factor - her friend - if she were  returned
         to India, would definitely increase her risk.  PTSD and  depression
         are conditions with a raised risk of suicide. ...

         44.  ...I  do  consider  that  her  mental  health  would  be  made
         significantly worse by return to India,  where  she  fear  being  a
         victim of honour-based violence, or of living in hiding and  unable
         to cope with the activities of daily life."

55. That is the evidence before me today.

Submissions

56. For the respondent, Mr Avery accepted that the medical evidence  of  Dr
    Cohen was not inconsistent  with  that  of  Dr  McCoubrie  three  years
    earlier.  The appellant  had  only  just  started  treatment,  and  had
    originally  been  encountered  working  in  Wembley,   selling   beauty
    products.

57. The appellant's expression of her lesbianism was extremely limited  and
    discreet, which reduced the risk to her on  internal  relocation.   The
    appellant had travelled within India, with the dance troupe, as well as
    overseas.  She was  not  merely  a  village  girl  and  would  be  more
    integrated in India, such that internal relocation was an option.

58. The medical evidence on suicide risk was equivocal and fell  far  short
    of the standard set in the Court of Appeal's judgments in J v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 as nuanced in Y  &
    Another (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]
    EWCA Civ 362.  There was no background evidence to show that  it  would
    restrict her ability to  relocate  within  Gujarat.   He  asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

59. For the appellant, Ms Asanovic relied on her  skeleton  argument.   She
    reminded me that in the decision of 1 December 2014, I  concluded  that
    unless the appellant had a viable internal relocation option, she is  a
    refugee.  She relied on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in AR and NH
    (lesbians) India [2016] UKUT 66, in particular  paragraph  (6)  of  the
    judicial headnote.  The appellant was not among the group of  educated,
    urban women whom the Tribunal had identified as likely to  be  safe  on
    return to India.   She would be unable  to  cope  alone  on  return  to
    India, both because she was uneducated and a  village  girl,  and  also
    because of her health problems, arising from her traumatic past.

60. In the  circumstances,  return  to  India  on  the  basis  of  internal
    relocation was unduly harsh: the appellant had no  support  network  in
    India and a subjectively held fear of persecution  which  rendered  her
    unable to look after herself.

61. On the question of suicide risk, Ms Asanovic's skeleton argument argued
    that the standard in J v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629 was met, that there was  medical  evidence  of  the
    risk of suicide being linked  to  the  return  process,  and  that  the
    appellant was the type of person contemplated in the judgment  of  Lord
    Justice Sedley in Y & Another (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 at [61]-[63].

62. The respondent should have particular respect for  Dr  Cohen,  who  was
    head of the Medical Foundation for the Victims of Torture (Freedom From
    Torture).  Ms Asanovic reminded me of the respondent's own guidance  on
    the  treatment  of  doctors  from  the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation   (Dr
    McCoubrie) or Freedom From Torture (Dr Cohen):
         "Considering the Content of MLRs
         3.1  Introduction
         Both  Foundations  are  accepted  by  the  Home  Office  as  having
         recognised  expertise  in   the   assessment   of   the   physical,
         psychological,  psychiatric  and   social   effects   of   torture.
         Clinicians and other health care professionals from the Foundations
         are objective and unbiased. Reports  prepared  by  the  Foundations
         should  be  accepted  as  having  been   compiled   by   qualified,
         experienced  and  suitably  trained  clinicians  and  health   care
         professionals."

63. The Upper Tribunal should therefore be prepared  to  place  significant
    weight on  the  consistent  medical  evidence  from  Dr  Cohen  and  Dr
    McCoubrie. I should also bear in mind the cultural context,  and  that,
    applying the guidance of the Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, where discreet  behaviour
    was caused, or partly caused,  by  fear  of  persecution,  it  must  be
    discounted in assessing the risk on return.

64. Gujarat is a large province, in which as a single woman  the  appellant
    would have difficulty in finding work, but the  real  obstacle  to  her
    reintegration was the appellant's vulnerability and her  mental  state,
    as identified most recently by Dr Cohen.    She  had  poor  memory  and
    could neither shop nor cook for herself.  Ms Asanovic asked me to allow
    the appeal.

65. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Discussion

66. The starting point in this appeal is the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam, setting aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    for error of law.  It is established that the appellant is  a  lesbian,
    albeit one who has never had a partner  or  a  relationship.   She  has
    travelled away from home with her dance troupe, but  not  alone,  until
    she came to the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  She is from a rural
    village, a working class  family  with  conservative  values,  and  she
    herself does not have much education.

67. The appellant was ill-treated  by  her  mother  and  father  when  they
    discovered her sexual orientation,  and  the  ill-treatment  which  she
    suffered was serious enough to amount to torture.  The  appellant  has,
    therefore, suffered  past  persecution  on  the  basis  of  her  sexual
    orientation.   Applying paragraph 339K of the Rules, unless  there  are
    good reasons for considering that such persecution or serious harm will
    not be repeated, the existence of credible evidence of serious harm  in
    the past must be treated as a serious indication of a well-founded fear
    of persecution.  The respondent has not  suggested  that  such  reasons
    exist in this case.  It follows, as I stated in 2014,  that, unless the
    appellant has a viable internal relocation option within India, she  is
    a refugee.

68. The opinion of  Lord Hope in HJ (Iran) at [35]  sets  out  the  correct
    approach.  It is established here that there is a risk  of  persecution
    for this appellant in India.  She  has  already  suffered  persecution.
    She is gay and is therefore a member  of  a  particular  social  group,
    lesbian women in India.  The relevant sub-paragraphs  for  this  appeal
    are 35(b) and 35(d):

         "35. ...(b) The next stage is to examine a group of questions which
         are directed to what his situation will be on return. This part  of
         the inquiry is directed to what will happen in the  future.  ...The
         question is  how  each  applicant,  looked  at  individually,  will
         conduct himself if returned and how others will react  to  what  he
         does. Those others will include everyone with whom he will come  in
         contact, in private as well as  in  public.  The  way  he  conducts
         himself may vary  from  one  situation  to  another,  with  varying
         degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to  conceal
         aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
         even from those whom he knows may disapprove of  it.  If  he  fears
         persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he  will  be
         entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal  to  resort  to
         concealment may be. The question what is reasonably  tolerable  has
         no part in this inquiry. ...

         (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in  fact
         conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
         consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in  response  to
         social pressures or for cultural or religious reasons  of  his  own
         choosing and not because of a fear of persecution,  his  claim  for
         asylum must be rejected. But if the reason why he  will  resort  to
         concealment is that he genuinely fears that otherwise  he  will  be
         persecuted, it will be necessary to consider whether that  fear  is
         well founded.

         (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a well-
         founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he has,  the  causative
         condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426,  para  5  will  have
         been established. The applicant will be entitled to asylum."

69.      There is no doubt in my mind, on the medical evidence here,  which
    has been consistent over time, that the appellant has  an  extreme  and
    sincerely held subjective fear of being harmed or killed by her  family
    members if she returns to  India.   That  fear  was  objectively  well-
    founded when she left India and there is nothing in the evidence before
    me to indicate that the appellant's family, who remain  estranged  from
    her,  will  have  changed  their  views.   Applying   paragraph   339K,
    therefore, wherever her family members can reach, the appellant  is  at
    risk if she is in reach of members of her family after  her  return  to
    India.

70.      On her evidence, since she  speaks  only  Gujarati  and  has  many
    family members across that state, the risk exists  throughout  Gujarat.
    It is the appellant's evidence that she has cousins and extended family
    throughout India.  That is not implausible and  I  do  not  reject  her
    evidence on that point.

71.      Even if the appellant had no family  members  outside  Gujarat,  I
    must consider whether as a lone woman she could be expected to relocate
    elsewhere in India. That turns on the Upper Tribunal's country guidance
    in AR and NH (lesbians) India [2016] UKUT 66 (IAC), summarised (so  far
    as relevant to this appeal) thus in the judicial headnote:

         "(2)    A risk of persecution or serious harm for a  lesbian  woman
         in India, where it exists, arises from her family members, and  the
         extent of such risk, and whether it extends beyond the  home  area,
         is a question of fact in each case.

         (3)    The risk of  persecution  or  serious  harm  is  higher  for
         uneducated lower class lesbian women in  rural  areas,  who  remain
         under the control of their family members and may not be  permitted
         to leave the home to continue meeting their lesbian partners.

         (4)    Where family  members  are  hostile  to  a  lesbian  woman's
         sexuality, they may reject her completely  and  sometimes  formally
         renounce her as a member of that family. In such  a  case,  whether
         relocation to a city is unduly harsh will be a  question  of  fact,
         depending on the  ability  of  such  a  lesbian  woman  to  survive
         economically away from her family and social networks.

         (5)    If a lesbian woman's family wishes to pursue and harm her in
         the place of internal relocation,  their  ability  to  do  so  will
         depend on the reach of the family network, how persistent they are,
         and how influential. The evidence indicates that there is  normally
         sufficient state protection for women whose families seek  to  harm
         them in their place of internal relocation. ..."

72.      The evidence in AR and NH of the treatment of lesbian  women  from
    uneducated rural backgrounds chimes with the evidence the appellant has
    advanced.  In this case, there is no evidence  of  formal  renunciation
    (by publication in a newspaper or some similar step), but applying  the
    lower standard of proof applicable to international protection  claims,
    I accept that the appellant may well have extended  family  members  in
    other parts of India.

73.      The appellant is a vulnerable person.  She has a history  of  PTSD
    and depression and is self-isolating, unable to cope for herself.   The
    medical evidence, upon which I  do  place  weight,  is  consistent  and
    credible on that point.  She is not among  the  more  robust  group  of
    educated, middle class  women  in  lesbian  partnerships,  who  can  be
    expected to cope in urban environments, and  indeed,  the  evidence  is
    that in the urban environment  where  she  now  lives,  she  is  barely
    coping.

74.      For all of these reasons, I am satisfied that on the facts of this
    appeal, it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to exercise an
    internal relocation option within India, in order to escape the risk of
    persecution from her family, or her extended family.

75.      Turning to the question of suicide risk, as Mr Avery  stated,  the
    evidence is equivocal.  Her general medical practitioner  recorded  her
    as not having suicidal ideation originally.  Neither  Dr  McCoubrie  in
    2013,  nor  Dr  Cohen  in  2016  considered  that  the  appellant   was
    fabricating her account, but both recorded that the  appellant  had  an
    intention to kill herself rather than be  harmed  on  return.   In  the
    United Kingdom, although she thought of suicide, she  did  not  have  a
    developed suicidal ideation and had this appeal turned on suicide  risk
    alone it might not have succeeded.

76.      That is  not,  however,  the  position  here.  The  appellant  has
    suffered past persecution and come to serious  and  lasting  harm,  and
    there is no evidence that she would be safe in her home area,  or  that
    she could exercise an  internal  relocation  option  without  it  being
    unduly harsh to expect her to do so.

77.      I therefore allow the appeal on asylum  grounds  and  pursuant  to
    Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.   It  is  a  consequence  of  the  appeal  being
    allowed  on  protection  grounds  that   the   secondary   humanitarian
    protection claim fails.


DECISION

78. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:
   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision
   by allowing the appeal.


Signed   Judith A J C Gleeson
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson                 Date 4 September 2020




