
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06922/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 21st October 2015             |On 3rd November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                     AC
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms King (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Hembrough which was promulgated on  the  25th  March
         2015, in which he dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
         Respondent's refusal of her asylum claim.




Background

      2. The Appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on the 30th June
         1992. It is the Appellant's claim that she was forced by her father
         to marry an older man Mr C, but between the engagement and marriage
         the Appellant had an affair with an Albanian man Mr K,  who  worked
         in Germany and who was in Albania on holiday. After Mr  K  returned
         to Germany the Appellant found out that she was  pregnant  by  him.
         Her husband on finding out on their wedding night that she was  not
         a virgin returned the Appellant to her family, and  she  says  that
         she was beaten by her father. It is her case  that  eventually  her
         husband was persuaded to take her back, but that her husband forced
         her into prostitution and tried to force her to have a  termination
         when he found out about the pregnancy, despite the  fact  that  she
         was more than 26 weeks pregnant and that he also assaulted  her  in
         the hope that she would miscarry.

      3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the grounds that she  had  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution and or would  suffer  serious  harm  by
         reason of her membership of a particular social group as  a  result
         of having been trafficked for the purposes of prostitution  by  her
         husband and having been subject to domestic violence at  the  hands
         of her father. On the 29th August 2014 the Respondent  refused  the
         Appellant's claim for asylum and on the  4th  September  2014  gave
         directions for her removal under Section 10 of the Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 1999. That  decision  was  appealed  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and that appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Hembrough at Hatton cross on the 9th March 2015.

      4. In his decision, Judge Hembrough rejected the  Appellant's  account
         of having been forced  to  married  Mr  C  or  that  she  had  been
         internally trafficked and forced into prostitution at the hands  of
         her husband, but accepted that she had been the victim of  domestic
         violence at the hands of her father and that she would be  returned
         to Albania as a single mother with an illegitimate child, without a
         male protector or the support of  her  immediate  family.  However,
         Judge Hembrough found that the Appellant would be able to integrate
         back into life in Albania and obtain employment, so as  to  provide
         for herself and the child, with the aid of  assistance  in  Tirana,
         the benefit of a package offered by the International  Organisation
         for Migration, and that she would be able to  access  support  from
         her aunt who sent her to the UK. He therefore dismissed the  appeal
         on Asylum, Humanitarian Protection and Human  Rights  grounds.  The
         Appellant has appealed that decision to the Upper Tribunal.

      5. Permission to appeal has  been  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Storey on the 1st July 2015, for the following reasons:

         "Whilst I do not consider that the grounds establish  any  arguable
         error in the Judge's treatment  of  the  medical  report-the  Judge
         appears to me to make valid criticisms of Professor Katona's report-
         I am troubled by the following. The Judge believed the  Appellant's
         account that the Appellant was a victim of domestic  violence,  but
         disbelieved her claim that she was a  victim  of  trafficking.  The
         main basis on which the Judge explains the different assessments of
         credibility turns on the fact that the trafficking account was  not
         mentioned in the screening interview. Yet  (despite  rejecting  the
         body of Professor Katona's findings) the Judge found the  Appellant
         had been the victim of trauma. The only reason given for  rejecting
         the submission that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to  identify  the
         account of being a victim of trafficking because of trauma was that
         in  her  screening  interview  she  was  coherent  and  consistent.
         However, I do not see that previous consistency precludes a failure
         to divulge key elements of an asylum claim at  a  first  interview,
         especially when the screening interview (as here) is quite cursory.
         Further, some of the reasons given by the  Judge  for  finding  the
         Appellant not credible about her trafficking account were  just  as
         relevant, on the face of it, to whether she  was  credible  on  the
         domestic violence account.  The  findings  on  internal  relocation
         appear confused, since  they  appear  to  depend  in  part  on  the
         Appellant being able to benefit from a return package  for  victims
         of trafficking, whereas the Judge rejecting that  she  was  such  a
         victim".

Submissions

      6. In her submissions on behalf of the Appellant Ms King  relied  upon
         her Grounds of Appeal. Although Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey  when
         granting permission to appeal had indicated  specifically  that  he
         did not consider that the grounds established any arguable error in
         the Judge's treatment of the medical report and the Judge had  made
         valid criticisms of Professor Katona's report, Ms King still sought
         to argue that the Judge had simply substituted his own opinion  for
         that of the expert and sought to  rely  upon  the  case  of  Y  and
         Another (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
         [2009] EWCA Civ 362, and the Judgement of  LJ  Sedley  at  [12]  to
         argue that where the  factual  basis  of  psychiatric  findings  is
         sought to be undermined by suggesting the Appellant had exaggerated
         her symptoms, care  was  required  and  that  whereas  the  factual
         account of an Appellant's history may be  so  controverted  by  the
         Tribunal's own findings as to undermine the  psychiatric  evidence,
         in that case, the Designated Immigration Judge himself  formed  the
         view that the Appellants' account had been calculatedly exaggerated
         in respect of the symptoms that they had recounted  to  the  expert
         witnesses. Ms King argued that Lord Justice Elliott  held  that  in
         the first instance this was a matter for  the  expert  himself  and
         that a fundamental aspect of his expertise  is  the  evaluation  of
         patient's account of their symptoms, and that it was  only  if  the
         Tribunal had a good  and  objective  reason  for  discounting  that
         evidence  that  it  could  be  modified  or-even  more   radically-
         disregarded.

      7. Ms King further sought to argue that Professor Katona in his report
         at  [52]  had  detailed  the  difficulties  that  people  have   in
         recounting a traumatic experience, including maybe getting agitated
         and distressed whilst doing so and that the Appellant's failure  to
         mention things in the  short  screening  interview  and  difficulty
         talking about having been trafficked, was not sufficient reason for
         her to have  been  disbelieved.  She  argued  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge had given no reasons for rejecting  the  trafficking
         account other than the fact it is not mentioned  in  the  screening
         interview. She argued that there was inadequate reasoning regarding
         the rejection of the Appellant's  account  of  her  husband  having
         trafficked her into prostitution.

      8. Ms King further argued that the Judge had  wrongly  considered  the
         support packages available for the victims of trafficking,  despite
         having found the Appellant was not  a  victim  of  trafficking,  in
         respect of the issue as to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  could
         safely internally relocate within Albania. She further argued  that
         the Judge  had  made  inadequate  findings  regarding  the  support
         available for victims of domestic violence at  [55].  It  was  also
         argued on behalf of the Appellant that there were inconsistent  and
         inadequate reasons put forward as to why the Appellant's aunt would
         be able to support her upon return, given  that  her  aunt  on  the
         Appellant's case had sent her away when she was pregnant.  Ms  King
         asked if there was a material error of law, the  case  be  remitted
         back to the First-tier Tribunal, as the  Appellant's  circumstances
         had now changed and she had met up again with  her  child's  father
         and was in a relationship with him and that they were  expecting  a
         further child.

      9. Mr Staunton on behalf of the Respondent sought to  argue  that  the
         Judge's findings in respect of Professor Katona's report were  open
         to him, given that the Judge considered that Professor  Katona  had
         not fully and properly considered the GP records. He sought to rely
         upon the case of JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT
         145 (IAC) as authority for the point that the more a diagnosis  was
         dependent upon the Appellant's own account, less weight  should  be
         attached to it. He argued that the Judge's findings in  respect  of
         the screening interview were  open  to  him.  He  argued  that  the
         Appellant had ample opportunity to refer to having been  trafficked
         within the screening interview  and  had  said  that  she  was  not
         married within the screening interview and had stated that she  had
         understood the interpreter.

     10. Mr Staunton sought to argue that  the  packages  available  to  the
         Appellant as a victim of domestic violence were  similar  to  those
         available to people who have been trafficked and that therefore any
         error in the Judge's assessment  of  the  packages  available  upon
         return was not material. He sought to  produce  evidence  from  the
         Horizon website, in respect of the packages available to victims of
         domestic violence, but accepted that this evidence was  not  before
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge and could not provide an  explanation
         as to why such evidence had not been produced before the Judge.

     11. He further sought to argue that it was open to the  Judge  to  find
         that the Appellant could obtain help from her aunt if she  were  to
         be returned.

     12. Mr Staunton further agreed  with  Ms  King  that  if  there  was  a
         material error of law, that the matter should be remitted  back  to
         the  First-tier  Tribunal  for   rehearing,   given   the   changed
         circumstances in respect of the Appellant's relationship  with  her
         child's father and the fact that she now had a second child on  the
         way.

     13. Although Mr Staunton sought to produce further  evidence  today  at
         the  Upper  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  from  the  Horizon   website
         regarding support available to victims of domestic violence, in  an
         attempt to argue that any error on part of the First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge in this regard was not material, in breach of Rule 15 (2A) of
         the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, the  Respondent
         had failed to send or deliver a notice to the Upper Tribunal and to
         the Appellant indicating the nature of the evidence that it  wished
         to produce and explaining why it had  not  been  submitted  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal. No explanation was forthcoming when I asked Mr
         Staunton in respect of the same as to why  such  evidence  had  not
         been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal, if reliance were  sought
         to be placed upon it as evidence as to the available  packages  for
         victims of domestic violence,  as  at  the  date  of  the  original
         hearing, and that without any such explanation, I have not admitted
         the evidence and I have not taken account of the same when reaching
         my decision, as this was not evidence available  before  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Hembrough.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

     14. I do not accept, given Upper Tribunal Judge Storey's wording of his
         permission to appeal grant, in which he stated specifically "whilst
         I do not consider the grounds establish any arguable error  in  the
         Judge's treatment of the medical report-the Judge appears  to  have
         made  valid  criticisms  of  Professor   Katona's   report",   that
         permission to appeal was granted  in  respect  of  that  ground  of
         appeal relating to the Judge's handling of  the  medical  evidence.
         Permission not having been granted in respect  of  that  ground  of
         appeal, I do not consider that it is something which  is  available
         to the Appellant to argue before me. I therefore do not accept  the
         submissions of Ms King that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in
         his approach to the  medical  evidence,  given  that  this  is  not
         available ground of appeal open to her, permission not having  been
         granted in respect of the same.

     15. However, even if I am wrong in that regard, that ground  of  appeal
         has no merit, in that the Judge has not simply considered that  the
         Appellant  exaggerated  her  account  as  being  the   reason   for
         disregarding Professor Katona's report, but gave clear,  sufficient
         and adequate reasons for rejecting  the  conclusions  of  Professor
         Katona's report between [45] and [48], including the fact that  her
         account had not been verified  by  open  questioning  by  Professor
         Katona and that he had not considered her GP notes in  any  detail,
         in  particular,  he  had  not  considered  the  record  of  the  GP
         consultation on the 1st August 2012 following the birth of her  son
         when she said that she was "coping well, no evidence of low  mood",
         despite this being 4 months after her arrival into  the  UK  and  6
         weeks after the asylum interview. He  therefore  gave  a  perfectly
         adequate  and  sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting  the  report  of
         Professor Katona.

     16. However, in respect of the basis upon which  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Storey granted permission to appeal, namely that he  was  concerned
         that despite having believed the Appellant's account that she was a
         victim of domestic violence, but having disbelieved her account  of
         being a victim of trafficking, that this was simply on the basis of
         the failure of the Appellant to mention the same in  the  screening
         interview.

     17. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did err in law at [44] in
         rejecting the submission of Ms King that the discrepancies  in  the
         Appellant's  account  between  her  screening  interview  and   her
         substantive interview could be explained by reference to  the  fact
         that people with  PTSD  have  difficulty  in  dealing  with  direct
         interviewing, and remembering traumatic events in temporal sequence
         and that those who have experienced sexual trauma  have  difficulty
         recounting events, simply on the basis that he was  unpersuaded  by
         that submission given the coherence and consistency of her  account
         in the screening interview. Although the First-Tier Tribunal  Judge
         properly gave reasons for discounting the final  conclusions  drawn
         by Professor Katona in respect of his failure to ask open questions
         and to fully consider the GP records,  Professor  Katona's  opinion
         regarding the fact that victims  of  PTSD  do  have  difficulty  in
         dealing with direct interviewing, remembering  dramatic  events  in
         temporal sequence and recounting sexual trauma, was based upon  his
         expertise, and it is well established that victims of sexual trauma
         may well have difficulty in recounting  the  same.  The  Judge  has
         failed to fully explain his reasoning or to give  adequate  reasons
         for rejecting this as a reason for the Appellant having  failed  to
         mention having been  trafficked  in  her  screening  interview,  in
         circumstances where he did then accept at [49] that  the  Appellant
         had been subject to some traumatic event which caused her to  leave
         her family and eventually find her way to  the  UK  whilst  heavily
         pregnant.  Simply stating that she had been coherent and internally
         consistent with the screening interview was an insufficient  reason
         and has been inadequately reasoned.

     18. Further, the Judge erred in  law  when  considering  the  issue  of
         internal relocation, as when dealing with the issue of the  support
         services available to victims of domestic violence at [55]  of  his
         decision, the Judge simply stated that "the Appellant was not  able
         to give any satisfactory reason as to why she would not be able  to
         avail herself of the services on offer" which he described as being
         referred to within the Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of  Canada
         Report dated the 29th April 2014 at Section 4. However, given  that
         report  itself  at  paragraph  4.1  had  stated  specifically  that
         "several sources indicate that there is not a sufficient number  of
         shelters for victims of domestic violence" and that  "according  to
         Data Centrum, the current shelters have  a  limited  capacity,  and
         there is a particular lack of emergency and long-term  shelters  in
         the North," and went on at paragraph 4.1.1 to state  that  "sources
         indicated that victims of domestic violence are required to have  a
         protection order to stay at the National shelter",  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge simply  placing  the  burden  on  the  Appellant  to
         explain why she would be unable to avail herself of the services on
         offer,  rather  than  assessing  fully  what  assistance  might  be
         available to victims of domestic violence, amounted to an error  of
         law. His reasoning  in  that  regard  failed  to  explain  why  the
         Appellant would be entitled to access such  services,  rather  than
         simply as he did, wrongly placing the burden on her to explain  why
         she would not be able to avail herself of the limited  services  on
         offer. He failed to properly consider whether or not  in  fact  she
         would be able to access such services, given their limited nature.

     19. Further, the Judge erred in law at [60] and [61] in considering the
         shelters and packages, including the dedicated  assistance  package
         from the International Organisation for Migration, which  had  been
         established for victims of trafficking, when considering whether or
         not the Appellant could internally relocate, despite  having  found
         that she was not a victim of trafficking. The  package  offered  by
         the International Organisation for Migration to which  he  referred
         at [60] was stated specifically  to  have  been  established  as  a
         dedicated assistance package for victims of  trafficking  who  were
         voluntarily returning from the UK to Albania, including those  with
         children, rather than being  a  package  available  to  victims  of
         domestic violence.  To have  taken  this  package  as  having  been
         available to the appellant when there is no evidence that it  given
         his findings regarding her not having been trafficked  amounted  to
         an error.

     20. Further, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding at [55]  that  "It
         is, in my view, also reasonable to anticipate that upon return  the
         Appellant would be able to access support from her  aunt  who  sent
         her to the UK", in my judgement is inadequately and  insufficiently
         reasoned. Given that the Appellant's own case was that her aunt had
         sent her away when heavily pregnant because she could not cope with
         the Appellant having a baby on the way,  no  explanation  has  been
         given by the Judge as to why in such circumstances, the aunt  would
         be in a position to provide  support,  were  the  Appellant  to  be
         returned.

     21. In my judgment the Judge's error in respect of  his  assessment  of
         the appellant's credibility  based  upon  the  failure  to  mention
         trafficking within  the  screening  interview,  together  with  his
         failure to properly assess what support is available to victims  of
         domestic violence, and his inclusion within his analysis of support
         actually available for victims of trafficking, despite finding that
         the Appellant was not a victim of trafficking and  his  failure  to
         properly explain the basis on which assistance would  be  available
         from the Appellant's aunt if returned, do amount to material errors
         of law. In such circumstances, the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Hembrough is set aside.

     22. Given that the errors made by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hembrough
         in my judgement undermine the entire basis for his conclusions that
         the Appellant would not be at a real risk upon return and given the
         agreement between the parties that it was appropriate for the  case
         to be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, given the change in
         the Appellant's circumstances, I do remit  the  case  back  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal for rehearing. The rehearing is to  take  place
         before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Hembrough.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hembrough  disclosing  material
errors of law, the decision is set aside;

The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard  before
any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
Hembrough;

The  First-tier  Tribunal  having  made  a  direction  regarding   anonymity
pursuant  to  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
(Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2013,  given  the  nature  of  the
allegations raised in the case, it is appropriate for  a  further  anonymity
order to be made.

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Dated 23rd October 2015
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
