
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06622/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                              |On 6 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR



                                   Between

                                     VSJ
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by CK Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born in June  1986.   He  left
    Sri Lanka on 20 August 2010 and, although the  chronology  is  somewhat
    confused,  it was agreed at the hearing that he arrived in this country
    on the same day.  He came with a student visa  and  an  application  of
    extension of stay as a student was granted until 18  July  2013.  Leave
    was curtailed on 15 May 2013.  He applied for asylum in September 2013.
     The application was refused on 29 March 2015.  The appellant  appealed
    and his appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 9 February  2016.
    The appellant was represented then, as he is  now,  by  Miss  Benfield.
    Miss Mepstead appeared for the respondent.

2.   There is a procedural issue on the question of whether it was  fair  to
    refuse an adjournment application made at the hearing and in  order  to
    do justice to that submission it is right that I reproduce the relevant
    part of the judge's decision as follows:-

         "Earlier Proceedings


         8.   The appellant was  not  represented  at  the  Case  Management
             Review hearing on 10 July 2015; the NHS  representatives  made
             written submissions. At the flexibility policy hearing  on  24
             July, the appellant's  Counsel  applied  for  an  adjournment.
             According  to  the  Record  of  Proceedings  the   appellant's
             solicitors were concerned that he was not fit to give evidence
             in a court environment, and the application was  made  on  the
             basis that an  adjournment  was  required  in  order  that  Dr
             Balasubramaniam could comment on whether he was fit to do  so.
             On 26 and 29 January, the appellant's solicitors made  written
             applications for a further adjournment, which were refused.


         9.   At the start of the hearing, Miss  Benfield  again  sought  an
             adjournment. She referred to a letter from Dr  Balasubramaniam
             dated 29 January 2016, in which he responded to a request that
             he comment on the appellant's ability  to  give  evidence.  He
             referred to the  recommendation  in  his  earlier  report  for
             treatment for the appellant's mental  disorders,  and  advised
             that the appellant should be re-examined for the purpose of an
             opinion as to his current ability to give  evidence.  However,
             he himself was on holiday  abroad  until  17  February.   Miss
             Benfield told me that whilst the  appellant's  solicitors  had
             been aware of the need  for  an  addendum  report,  that  they
             waited until four weeks before the adjourned hearing so as  to
             obtain an up-to-date report. Unfortunately, it then transpired
             that the psychiatrist was unavailable. As a consequence of his
             medical condition, the appellant  had  not  engaged  with  his
             solicitors. It was not his fault that Dr  Balasubramaniam  was
             not currently available.  Although the appellant  was  at  the
             hearing, he did not want to give evidence.  He  was  suffering
             from headaches and lack of memory, and did not  feel  able  to
             answer questions in court.


         10.  Miss Mepstead opposed the application. She maintained that the
             psychiatrist's report did not say that he was  unfit  to  give
             evidence.  Following the earlier adjournment, there  had  been
             ample opportunity for  an  addendum  report  to  be  obtained,
             either from Dr Balasubramaniam or from another psychiatrist Dr
             Balasubramaniam  had  recommended  that  the  appellant   seek
             treatment, but he had failed to do so.


         11.  I refused the application. The earlier  adjournment  had  been
             granted in order to enable the appellant to provide  a  report
             on his ability to give evidence, and no such report  had  been
             provided. It was not  clear  that  there  was  a  satisfactory
             reason for that. While Miss Benfield's instructions were  that
             the solicitors had delayed in seeking his second report, there
             was no evidence from the solicitors as to why  they  had  done
             so, or as to any lack of engagement by the  appellant  in  the
             preparation for the hearing.   Although  the  letter  from  Dr
             Balasubramaniam referred to a letter from the solicitors dated
             11 February, no such letter  had  been  produced.  There  was,
             however an email from Dr Balasubramaniam dated 21  January  to
             which was attached an e-mail  from  the  solicitors  dated  18
             January requesting his further comments.   The  appellant  has
             had an ample opportunity since July 2015 to obtain  a  further
             opinion from a psychiatrist. In all the  circumstances  I  was
             not satisfied that the appeal could not justly  be  determined
             without a further adjournment, or that  such  adjournment  was
             warranted.


         12.  Miss Benfield then told me that although the  appellant  would
             not seek to give evidence, he  did  wish  to  explain  to  the
             Tribunal  why he did not want to do so. Miss Mepstead told  me
             that she had no objection.  The appellant then told me that he
             did not want to give evidence because nobody seemed  to  trust
             him.  He was facing problems on a daily basis, and  could  not
             sleep properly. He had had a blood clot on his eyelids but had
             not been able to go to the doctor for that: he did not want to
             go to the doctor. Further, his parent was giving him  problems
             every day.


         13.   Miss Benfield sought to rely on the appellant's  evidence  as
             contained in  two  witness  statements.  However,  neither  of
             those statements was signed by the appellant. Before  inviting
             him to sign them, Miss Benfield asked  him  whether  they  had
             been read to him, or whether he had  read  them,  so  that  he
             understood them. The appellant's reasons was 'I only told them
             to write. Somebody contacted my brother. My brother  explained
             to them what happened. They didn't explain to me.  That's  the
             reasons I could not concentrate on this properly because of my
             mother's sickness. They tell me to read them, but  I  was  not
             interested to read'.


         14.  Since that explanation did not  indicate  that  the  appellant
             wished to adopt the witness statements, I  indicated  that  if
             they were to be relied upon they should first be read  to  the
             appellant. The interpreter agreed to translate them, paragraph
             by paragraph.  He then translated paragraphs 1-22 and, in  the
             main, the appellant confirmed that the contents were  correct.
             He made clear to me that he was not able to remember  some  of
             the dates referred to, and he drew attention to one  error  in
             relation to his siblings; he only had one brother, not two, he
             said that at the moment his sister was in  Sri  Lanka  looking
             after his mother, and his brother was also in Sri Lanka.


         15.   Miss  Benfield  then  made  a  further  application  for   an
             adjournment, on the basis that the  appellant  should  not  be
             asked to continue with  the  exercise  of  going  through  his
             witness statement because it  was  traumatising  him;  he  was
             showing signs of distress. He should not be penalised for  any
             mistakes on the part of his solicitors. She  referred  to  the
             judgments in FP (Iran) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13.


         16.   Miss Mepstead told  me  that  the  further  application  was,
             again, opposed.


         17.  I refused the further application.  No  explanation  had  been
             provided for the fact that signed witness  statements  by  the
             appellant  had  not  been  filed  before  the   hearing.   The
             explanation that the appellant had given about the preparation
             of the statement indicated that he was aware that his  brother
             had provided information  for  a  statement  and,  subject  to
             making clear that he was not able to recall certain dates,  he
             had indicated that he agreed with the contents of paragraphs 1-
             22, with minor exceptions. There was no reason  to  find  that
             the statements did not represent the solicitors' understanding
             of the appellant's case, and they might be  taken  as  putting
             forward his case. I would not ask the interpreter to  continue
             to translate the statements because of  the  distress  to  the
             appellant to which  Miss  Benfield  had  drawn  attention:  an
             adjournment was not warranted."

3.   The judge found that it was  plausible  that  the  appellant  had  been
    warned by the Karuna Group in 2006 about his contacts  with  the  LTTE.
    He attached some weight to the appellant's account of being detained in
    2010.  The appellant's account was not implausible and some support for
    it was provided by Dr Balasubramaniam's report. He considered the  risk
    on return to Sri Lanka on the basis that the appellant was a  supporter
    of the LTTE  in  the  way  that  he  described  and  was  detained  and
    interrogated in 2010 before being released  after  his  father  paid  a
    bribe.  He referred to the country guidance  case  of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2013] UKUT 31 (IAC).  The judge had been provided with  evidence  from
    an attorney-at-law in Sri Lanka, Mr Sivanathan. He gave his  assessment
    of this evidence and the risks on return in the following extract  from
    his determination :

          "61.  In my judgement, little weight is  to  be  attached  to  the
             evidence provided in the letter  from  Mr  Sivanathan  to  the
             effect that an arrest warrant had been issued relating to  the
             appellant.   According  to  that  letter,  'members   of   the
             authorities' came to the appellant's older brother's house  in
             July 2015 looking for the appellant. Mr Sivanathan states that
             he was informed by officials at Batticoloa police station that
              'the authorities are in possession of new evidence connecting
             [the appellant] with  the  LTTE  and  therefore,  there  is  a
             warrant  for  his  arrest  in  place'.    On  that  basis,  Mr
             Sivanathan's letter states that  he  'can  confirm  that  [the
             appellant] is wanted by  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  for  his
             affiliation with the LTTE and therefore, his life would be  in
             danger if he returned to Sri Lanka'.


         62.  I take account of the documentary evidence that Mr  Sivathanan
             was admitted as  an  attorney-at-law  in  Sri  Lanka.   In  my
             judgement that is not in itself a sufficient  reason  to  find
             that the account given in his letter is reliable, in the light
             of the matters set out in the paragraphs below.   I  add  that
             while it may be that he continues to be a member  of  the  Bar
             Association in Sri Lanka, I observe that the certified copy of
             the membership card which was provided shows his  category  of
             membership as 'life member', but records  that  the  card  was
             valid only until 11 July 2015.


         63.  In my judgement, the account given in Mr  Sivanathan's  letter
             is not plausible, having regard to the appellant's account  of
             his activities in Sri Lanka and the  country  guidance  in  GJ
             (Sri Lanka).  By the appellant's account, he in fact played  a
             very  minor  role  in  supporting  the  LTTE.  At  his  asylum
             interview he explained that he would collect food for the LTTE
             through his cricket team, and that the team was 'helping  them
             transport sand for  century  (I  infer,  sentry)  points'  and
             collecting money for them.  He was  a  supporter  but  not  an
             actual member of the LTTE, and did  not  take  part  in  their
             operations.  While I have accepted that it is  plausible  that
             he was detained and interrogated in 2010, which was after  the
             end of the civil war, there  is  nothing  in  the  appellant's
             account to indicate that he would now be of  interest  to  the
             authorities because of his previous links to the LTTE; and  he
             did not claim to have  engaged  in  any  political  activities
             while in the UK.


         64.  The fact that the appellant's activities, viewed  objectively,
             were not such as to explain why he would now be of interest to
             the authorities in Sri Lanka does not necessarily mean that he
             would not now be sought by them.  There  is,  in  theory,  the
             possibility that false information about  his  activities  has
             been given to the authorities that has caused them to seek his
             arrest. However I have no reason to find  that  there  is  any
             real likelihood that this has occurred. Mr Sivanathan's letter
             refers to 'new evidence connecting [the appellant] with LTTE'.
              Yet the country guidance in GJ (Sri Lanka) makes  clear  that
             an individual's past links with the LTTE  are  no  longer  the
             government's concern.  They are relevant only  to  the  extent
             that they are perceived  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as
             indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or
             the Sri Lankan government.


         65.  Further, as noted above, the country guidance is that 'the Sri
             Lankan  authorities'  approach  is  based   on   sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement  with  the  LTTE  during  the  civil  war'.   That
             indicates that the authorities would not now be interested  in
             the appellant, even if someone had provided false  information
             about his former links with the LTTE, unless he was  perceived
             to be a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the
             Sri Lankan government. If such information related to  alleged
             activities in the UK, the authorities would be aware  that  he
             was not in Sri  Lanka,  and  accordingly  they  would  not  be
             looking for him at his brother's home there as asserted in  Mr
             Sivanathan's letter.


         66.  Finally, the documents in the respondent's bundle  included  a
             letter from an individual in Sri Lanka who  described  himself
             as a 'Justice of  Peace',  dated  18  March  2015,  which  was
             shortly before the date of the appellant's  asylum  interview.
             According to that letter, the appellant's  'family  is  facing
             some terrible  problems  here  because  of  [the  appellant]'.
             There is no reference to any such problem in  Mr  Sivanathan's
             letter.  He explains that he was instructed in  late  November
             2015,  and  he  refers  to  an  alleged  attendance   at   the
             appellant's brother's home by members of  the  authorities  on
             11 July 2015.  There is no  reference  to  the  family  having
             faced a terrible problem earlier in the  year.   There  is  no
             other evidence to explain  the reference in the letter  of  18
             March to a terrible problem. In my judgement, no weight is  to
             be attached to that letter and its submission by or on  behalf
             of the appellant is damaging to the credibility of the account
             of the authorities' present interest in him.


         67.  In the light of the matters to which I have referred, I am not
             willing  to  attach  any  credence  to  the  accounts  in   Mr
             Sivanathan's letter of a search  for  the  appellant  and  the
             issue of a  warrant  of  arrest.  I  find  that  even  if  the
             appellant was detained in Sri Lanka in 2010 as he  maintained,
             there is no serious  possibility  that  he  falls  within  the
             categories identified in paragraph 356(7)(a) or (d) of GJ (Sri
             Lanka).


         68.  Miss Benfield referred in her submissions to paragraph  50  of
             MP.  Underhill  LJ  concluded  that  'even  apart  from  cases
             falling under heads (b)-(d) in paragraph  356(7),  there  may,
             though untypically, be other cases (of  which  NT  may  be  an
             example)   where  evidence  shows   particular   grounds   for
             concluding that the government might regard the  applicant  as
             posing a current threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
             single state even in the absence of evidence that  he  or  she
             has been  involved in diaspora activism.  In my judgement,  no
             such grounds have  been shown in relation to the appellant."

4.   The judge went on to find that the  appellant  did  not  qualify  as  a
    refugee and had not established a case for humanitarian protection.  In
    relation to Article 3, the case was put on the basis that there  was  a
    risk arising out of conditions in prison in Sri Lanka  and  because  of
    the appellant's mental health condition.

5.   The judge dealt with these matters and concluded his  determination  as
    follows:

         "72.  In my judgement, I have no reason to find that there  is  any
             reasonable likelihood that the appellant would be  imprisoned.
             Miss Benfield submitted that the Sri Lankan  authorities  have
             particular concerns about those returning to  Sri  Lanka  from
             the UK.  Further, if the appellant were questioned, because of
             his metal health condition there was an increased risk that he
             would be viewed suspiciously, since if he were  questioned  he
             might be unable to  provide  satisfactory  answers  and  might
             therefore be regarded as having dissembled.


         73.  I am not satisfied that there is any serious possibility  that
             the appellant's name would appear on either a 'stop' list or a
             'watch' listed in Sri Lanka. I have not accepted  as  credible
             the evidence that there is  an  arrest  warrant  against  him.
             Paragraph 356 (9) of GJ (Sri Lanka) refers to the  maintenance
             of a computerised intelligence-led 'watch' list. Having regard
             to the limited support which  the  appellant  claims  to  have
             given to the LTTE and the fact that he has not engaged in  any
             pro-Tamil activities in the UK no basis has  been  established
             for a concern that he is now on a 'watch' list or  would  face
             interrogation  in  Sri  Lanka.   I  find  that  there  is   no
             reasonable likelihood that he would face  serious  harm  as  a
             consequence of detention, such as to constitute  a  breach  of
             his rights under Article 3.


         74.  In GJ (Sri Lanka), the Article 3 claim by the third appellant,
             MP, succeeded on the basis  of  his  mental  illness.  He  had
             injuries which were described by one of the medical experts as
             highly consistent with his account of being subjected to  very
             considerable ill-treatment, including being beaten and burned.
              The consultant psychiatrist who examined him referred to  him
             having  severe  post  traumatic  stress  disorder  and  severe
             depression;  he  shows  a  high  degree  of  suicidality   and
             apparently a clear suicidal plan and a  serious  determination
             to kill himself in case he was forced to go back to Sri Lanka.
              The psychiatrist's firm opinion was that if he were deported,
             his already severe mental state would deteriorate further, and
             his already significant suicide risk  would  become  extremely
             high. If he were removed to Sri Lanka, this would cause severe
             mental suffering to him.  Even if there were  adequate  mental
             health services in Sri Lanka, his suspicions of  professionals
             there would be too great to trust them sufficiently to  accept
             any treatment or support, and   it  would  therefore  also  be
             impossible for him to seek out treatment  by  himself  in  Sri
             Lanka.   There  were  limited   facilities   for   psychiatric
             treatment in Sri Lanka; resources were sparse, and limited  to
             cities.  At paragraph 456, the Upper Tribunal  concluded  that
             in the light of the severity of his mental illness, his  claim
             under Article 3 should succeed.


         75.  The evidence does not  indicate  that  the  present  appellant
             suffers from a comparable  severity  of  mental  illness.   Dr
             Balasubramaniam does not provide an opinion on the  degree  of
             risk that the appellant would commit suicide, stating that  it
             was not possible to predict it with any certainty but that the
             incidence  of  suicide  was  higher  in  the  case  of  people
             suffering from PTSD and depression; the risk to the  appellant
             would be reduced if his application for asylum was successful.
             There is no indication that Dr Balasubramaniam considered  the
             risk to be high, or that the appellant's  PTSD  or  depressive
             disorder was severe.


         76.   Further,  according  to  Dr  Balasubramaniam's   report   the
             appellant  needed  to  be  treated  with  antidepressants  and
             cognitive behavioural therapy. Antidepressants  would  provide
             some treatment for both his PTSD and his depressive  disorder.
             I was given no reason to find that antidepressants  would  not
             be available in Sri Lanka, even if he would have difficulty in
             obtaining cognitive behavioural therapy.


         77.  I have  regard  to  the  references  in  GJ  (Sri  Lanka),  at
             paragraphs 450-451, to the test set out in J  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home  Department  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  629  as  to
             threshold in relation to Article 3,  and  the  observation  of
             Sedley in Y (Sri Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 in  relation  to  the  risk  of
             suicide.  Miss Benfield told me that it was accepted that  the
             appellant's claim could not succeed on the grounds of the risk
             of suicide alone. She maintained that the risk of suicide  was
             a factor in the overall assessment of the implications for the
             appellant of being returned to Sri Lanka. I take account of Dr
             Balasubramaniam's opinion, in Section 9  of  his  report  that
             deportation to Sri Lanka is likely to worsen  his  conditions;
             there is no reference to the extent of the deterioration  that
             can be expected.  In  my  judgement,  the  evidence  does  not
             establish that the implications for the appellant's health  of
             his return to Sri Lankan are such that his return would breach
             the UK's obligations under Article 3.


         78.  The appellant also relied on Article 3, on the basis that  his
             private  life  included  his  physical  and  moral   integrity
             including his mental health.  In  that  regard,  I  adopt  the
             approach set out in  Razgar,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27.


         79.  The appellant has been living in the UK since August 2013.  In
             my judgement he is to be regarded as having developed a degree
             of private life here such that his removal would constitute an
             interference with the exercise of his right to respect for his
             private life, with consequences of such gravity potentially to
             engage the operation of Article 8.  Such  interference  is  in
             accordance with the law.


         80.  In considering whether such interference  is  necessary  in  a
             democratic society, and proportionate to the legitimate public
             end sought to be achieved, I find  that  the  relevant  public
             interest is the economic wellbeing  of  the  country,  through
             immigration  control.   Section  117A  of   the   Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requires that, in  considering
             whether an interference with a person's right to  respect  for
             private life is justified under  Article  8(2),  the  Tribunal
             must (in particular) have regard to the  consideration  listed
             in Section 1217B.


         81.  The consideration in Section 117B(1) is that  the  maintenance
             of effective immigration controls is in the  public  interest.
             I have found that the appellant is not entitled to be  granted
             asylum, or humanitarian protection under the Immigration Rules
             and he did not  maintain  that  he  met  the  requirements  of
             paragraph 276ADE(1) of Appendix FM for the grant of  leave  to
             remain on the basis of private or family life in the UK.


         82.  I have regard to the findings by the Upper Tribunal in  Akhalu
             (Health claim: ECHR Article 8) [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC), and  the
             reference at paragraph 46 to the public interest  in  ensuring
             that the limited resources of this  country's  health  service
             are used to the best effect for the benefit of those for  whom
             they are intended. My findings in respect of  the  appellant's
             mental condition, and the likely implications for him of being
             returned to Sri Lanka, in relation to the appeal  by reference
             to Article 3 are relevant also to the  considerations  of  his
             rights under Article 8.  I take account of the evidence as  to
             the limited facilities for psychiatric treatment in Sri Lanka.
              I am not satisfied that there  are  compelling  circumstances
             such as to warrant a grant of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
             provisions of the Immigration Rules. I find  that  removal  of
             the appellant would be a proportionate interference  with  the
             exercise of  his rights under Article 8."

6.   The appellant's appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds were dismissed.

7.   Permission to appeal was applied for and was granted by the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 4 March 2016. The judge found it arguable that the decision
    not to grant an adjournment for  an  addendum  psychiatric  report  was
    unfair, referring to SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State [2011]  EWCA
    Civ 1284 and Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418.  The  refusal  to  adjourn  had
    precluded proper consideration of the Article 3 claim.  The  judge  had
    erred in failing to make clear findings in relation to  the  events  of
    July 2015 and had erred in rejecting the evidence of the attorney.  She
    had adopted too narrow a view of the plausibility of  adverse  interest
    in 2015.  She had not  had  regard  to  the  findings  in  the  country
    guidance case in relation to the returns process having found that  the
    appellant was credible in relation to having  been  an  LTTE  supporter
    between 2002 and 2009.

8.   Miss Benfield relied on the grounds.  In relation  to  the  psychiatric
    reports efforts had been made and, while  it  was  accepted  that  more
    could have been done  by  the  representatives,  the  judge  had  acted
    unfairly, indeed punitively.

9.   The judge had not  found  the  appellant  to  be  a  wholly  incredible
    witness.  Article 3 was in issue and without  a  proper  diagnosis  the
    appeal could not be justly determined.  No clear findings had been made
    on the incident in July 2015.  Clear reasons should have been given for
    rejecting key aspects of  the  appellant's  claim.  The  appellant  had
    provided a clear account and no adequate reason  had  been   given  for
    rejecting the evidence of the attorney regarding the 2015  events.   It
    was implied that the statement was a  false  one.  The  judge  had  not
    properly applied country guidance. The appellant had  accepted  he  had
    been involved with the LTTE and would be questioned about this  and  he
    would be likely to be detained even for a short  period  in  breach  of
    Article 3.

10.  Mr Avery submitted that the judge had set  out   his  reasons  for  not
    agreeing to adjourn the matter. The appeal had already been   adjourned
    once.  More force would be given to the submission  had  the  appellant
    provided an updated medical report  and  no  medical  report  had  been
    provided, even today.  The judge had had a report which was relevant to
    the issues before him and at the hearing today the Upper  Tribunal  was
    none the wiser.  The judge had dealt with all the matters in contention
    although specific reference had  not  been  given  to  the  appellant's
    statement about the events in 2015.  Weight  had  been   given  to  the
    account in 2010.   The judge had dealt with all material aspects of the
    case. He had rejected the attorney's account as not plausible.  He  had
    found that the appellant had not been involved in activities in the  UK
    and there was nothing to suggest that the appellant  would  now  be  of
    interest.  The weight to be given to the letter from the attorney was a
    matter for the judge. The grounds merely  expressed  disagreement  with
    the judge's assessment.

11.  In relation to Article 3 it was said that there would be a risk to  the
    appellant which would be exacerbated by his previous history  with  the
    LTTE.   The appellant had helped the LTTE and supported  the  LTTE  but
    was not a member.  He could be  honest on return and it was commonplace
    that there had been widespread involvement in the LTTE in the north  of
    Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  had  given  careful  consideration   to   the
    appellant's claim as a low level member.

12.  In her reply Counsel reiterated her criticism of the  judge's  findings
    in relation to the letter from the attorney.  The attorney had  written
    the material as a professional person.

13.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved  my  decision.   I  can
    only interfere with the judge's decision if it was infected by an error
    of law.  The first point taken is in relation to  the  refusal  of  the
    application for  the  adjournment  and  I  have  set  out  the  judge's
    treatment of this application in full above.

14.  In my view the judge went into the application and indeed  the  renewed
    application   with   great   care.    He   exercised   his   discretion
    appropriately in my view. It is of course true that a  discretion  must
    be exercised fairly but it does not follow that a refusal to grant   an
    application is unfair. In this case there was  a  history  and  it  was
    clear that opportunity had been given for a report to be  filed.    The
    judge addressed himself to all relevant matters. With hindsight it  can
    be seen  that  an  adjournment  would  not  necessarily  have  achieved
    anything. As was confirmed before me there has  still  been  no  report
    provided.  In my view the judge's decision to proceed was not unfair to
    the appellant.  It was a properly exercised discretion.

15.  It is said that the judge erred in finding the  appellant  credible  in
    relation to aspects of his claim but failed to make clear  findings  in
    relation to the events of July 2015.

16.  I can see no merit in this ground.  The judge gave  full  attention  to
    the  letter  from  the  attorney  and  gave  proper  emphasis  to   his
    professional status in Sri Lanka.  He noted the certified copy  of  the
    membership card relied upon was only valid  until  11  July  2015.   He
    found the account not  plausible  and  gave  satisfactory  reasons  for
    taking that view.  As  Mr  Avery  submitted,  the  grounds  are  simply
    expressions of disagreement with the First-tier Judge's conclusions.

17.  The judge accepted aspects of the appellant's case but not all  of  the
    appellant's case.  His approach throughout was in my view fair.  Having
    accepted one aspect he was not obliged to accept another.  In  my  view
    and with respect there is nothing lacking in  clarity  in  the  judge's
    assessment.  He attached no weight to the evidence about a  search  for
    the appellant and the issue of the arrest warrant. It  is  quite  clear
    that the judge had well in mind the appellant's  witness  statement  to
    which he makes reference during the course of his  decision.    However
    he did not accept the evidence relating to the events in  2015,  as  is
    clearly indicated in the determination and it was not incumbent on  the
    judge to make a further reference to the appellant's witness statement.
    The judge gave full reasons for finding that the  appellant  would  not
    now be of interest and that  the  letter  from  the  attorney  was  not
    plausible in paragraphs 63 to 66 of the  determination.   Paragraph  67
    makes the judge's findings perfectly clear.

18.  In relation to the country guidance the judge again  properly  directed
    himself.  He considered the issue of detention and the submission  that
    on questioning there was an  increased  risk  the  appellant  would  be
    viewed suspiciously - see paragraph 72.  He was entitled to conclude as
    he did in paragraph 73 on the issue of detention.

19.  He explored fully the  impact  on  the  appellant's  mental  health  of
    removal in paragraphs 74  to  77.   I  am  not  satisfied  that  it  is
    established that the judge overlooked or  misdirected  himself  in  any
    material respect during the course of a long and  carefully  considered
    decision. Further, I find no evidence of any unfairness in the  judge's
    approach to the various issues before  him.

20.  For the reasons I have given this appeal is dismissed and the   judge's
    decision is confirmed.

Notice of Decision

21.  Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity Order

   22. The First-tier Judge made an anonymity  order  and  I  confirm  that
       order.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Fee Award

24.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date 3 May 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


