
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06783/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 5th December 2013                          |On 27th January 2014         |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            REHAB ADEL ALY KOTOB
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Collins instructed by Gulbenkiabn Andonian Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Birkby who, in a determination promulgated on the 28th August
        2013, dismissed the appeal on all grounds against the direction for
        the Appellants removal to Egypt which accompanied  the  refusal  of
        her claim for asylum or for permission to remain in the UK  on  any
        other basis.


     2. Permission to appeal was granted on 1st October 2013 and the matter
        comes before me for the purposes of a hearing to establish  whether
        Judge Birkby has made a legal error material  to  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal.



Discussion



     3. The Appellant was born on the 1st April 1972 and is a citizen of
        Egypt.  Her three children are dependants on her claim. Mr Collins
        relied upon the grounds on which permission to appeal was sought
        supplemented by additional submissions.


     4. Paragraph 4 of the grounds alleges the Judge took an overly
        forensic approach the evidence and erred in overlooking or not
        adequately considering the evidence which supported the claim.


     5. In relation to the obligation to evaluate the evidence in asylum
        and human rights appeals, in Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] Imm AR 282
        (approved in R (Sivakumar) v Tribunal HL) the Court of Appeal said
        that decision makers, on the classic principles of public law, are
        required to take everything material into account in asylum
        appeals.  Their sources of information will frequently go well
        beyond the testimony of the applicant and include in-country
        reports, expert testimony and - sometimes - specialist knowledge of
        their own (which must of course be disclosed).  No probabilistic
        cut off operates here: everything capable of having a bearing has
        to be given the weight, great or little, due to it.  What the
        decision makers ultimately make of the material is a matter for
        their own conscientious judgment, so long as the procedure by which
        they approach and entertain it is lawful and fair and provided
        their decision logically addresses the Convention issues.  Finally
        and importantly the Convention issues from first to last are
        evaluative, not factual.  The facts, so far as they can be
        established, are signposts on the road to a conclusion on the
        issues: they are not themselves conclusions.


     6. Judges are often criticised in permission applications for not
        having applied the most "anxious scrutiny" to the evidence but such
        a charge is not made out in this case.  The Judge refers in
        paragraph 13 to the documentary and oral evidence.  At paragraph 32
        the Judge confirms that he has carefully considered the oral
        evidence from the Appellant and her brother in the context of the
        background situation in Egypt and the submissions made. It was only
        after having done so that the findings made in relation to the core
        of the claim are set out in paragraph 33. I do not find it proved
        this is a case in which a Judge has included standard paragraphs
        claiming the evidence was considered, when in fact it was not with
        the required degree of care, as a reading of the determination
        shows the findings made are in accordance with the evidence. Both
        the SEF interview and other material was provided and although not
        specifically stated, it must be the case that the Judge did not
        find that any consistency in the Appellants evidence or its content
        was sufficient to enable him to find in her favour, when
        considering all the evidence in the round.


     7. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge
        provided he considered the evidence with the appropriate degree of
        anxious scrutiny, which I find he did, and gave adequate reasons
        for the findings made, which a reading of the determination again
        demonstrates he did.  It may be that others may disagree with such
        findings or be of the opinion greater weight should have been given
        to others issues when considering whether the evidence
        substantiated the claim, but that is not the correct test to be
        applied at this stage. As Mr Collins observed neither of the
        advocates or myself were at the original hearing and so we are
        guided by the evidence found in the papers and submissions made.
        As I have found the evidence was considered with the required
        degree of care the only possible challenge remaining must be based
        upon an assertion that such findings made on the evidence are
        perverse or irrational.    In R and Others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ
        982 Lord Justice Brooke noted that perversity represented a very
        high hurdle.  It embraced decisions which were irrational or
        unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense.  I find irrationality is
        suggestive of a decision in which the reasons lack sense and are
        without foundation. It has not been shown that such a test is
        arguably met on the facts of this case. The burden is upon the
        Appellant to prove she is entitled to succeed and on the basis of
        the information made available to the Respondent and First-tier
        Tribunal this element of challenge is not made out.  The findings
        made, for the reasons stated, are within the range of those the
        Judge was entitled to make on the evidence.


     8. The grounds contain a number of similar challenges alleging a 'nit
        picking' approach to the findings by reference to paragraph 32 (iv)
        and (v) but again there is no merit in the same in terms of proving
        material error. Disagreement, without more, of the findings made
        does not establish legal error and not is therefore sufficient to
        allow me to find that too high a burden of proof has been applied
        to the case, as clearly it has not.


     9. The grounds also challenge the Judges assessment of the evidence of
        the Appellant's brother which is said to have corroborated her
        evidence.  The Judge found the Appellant to lack credibility and
        her evidence to be "at times implausible, evasive, vague and
        inconsistent." Examples are provided in paragraph 32 (i) to (ix).
        In relation to the evidence of the brother the Judge states at
        paragraph 33 "I do not accept the essentially hearsay evidence of
        her brother who largely was repeating what he had been told".  The
        Appellants brother has been in the UK for some time and a serving
        prison officer since 2006. He does not live in Egypt and has no
        personal knowledge of what has or has not happened there. As a
        result the finding such evidence is hearsay is arguably correct.


    10. In relation to hearsay evidence in the Tribunal, the general rule
        is set out in R (Ullah) v SSHD (CIS 4/12/03) in which the Court of
        Appeal said that the Secretary of State could not be precluded from
        advancing his case on the basis of an interview note between an
        immigration officer and a witness simply because the witness was
        not called and there was no witness statement.  It was evidence,
        albeit hearsay in form, to which the judge was entitled to have
        regard.  The weight to be attached to it was, however, a different
        matter.  In this case Judge Birkby did not feel able to give the
        brother's evidence the weight I am being invited to find he should,
        but that was a matter for the Judge who gave adequate reason for
        findings as he did.


    11. The grounds also challenge the findings made in relation to the
        newspaper. I have seen the original in the file and this evidence
        was clearly considered by the Judge as there is reference to it in
        paragraph 32 (vi) of the determination. The newspaper contains a
        photograph of a person said to be the Appellant's husband together
        with a missing persons report. The Judge noted that the newspaper
        is dated 23rd July 2013 and refers to the Appellant's husband being
        abducted on 4th June 2013 after the Appellant had left for the UK.
        The report was also placed after the Respondent had issued the
        reasons for refusal letter of 4th July 2013. It is noted by the
        Judge that the Appellant was unable to provide an explanation for
        why the report was not placed until 23rd July 2013. Mr Collins
        challenges this conclusion but his argument is, in effect, a
        disagreement with the findings made. I accept that the newspaper
        has not been found to be forgery and may be a reputable source of
        news in Egypt but a genuine document may have content that can be
        found not to be so, provided sufficient evidence exists to support
        such a finding. The evidence considered as a whole was the basis on
        which the Judge found as he did in relation to this aspect of the
        evidence. It was not found to be determinative either way but part
        of the overall assessment of the evidence that led to the adverse
        credibility finding.  It is important to draw a distinction between
        (i) the evidential weight to be attached to a document, which is
        couched in terms of the document's reliability; and (ii) the
        question of whether the document is a forgery.   Where a claimant
        seeks to rely on a document then, in the normal course, the burden
        lies on the claimant to show that it is a document that can be
        relied on.  It does not follow, however, from this exercise that
        the document is a forgery.  There will need to be strong evidence
        before a Judge makes a positive finding that a document is forged.
        It is one thing to decide that, as a piece of evidence, a document
        merits no real weight and is unreliable; quite another to decide
        that it is a forgery.  The fact that a document produced by an
        appellant merits no weight in evidential terms does not necessarily
        taint the rest of the appellant's evidence.  It simply means that,
        as a piece of evidence, the document adds nothing either way.  In
        contrast, a finding that an appellant has actually submitted a
        forged document may seriously taint the general credibility of the
        appeal. In Tanveer Ahmed (Starred) [2002] UKIAT 00439 the Tribunal
        acknowledged the argument that "documents and the information
        contained in them may be either genuine or false; documents may be
        genuine but the information itself may be false; documents may not
        be genuine but the information may nonetheless be true".  The
        Tribunal concluded by stating that "The decision maker should
        consider whether a document is one on which reliance should
        properly be placed after looking at all the evidence in the round".
          A reading of Judge Birkby's determination supports the submission
        this is what he did and so no legal error is proved.


    12. No legal error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on
        all grounds is proved.

Decision

    13. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    14. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I have not been asked to make that order (pursuant to rule 14
        of the Tribunal Procedure       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008). No
        basis for doing so is established on the facts.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27th January 2014












