
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06031/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2015                            |On 10 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                ES (ALBANIA)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision  by  the
    Secretary of State  to  refuse  to  recognise  him  as  refugee  or  as
    otherwise requiring international  or  human  rights  protection.   The
    First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider that it
    is appropriate that the  appellant  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Albania,  whose  date  of  birth  is  7
    November 1998.  He says he left Albania on 6  October  2013  in  a  van
    travelling to Macedonia, and that he arrived in the UK  on  10  October
    2013.  He attended a screening interview for  children  on  30  October
    2013.  By  this  stage,  he  was  being  supported  by  Croydon  Social
    Services.  His last address in his country of origin was  [  ],  Diber.
    He had attended primary school in the village for eight years.  He last
    attended school on 7 January 2013.  His reason for coming to the UK was
    to claim asylum.  He was in a family feud with the B family in Albania,
    and he was frightened that he would be killed by the B family if he was
    returned to Albania.

 3. A witness statement was taken from the appellant and signed by  him  on
    21 November 2013.  In September 2012 his older brother  went  with  his
    uncle to Greece in order to work as a seasonal worker.  His father  had
    only one brother, and he had left their village many years ago to  live
    in the capital of Albania, Tirana.  It was this uncle who was currently
    in Greece with his older brother.  His uncle had a son  called  G.   He
    had remained in Tirana with his mother, whilst his father had  gone  to
    Greece.  On 7 January 2013 the appellant was told by his mother that G,
    who at the time was aged 17, had shot and wounded a  man  called  E  B.
    His parents told him that G had had an argument with E B the day before
    because  E's  pit-bull  terrier  had  attacked  and  bitten  him.   The
    following day, G had confronted E and fired at him three times.  E  was
    badly wounded by two bullets.  The appellant knew that G  had  intended
    to kill E.

 4. After this incident G went into hiding, and the B family wanted revenge
    and so they declared a blood feud.  It took a few  days  before  the  B
    family found out who they were, as they had never had contact with them
    before.  The B family were a very big  family  and  were  wealthy.   He
    thought they owned a big furniture shop.

 5. On 5 June 2013 G was arrested for attempted murder and possession of  a
    firearm.  He had not yet been sentenced.  This did not  satisfy  the  B
    family as E had developed medical problems and could not even walk.  He
    was a 25 year old man who had been left  disabled,  and  the  B  family
    wanted revenge for that.  Furthermore, G had intended  to  kill  E  and
    therefore they had stated they would only be satisfied  when  they  got
    blood from them.

 6. He did not know how his father had been informed that the B family  had
    declared a blood feud against his father and him.  He  understood  that
    the reason why they had declared a blood feud against  his  father  and
    him was that they were the only close members of the family that almost
    killed E.

 7. Although he was very young, his father was very afraid for his  safety.
    Since 7 January 2013 he had not been allowed to go to school,  and  his
    father had kept him at home because he was too scared to let  him  out.
    His father had asked for reconciliation from the B family, but they did
    not accept.  His father was scared, and  so  he  left  at  the  end  of
    January 2013 and he did not know where his father was.

 8. At the beginning of October 2013, people that knew about their problems
    said that strangers had come to the village and asked about his family,
    and wanted their address.  These people were from Tirana.   His  family
    were certain that these people were from  the  B  family,  and  so  his
    mother contacted his maternal cousin.  This  cousin  helped  him  leave
    Albania.

 9. On 8 August 2014 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    to recognise the appellant as a  refugee,  or  as  otherwise  requiring
    international  or  human  rights  protection.   His  degree  of  mental
    development and maturity had been taken into account.  The same  burden
    of proof applied to him as it  would  to  an  adult,  although  greater
    dispensation had been given to him throughout his  asylum  claim  as  a
    result of the understanding that he was a minor and that the problem of
    proof was compounded in the case of children.  The benefit of the doubt
    had been applied more liberally than when dealing with  an  adult.   In
    addition more weight had been given to objective  indications  of  risk
    than to his state of mind and understanding of his situation.   It  was
    considered that at his age he would still have  some  understanding  of
    the situation.

10. He was vague in his answers about the blood feud.  He had been asked to
    state what a blood feud was, and his answers were not  consistent  with
    the background information.  In particular, he said in  interview  that
    it did not matter nowadays if you were a child  or  a  grown  up.   But
    according  to  the  International  Centre  for  Minority  Studies   and
    Intercultural Relations Report of 2004, the Kanun code  did  not  allow
    the murdering of women or children.  So his claim  to  be  at  risk  of
    being a target of his father's blood feud  was  inconsistent  with  the
    background information.

11. He claimed in interview that  his  father  reported  the  feud  to  the
    police.  He was asked what the police had said to his  father,  and  he
    had said he did not know.  He was  asked  if  the  father  had  made  a
    complaint to anyone else, or another member of the police force, and he
    had stated that he did not know.  Due consideration had been  given  to
    his age at the time of this event, but it was consistent that he  would
    not have been told why  the  police  were  unable  to  assist,  as  the
    alternative was that he would have to leave Albania.

12. The refusal letter went on to set out the head note guidance  given  in
    the country guidance of EH (Blood Feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT  00348
    (IAC).  There had been  no  violent  incidents  that  had  taken  place
    between his family and the B family after the initial attack  committed
    by his cousin.  He provided no evidence that any member of the B family
    would be able to locate him anywhere in the country.   He  stated  that
    his father contacted the police about the blood feud,  and  they  would
    not help them.  But the family had not made a complaint about the  lack
    of assistance to a senior police officer, or made a further  report  to
    police outside their local area.  So in line with  sub-paragraphs  (i),
    (ii), (iii) and (iv) of paragraph 6 of EH it was not accepted  that  he
    had outlined a history that would indicate a serious risk to  his  life
    upon return.  It was also noted in paragraph 1  of  EH  the  number  of
    legitimate blood feuds in Albania was few and declining, and there  was
    also state protection as outlined in paragraph 3  of  EH;  and  he  had
    presented no documentary evidence to support his claim of a blood  feud
    as outlined in paragraph 9 of EH.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appellant's appeal came before Judge J D L Edwards sitting  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Richmond Magistrates' Court on 19 November 2014.
     Both parties  were  legally  represented.   The  judge  received  oral
    evidence from the appellant, who relied on a second  witness  statement
    that had been taken from him on 17  September  2014,  as  well  as  the
    contents of his substantive asylum interview and his  original  witness
    statement to which I have made reference earlier in this decision.

14. In his subsequent decision, the judge gave his  reasons  for  rejecting
    the core of the appellant's claim in paragraph 28:

         I will deal first with the credibility of the account given by  the
         appellant.  For a number of reasons I do not find this  to  be  one
         that is credible.  These are as follows:-

          a) Much of what the appellant had to tell me  was  not  from  his
             firsthand knowledge, it was reliant  upon  others,  particular
             his mother, had told him.  This is hardly a satisfactory basis
             for an appeal.

          b) I find it wholly  unacceptable  that  the  appellant's  father
             should have feared for the appellant's safety in January 2013,
             and should not have done anything about  it  then  and  simply
             decamped leaving him in isolation with only his mother to look
             after him.

          c) I do not accept that the whereabouts of the appellant's father
             are still unknown.

          d) The account of the strangers coming to the  village  has  been
             adopted by the appellant in the progress of the appeal from it
             happening in October 2013 to it  happening  continuously  from
             January 2013.  This is not impressive.  I question why  the  B
             [family] would need to make such detailed enquiries about  the
             appellant's address.  That of the family would be well  known.



          e) I do not find it impressive that nothing is known  about  what
             happened to  G  after  his  arrest.   The  press  reports  are
             peculiar in that one is not dated and all make no  mention  of
             the outcome of the case.  In the overall context of this  case
             in the light of the guidance in  EH,  I  am  not  prepared  to
             attach any weight to these items.

          f) The appellant is not the prime target of the B [family].  That
             would be G himself.  His whereabouts are presumably known, and
             that is in prison.  It requires no gift of imagination to  see
             how he could be murdered while in custody.

          g) The appellant told me he was unaware that he was coming to the
             UK.  I find it incredible that his  mother  and  uncle  should
             send him off  on  an  international  journey,  across  Europe,
             without informing him of where he would end up.

Application for Permission to Appeal

15. Mr Collins of Counsel, who  appeared  below,  settled  the  appellant's
    application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   His
    overarching submission was that the judge's findings  in  paragraph  28
    were unsustainable, as the reasoning was  inadequate.   The  judge  had
    failed to consider adequately he was dealing with a child  who  was  of
    course even younger at the date of material events in Albania.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

16. On 22 December  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         Although the appellant may find it  difficult  to  cross  the  high
         threshold appropriate to a  finding  of  irrationality,  the  judge
         arguably failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  and
         failed to take material evidence into account.  Since permission is
         to be granted, all grounds may be argued.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr Bramble  conceded  that  the
    judge had materially erred in law.  As his stance was not determinative
    of the issue before me, I explored with Mr Bramble the  reason  why  he
    gave  this  concession,  and  I  also  explored  with  Mr  Collins  his
    particular objections to each sub-paragraph of  paragraph  28.   Having
    heard from both representatives, I was satisfied that a material  error
    of law was made out such that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should be set  aside  in  its  entirety,  and  the  appellant's  appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.  My  reasons
    for so finding are set out below.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

18. The judge's line of reasoning in  paragraph  28  does  not  display  an
    adequate recognition of the fact that the appellant was only aged 14 at
    the date when the incident triggering the blood feud was said  to  have
    occurred; and that the appellant had remained a  child  throughout  his
    asylum claim.  The judge had not reminded himself that the  benefit  of
    the doubt had to be applied more liberally than when  dealing  with  an
    adult, and that more weight had to be given to objective indications of
    risk than to the appellant's understanding of his situation.

19. While it was open to the  judge  to  proceed  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant  would  have  been   sufficiently   mature   to   have   some
    understanding of his situation, the judge needed to distinguish in  his
    reasoning between matters  which  the  appellant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to know, despite his immaturity, and  matters  in  respect  of
    which the appellant's immaturity might well explain his ignorance, such
    as the current whereabouts of his father.

20. The implication of sub-paragraph (a) is that the appellant's account is
    inherently weak because it is mainly based on what he has been told  by
    a responsible adult  (his  mother),  rather  than  on  his  own  direct
    observation.  While it was open to the  judge  to  draw  a  distinction
    between the probative value  of  direct  evidence  as  against  hearsay
    evidence, the judge needed at the same time to remind himself that  the
    benefit of the doubt should be given more readily to a child.

21. At sub-paragraph (b) the judge failed to take into account the relevant
    country guidance and background evidence on blood feuds.  As an  adult,
    the appellant's father was much more vulnerable to being the target  of
    a blood feud than was the appellant himself.  Indeed, the line taken by
    the respondent in the refusal letter was that  the  appellant  was  not
    vulnerable at all, as he was still a child.  So the appellant's account
    that his father fled, whereas he was left behind in  the  village  with
    his mother, does not lack credibility  for  the  reason  given  by  the
    judge.

22. With regard to sub-paragraph (f), it was open to the judge to find that
    G would be the primary target of the B family; and that his whereabouts
    would be known, which  was  in  prison.   I  deduce  from  the  reports
    downloaded from the internet that G had been arrested by the police  in
    Tirana at the beginning of June 2013 after the Serious Crimes Court  in
    Tirana had issued a  warrant  for  G's  arrest  on  2  April  2013  for
    attempted murder and possession  of  illegal  weapons.   The  SAT  news
    extract of 5 June 2013 states that investigative  materials  have  been
    passed to the district prosecutor's office for  further  investigation,
    and that very soon G is expected to be brought to justice  "to  receive
    his sentence."  The ambiguity inherent in the press report is whether G
    has already been tried and convicted in his  absence;  or  whether  his
    trial has yet to take place.

23. While G would be the primary target in the alleged blood feud,  it  was
    pure speculation on the part of the judge to  say  that  the  B  family
    would be able and willing to exact revenge on G while he was on  remand
    awaiting trial or serving a term of imprisonment. Either way G would be
    in de facto  protective  custody,  and  there  is  no  support  in  the
    background evidence for the proposition that potential victims of blood
    feuds are at risk of being attacked in prison, any more than  they  are
    at risk if they keep themselves in self-confinement outside prison.

24. Although some of the adverse credibility points taken by the judge  are
    sustainable ones, on a holistic assessment I find that  the  judge  has
    not given adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's asylum  claim.
    I find that both parties were deprived of a fair hearing in the  First-
    tier Tribunal, as the judge did not adequately engage with the detailed
    country guidance given in EH, and specifically he did not  address  (a)
    the reasons given in the refusal letter for rejecting the claim  having
    regard to EH,  and  (b)  the  points  in  rebuttal  relied  on  by  the
    appellant's representatives.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that the decision should be set aside in its entirety and remade.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing  at
Taylor House on an agreed hearing date of 15 July  2015,  before  any  judge
apart from Judge J D L Edwards.   None  of  the  findings  of  fact  of  the
previous First-tier Tribunal will be preserved.

The  time  estimate  for  the  hearing  is  three  hours,  and  an  Albanian
interpreter will be required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 2 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
