
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06932/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 8th December 2015                |On: 21st December 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AHH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reza, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on the 20th March 2002.
    He appeals with permission[1] the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Row)[2] to dismiss his appeal against a decision  to  refuse  to
    vary his leave to  remain.  That  decision  followed  the  Respondent's
    refusal to grant the Appellant asylum.

 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim was that he faced  a  real  risk  of
    forced recruitment by the Taliban and/or  punishment  for  refusing  to
    join them that would amount to persecution for reasons of  his  imputed
    political opinion and/or membership of a particular social  group.   He
    claimed that his father was killed in  an  explosion  in  approximately
    2010 and that his mother had been  compelled  to  take  on  work  in  a
    foreign-owned factory. The Taliban had threatened her to  stop  working
    there but she could not give up her only source of income. The  Taliban
    kidnapped the Appellant's brother. Then  his  mother  was  killed.  The
    Appellant's departure from Afghanistan was arranged by a family friend.

 3. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant was only 12 years  old  when
    he arrived in the United Kingdom as an unaccompanied minor.  Asylum was
    refused  on  credibility  grounds,  the  Appellant's   evidence   being
    considered too vague to discharge the burden of  proof.   Discretionary
    Leave was granted in line with the Respondent's policy.

 4. On appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant gave oral  evidence.
    Having heard that evidence, and having referred to his  young  age  and
    the 'benefit of the doubt', the Tribunal made several negative findings
    about the Appellant's evidence.  There was a  discrepancy  as  to  what
    happened after his mother died, specifically who it was  that  returned
    her body to the family home; the Appellant had first  claimed  only  to
    have an aunt who lived far away then that he had an aunt  in  his  home
    village. He has been vague and inconsistent about  who  and  where  his
    grandparents were. The Tribunal considered the "main problem" with  the
    account to be the overall credibility of the story, or rather  lack  of
    it. It was not considered to be credible that the  Taliban  would  have
    any interest in a 12 year old boy, nor that a foreign company would set
    up a sewing factory in an area of Taliban activity,  nor  that  of  the
    employees, only the Appellant's mother would be targeted. The  Tribunal
    questioned why the family friend Mr Zahir would  pay  a  large  sum  of
    money to get the Appellant all the way to the UK: if  the  only  object
    was securing his safety it  would  have  been  far  easier,  safer  and
    cheaper to send him to another village or even  Pakistan.   As  to  the
    question of return, the Tribunal notes that this would be  hypothetical
    since  the  Appellant  was  not  being  removed,  having  been  granted
    Discretionary Leave in accordance with published policy.  The  Tribunal
    did not accept that the Appellant had no family to whom he could  turn,
    found that the Appellant had been less than forthcoming  in  explaining
    what relatives he had and where.

    Error of Law

 5. The grounds of appeal, elaborated in oral submissions by Mr  Reza,  are
    threefold:

      i) The  following  finding  is  contrary  to  the  country  background
         material, and to the accepted findings in, for instance,  HK v SSHD
         [2006] EWCA Civ 1037:

             "The main problem with the appellant's account however is  not
             internal inconsistencies but whether the story as a  whole  is
             credible. It is difficult to see why the Taliban  should  have
             any interest in a 12 year old appellant or  his  14  year  old
             brother"

     ii) There was a material misdirection  in  that  the  Judge  failed  to
         follow the guidance in ST (Child Asylum Seekers) Sri  Lanka  [2013]
         UKUT 292 (IAC) in that the determination only addresses the welfare
         of the child after the asylum matter has been determined.

    iii) There was a failure to give  reasons  for  the  findings  that  the
         Appellant would be met and cared for by his parents.  This  finding
         was contrary to the evidence and speculative.

 6. The appeal was opposed on all grounds by Mr Staunton.

 7. I find as follows.

 8. A finding that it was somehow inherently incredible  that  the  Taliban
    would act with malice towards young teenagers would, I  agree,  fly  in
    the face of the background material which  makes  it  abundantly  clear
    that teenage boys have long faced a risk from such insurgent groups, in
    particular of forced recruitment. Reading the determination  as  whole,
    however, I am not satisfied that the Judge was making a general comment
    about 12 and 14 year old boys. He was doubting why the Taliban would be
    interested in these boys in the context of the claim overall. The point
    was that the Appellant's mother was accused of collaborating  with  the
    enemy by reason of her employment with a foreign owned  firm,  and  she
    was accordingly targeted. I understand the Tribunal, at  paragraph  32,
    simply to be raising a question as to why they  would  then  go  on  to
    target  this  woman's  children.   Moreover  it  is  clear   from   the
    determination that this was but one strand of the credibility  findings
    as a whole. As I have summarised above, the Judge  found  there  to  be
    fundamental discrepancies that went to the core of the claim, and found
    the account overall to lack cohesion and  credibility.  Those  findings
    were made bearing in mind at all times the extremely young age  of  the
    Appellant.

 9. Ground 2 is similarly selective in its analysis of the  decision.   The
    Tribunal does address the matter of the Appellant's age at the  end  of
    the determination but this does not mean that the matter is  overlooked
    in the asylum risk assessment. The fact that  the  Appellant  is  young
    child who requires care is  not  lost  on  the  Tribunal,  which  makes
    specific findings that he would not be returning to Afghanistan  to  be
    on his own: the tribunal expressly finds that he has family members who
    would be able to offer him care and support.

10. That leads to ground 3. Mr Reza contends that the findings  in  respect
    of the Appellant's ongoing links with Afghanistan must be  speculative,
    since there was no evidential basis for  concluding  that  he  had  any
    family members at all there. The point is that the Tribunal  had  given
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's case about the current  state  of
    his family network; for instance  he  had  had  given  three  differing
    accounts as to the aftermath of  his  mother's  murder,  he  had  given
    inconsistent accounts of whether he had an aunt and  where  she  lived,
    and he had given extremely muddled evidence in respect  of  whether  he
    knew his grandparents, whether they were alive of dead and  where  they
    lived. The Tribunal was  entitled  to  reject  that  evidence  for  the
    reasons it gave.  Further it was entitled to infer  from  that  finding
    that the Appellant did in fact have some family to whom he  could  turn
    if he was ever to go back to Afghanistan.  As to  the  suggestion  that
    the Respondent had failed to discharge her  obligations  as  to  family
    tracing, she had not. The refusal letter confirms  that  attempts  were
    made to trace the Appellant's family,  but  on  the  scant  information
    provided by him, no results were found.

    Decisions

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

12. The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           8th December 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 26th August 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Martins
[2] Determination promulgated 5th August 2015

