
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06483/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     vN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Lewis, Counsel instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kainth, promulgated on 22  October  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant asylum.

 2. I have made an anonymity direction, following that which  was  made  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable  that  the  judge's
    findings,  in   particular   at   paragraph   [36],   were   inherently
    contradictory and unclear.  It was also arguable  that  the  judge  had
    given inadequate reasons for his conclusions on  the  Appellant's  LTTE
    activities in Sri Lanka, and on his diaspora activity, and  had  failed
    to have sufficient regard to the background country evidence  filed  by
    the Appellant.

 4. At the hearing I announced that I found that the decision involved  the
    making of a material error of law.  I set the  decision  aside  in  its
    entirety and remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.  My
    reasons are set out below.

Error of law

 5. At the outset of the hearing Mr Lewis stated that he had spoken  to  Ms
    Fijiwala who had acknowledged that there  were  difficulties  with  the
    decision.  Ms Fijiwala accepted that paragraph  [36]  was  problematic,
    and additionally that the judge had not  addressed  the  issue  of  the
    perceived threat which the Appellant  faced,  which  should  have  been
    answered by reference to the cases of GJ and  Others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and MP  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 362.

 6. The relevant part of paragraph [36] states:
         "I do not accept that the Appellant was arrested in the way that he
         has described or that he was  ill-treated.   With  respect  to  the
         final arrest on 8 May  2007  the  Appellant  claimed  that  he  was
         detained at the airport and subjected to torture and only  released
         upon the payment of a bribe made by his uncle.  It is clear  in  my
         judgment that the Appellant's uncle knew influential people  within
         the police force and was able to secure  the  Appellant's  release.
         It is simply not plausible  that  the  Appellant  was  arrested  on
         several occasions and released via the assistance of his uncle  who
         held a position in government.  If this were the  case,  why  would
         the Appellant have been detained in the first instance?"

 7. I find that this is contradictory insofar as the judge does not  accept
    that the Appellant was arrested in the way described, but  also  states
    that it is clear that the Appellant's uncle knew influential people and
    was able to secure the Appellant's release.  If he had found  that  the
    Appellant was not arrested or detained as claimed, it is  contradictory
    to find that the Appellant's uncle was able to secure his release  from
    such detention.  I find that the issue of his arrest, detention and ill-
    treatment goes to the heart of the Appellant's claim.  The judge has on
    the one hand stated that he does not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was
    arrested, but has also found that the Appellant's  uncle  was  able  to
    secure his release.  Given the inherent contradiction,  these  findings
    are not sustainable.

5.   In relation to the failure to deal with the Appellant's  risk  and  the
    perceived threat which he faces, the Appellant's sur  place  activities
    are dealt with in paragraphs [41] and  [42].   This  is  a  very  short
    consideration.  Paragraph [41] states:
         "I note from the evidence upon which the Appellant seeks  to  rely,
         that since arriving in the United Kingdom he  has  participated  in
         pro-Tamil separatist activities.  He has attended a total  of  nine
         demonstrations.  He is a member of the British Tamil's Forum.   The
         latter document does not detail  in  which  way  the  Appellant  is
         involved in pro-Tamil activities and accordingly little weight  can
         be attached to it."

 8. Paragraph [42] refers to a photograph of the Appellant which the  judge
    states is of poor quality  and  from  which  it  was  not  possible  to
    identify any specific individual.

 9. This is the totality of the evidence which is referred to by the  judge
    in relation to the Appellant's sur place  activities,  and  the  threat
    that he faces as a result.  In the grounds of appeal, paragraph [7], it
    was submitted that the judge had failed  to  have  regard  to  relevant
    evidence  about  the  Appellant's   involvement   in   diaspora   Tamil
    activities.  It refers to evidence that the British  Tamil  Forum  have
    been  proscribed  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as   a   terrorist
    organisation, which evidence was before the judge.  It  refers  to  the
    Appellant having made a statement to the  press  as  a  member  of  the
    British Tamil Forum, which was also in the evidence before  the  judge.
    It also refers to a  letter  from  the  International  Centre  for  the
    Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide which shows that  the  Appellant
    has consented that his evidence should be used in prosecutions  against
    Sri Lankan Government and military officials.  There is no  mention  of
    any of this evidence in the decision.  Neither is there  any  reference
    to the witness statement of  Mr  Williamson  which  also  goes  to  the
    Appellant's Tamil diaspora activities.

10. In the absence of consideration of  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    activities in the United Kingdom with the British Tamil Forum,  or  any
    other pro-Tamil separatist activities, it is clear  that  the  decision
    does not involve a full and reasoned assessment of the  threat  to  the
    Appellant on return to Sri Lanka due to his activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As accepted by Ms Fijiwala, the issue of the perceived threat
    faced by the Appellant has not been addressed in  accordance  with  the
    case of GJ & Others.

11. For these reasons, I find that the decision involved the  making  of  a
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of a material error  of  law.   I  set  the
decision aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for remaking.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 2 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
