
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06532/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                          MR PRATHEEPAN NAMASIVAYAM
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Paramjorthy of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 27th August  1985.   He
    appeals against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grimshaw
    sitting at Bradford on 29th June 2015  who  dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  27th  March  2015.
    That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for asylum  and
    remove the Appellant as an illegal entrant by way of  directions  under
    paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 23rd August  2010  as  a
    student and made three applications in succession for leave  to  remain
    which were granted with his leave being extended  until  October  2014.
    The Appellant visited Sri Lanka between 24th May 2013 and 6th July 2013
    and made an application for asylum on 25th July 2013 approximately  six
    weeks after his return to the United Kingdom.

3.   The Appellant  claimed  to  have  a  genuine  fear  of  persecution  if
    returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   He  would  be  adversely  targeted  by  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka on the grounds of his political opinion namely
    his association with the LTTE and more recently with the  Transnational
    Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) in the United  Kingdom.   His  support
    for the LTTE began in 2001 when he was encouraged to become involved by
    his uncle who was a member of the LTTE.  Although the Appellant was not
    a member of the LTTE he assisted in a voluntary capacity from  2001  to
    2009 hiding weapons, collecting  money,  supplying  medical  items  and
    organising events on the LTTE's  behalf  in  the  Jaffna  area.   Since
    arrival in the United Kingdom as a student he had become involved as  a
    volunteer with the TGTE which is perceived by members of the Sri Lankan
    Tamil diaspora as a Government in exile.  He started to attend meetings
    with his uncle in 2012 distributing leaflets and generally helping  out
    in the TGTE's office.

4.   His problems began when he returned to Sri Lanka  in  May  2013  for  a
    holiday and to spend time with his mother who was  ill.   On  30th  May
    2013 he was arrested and detained by the army and  taken  to  a  secret
    army camp where he was beaten and tortured.  He  was  released  on  4th
    July 2013 when his family arranged with an agent for the payment  of  a
    bribe.  He returned to the United Kingdom two days later using his  own
    passport.  The agent arranged for the Appellant  to  pass  through  the
    airport at Colombo unimpeded.  The Appellant provided a letter from his
    father stating that the authorities had been  to  the  family  home  on
    several occasions seeking the Appellant's whereabouts.

The Decision at First Instance

5.   The Judge did not find it reasonably likely that the Appellant  at  the
    age of 16 would have been given the responsibility  of  hiding  weapons
    for  the  LTTE  particularly  as  he  had  no  experience  of  handling
    ammunition.  The Appellant's locality was under the control of the  Sri
    Lankan army and  everyone  would  therefore  be  under  scrutiny.   The
    Appellant would not be given the responsibility of  concealing  weapons
    for nearly seven years.  That  the  Appellant  experienced  no  adverse
    attention from the army after the civil war ended and indeed  was  able
    to leave Sri Lanka in 2010 to study  in  the  United  Kingdom  did  not
    suggest that the Appellant was of any adverse interest to anyone.   The
    Judge did not accept that the Appellant had engaged in  any  sur  place
    activities for the TGTE in the United Kingdom  such  as  to  acquire  a
    political profile which would cause the authorities to act against  him
    in 2013 as he had claimed.

6.   The Appellant supplied a letter from his GP Dr  Raveendran  in  support
    of the claim to have suffered injuries as the result  of  ill-treatment
    whilst in detention.   At  paragraph  28  the  Judge  stated  that  the
    Appellant had described being hit most days  whilst  in  detention  yet
    there was no record of the injuries from the blows  and  beatings  when
    the Appellant attended the GP's surgery on 12th July 2013 barely a week
    after he had escaped from his captors.  The  Judge  asked  rhetorically
    "Surely his injuries must have been visible if they had occurred in the
    manner in which he describes".  There was no record of the burns from a
    heated iron bar which the Appellant claimed to have received when as at
    12th July 2013 they must have been at an early  stage  of  healing  and
    presumably causing the Appellant considerable pain and discomfort.  One
    would have expected to see a report of the examination conducted by the
    GP on 12th July 2013 and the record of the nature  and  extent  of  the
    Appellant's injuries yet  no  such  information  was  produced.   These
    matters caused the Judge to hold considerable doubts about the core  of
    the Appellant's claim.

7.   Even if the Appellant could show that he had scars of around two  years
    old by the time of the hearing (which would place them in the 2013 time
    period) the Judge did not  accept  that  they  were  inflicted  by  the
    authorities  in  Sri  Lanka  in  the  way  the  Appellant  claimed.   A
    psychiatrist, Dr Dhumad, gave his opinion that the Appellant's symptoms
    were consistent  with  exposure  to  a  traumatic  experience  such  as
    torture. The Judge however found it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the
    Appellant's mental health problems could be caused or compounded  by  a
    number of other reasons such as his failure to pay his course fees  and
    complete his studies and the uncertainties surrounding his  immigration
    status.   The  medical  evidence  did  not  amount  to  an  independent
    verification of the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  was  tortured.   The
    Appellant's uncle had simply reproduced in his  evidence  what  he  was
    told by the Appellant and the weight  which  could  be  placed  on  the
    uncle's evidence was very limited.  Following GJ and others (post-civil
    war: returnees) [2013] UKUT 00319 the  Appellant's  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom would not mean that the Appellant had or  was  perceived
    to  have  a  significant  role  in  relation  to  post-conflict   Tamil
    separatism within the Sri Lankan diaspora.   The  Judge  dismissed  the
    appeal.

The Onward Appeal

8.   The Appellant appealed against that decision arguing  that  in  holding
    it was not reasonably likely that the  Appellant  would  be  given  the
    responsibility of handling ammunition the Judge had failed to  consider
    the evidence that the Appellant's uncle was in the  LTTE.   The  person
    who asked  the  Appellant  to  help  the  LTTE  was  a  friend  of  the
    Appellant's uncle and the  Appellant  was  asked  to  engage  in  these
    activities because he was a family member of an LTTE member.  The Judge
    had drawn inferences from the claimed absence of medical  evidence  but
    this was a mistake of fact. The Appellant's GP had noted (in the letter
    to the Appellant's solicitors dated 2nd April 2015) that the  Appellant
    was seen on 12th July 2013 by another doctor in the surgery complaining
    that he, the Appellant had been arrested in Sri  Lanka  and  imprisoned
    between 30th May to 4th July 2013 and was tortured there.  The  GP  saw
    the Appellant on 23rd July 2013 with symptoms of stress and was told by
    the Appellant that the Appellant was beaten and scalded by a  hot  iron
    rod.  There were long transverse impression marks of scalding all  over
    the Appellant's back "which could confirm  the  above  history".   This
    mistake of fact had led  the  Judge  to  make  an  adverse  credibility
    finding against the Appellant such that the determination  was  unsafe.
    Further the Judge had failed to consider  adequately  the  evidence  in
    Professor Lingham's report.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Page on 11th August 2015.  In granting
    permission to appeal he  stated  that  it  was  arguable  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the Judge to make references to the  objective  evidence
    in support of the Appellant's case on the issue of hiding weapons  when
    making her findings.  "Given the dismissive approach which is  evidence
    in the Judge's reasoning it is arguable that  all  of  the  Appellant's
    grounds  of  appeal  are  arguable  before  the  Upper  Tribunal".  The
    Respondent replied to the grant  of  permission  on  21st  August  2015
    stating that the First-tier Tribunal had properly considered  the  oral
    and documentary evidence and had provided detailed and  cogent  reasons
    for its findings.  There was no error of law.

The Hearing before Me

10.  Counsel for the Appellant stated that the missing  GP  record  referred
    to by the Judge in her determination was now available.  This indicated
    that the Appellant had shown his scars to the doctor on 12th July 2013.
     That evidence had not been provided to the  Judge  at  first  instance
    because it had "slipped through the net".  No one  at  the  Appellant's
    representatives had properly dealt with it.

11.  The remaining  grounds  were  based  on  a  challenge  to  the  Judge's
    assessment of the medical evidence.  There was one point which  was  of
    particular  significance  in  this  case.   The  Judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 38 that the uncle had simply reproduced what he was  told  by
    the Appellant could  not  be  further  from  the  truth.   The  pivotal
    paragraph in the Judge's determination was paragraph 21 where the Judge
    had not found it reasonably likely that the Appellant would  have  been
    entrusted with the responsibility for hiding weapons as claimed.   This
    overlooked paragraph 3 of the uncle's statement which referred to a man
    called Gamini who the uncle knew was in  the  LTTE  and  who  knew  the
    Appellant.  The LTTE could trust the Appellant to help them because the
    LTLTE knew the uncle and could confidently ask the  Appellant  to  help
    the LTTE.  The mistake about the  uncle's  evidence  had  infected  the
    Judge's assessment of the plausibility of the assistance  to  the  LTTE
    rendered by the Appellant.  The Appellant was someone with strong  LTTE
    affiliations and this point  was  not  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's finding.  Counsel conceded that the  grounds  could  have  been
    more succinct and focussed on that particular  point  but  the  Judge's
    failure to consider the Appellant's family affiliations with  the  LTTE
    had been pleaded in terms in the grounds of onward appeal.  The  matter
    should be remitted back to the First-tier to be decided again.

12.  In reply the Presenting Officer referred to the  witness  statement  of
    the uncle  dated  25th  June  2015  at  paragraph  3.   That  statement
    confirmed that the uncle knew Gamini.  It did not say  that  the  uncle
    knew that the Appellant assisted the LTTE and noticeably  did  not  say
    what the Appellant was doing for the LTTE.  It was open to the Judge to
    find that the uncle had replicated what the Appellant had said  to  the
    uncle in the statement.  The Appellant was never a member of  the  LTTE
    he had said he was a supporter.  The Judge did not  need  to  take  the
    Appellant's claim at face value but  assessed  what  was  said  in  the
    context of country conditions.  The Appellant was 16 at the time.   The
    LTTE would not take such a risk to give him the material to hide.   The
    uncle had come to the United Kingdom in 1999  whereas  the  Appellant's
    alleged involvement with the LTTE began  two  years  later  from  2001.
    After the civil war ended the  Appellant  remained  in  his  home  area
    without harm.  The absence of medical  evidence  was  damaging  to  the
    Appellant's claim.  The Appellant did not fall within the risk  factors
    set out in GJ.  The Judge  had  taken  the  correct  approach  and  the
    Appellant was not at risk upon return.

13.  In closing for the Appellant it was argued that it could  not  be  said
    that simply because the uncle was  in  the  United  Kingdom  from  1999
    onwards he would not know what the Appellant was doing  in  Sri  Lanka.
    The uncle had confirmed the Appellant's connection with  the  LTTE  and
    how it had come about and that the uncle knew Gamini.  It was not  open
    to the Upper Tribunal to go on a fishing expedition  to  consider  what
    the Judge ought to have said.  The Judge had not  made  clear  what  he
    thought of the Appellant's evidence that Gamini was in the LTTE.

Findings

14.  The appeal in this case is essentially  a  reasons-based  challenge  to
    the decision of the Judge at first instance.  Most of  the  grounds  of
    onward appeal amount to no more  than  a  mere  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's findings.  It was correct for  counsel  for  the  Appellant  in
    submissions to me not to pursue with any vigour  the  point  about  the
    medical evidence.  The Judge could only deal with the medical  evidence
    which was in front of her and that did not  include  a  letter  from  a
    doctor who  might  have  examined  the  Appellant  on  12th  July.   No
    satisfactory reason was given to me why if such a letter existed it was
    not before the Judge at first instance.  What was before the Judge  was
    a report by the Appellant's GP dated 2nd April 2015 that said that  the
    Appellant had "claimed" that he the Appellant had been  imprisoned  and
    tortured in Sri Lanka. The Judge had no evidence before  her  that  the
    Appellant had been examined on 12th July and evidence of torture found.
    It could not be an error of law to fail  to  have  regard  to  evidence
    which was not before her.

15.  It is not clear what Judge  Page  meant  when  granting  permission  to
    appeal by referring to Judge Grimshaw's "dismissive  approach"  to  the
    evidence.  If by his use of the expression "dismissive approach"  Judge
    Page meant that Judge Grimshaw had not properly considered the evidence
    but merely dismissed it out of hand, I consider that to  be  an  unfair
    criticism of the Judge at first instance.  Rather I consider that Judge
    Grimshaw has very carefully analysed the substantial documentation  and
    oral testimony put before her.  If by dismissive  approach  Judge  Page
    merely meant that the Judge had dismissed the appeal then the statement
    takes matters no further.

16.  At the hearing before me one core issue was advanced  that  if  correct
    could arguably lead to  a  conclusion  that  the  Judge's  findings  on
    credibility were infected by a mistake of fact.  The  Appellant  relies
    heavily on the statement of his uncle which is said to explain why  the
    LTTE would trust the Appellant with such an important  task  as  hiding
    weapons. As the Judge pointed  out  the  difficulty  with  the  uncle's
    evidence is that the uncle was not in Sri Lanka at the material  times.
    The uncle must by definition have received information either from  the
    Appellant as the  Judge  surmised,  or  from  an  unnamed  third  party
    (whether Gamini or someone else).  The issue for the Judge was how much
    weight she could place on evidence given to her in such  circumstances.
    Her decision was that little or no  weight  could  be  placed  on  such
    evidence and that was entirely  a  matter  for  her.   The  Appellant's
    argument that the LTTE could trust him at such a young age over such  a
    long  period  in  such  difficult  circumstances  because   of   family
    affiliations to the  LTTE  was  something  of  a  fanciful  explanation
    rejected by the Judge for the reasons she gave (see paragraphs 5  to  7
    above).  The Appellant's search for evidence to support his  contention
    falls flat because the uncle is not in a position to speak from his own
    knowledge of what the Appellant did or did not do  for  the  LTTE.  The
    Appellant's grounds of onward appeal are a mere disagreement  with  the
    Judge's findings but do not disclose any material error of law  in  the
    determination.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 9th day of December 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and the appeal has been  dismissed  and  therefore  there
can be no fee award.


Signed this 9th day of December 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
