
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06661/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 March 2014                              |On 7 April 2014              |
|Prepared 13 March 2014                        |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                     sp

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, of Counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka born  on  5  July  1993  appeals,
    with permission granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Simpson  on
    29 January 2014 against a decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Brenells dated 27 December 2013 in which he dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State, dated 2 July 2013,
    to refuse to grant asylum and to issue removal directions to Sri Lanka.

2.   The appellant was brought up by her uncle who was childless in  Jaffna.
     Her parents and siblings  lived  in  Vanni.   When  her  studies  were
    completed in January 2013 she went to see her parents as her father was
    seriously ill.  Shortly after her arrival soldiers came  to  the  house
    and took her sister away.  Her sister later returned in  tears.   On  4
    February soldiers came to  the  house  and  took  her  sister  and  the
    appellant away.  They were separated.  Her sister was taken outside  by
    a soldier and was raped.  The soldier who  was  keeping  the  appellant
    tried to get her to undress.  She then heard a shot and her sister came
    in holding a gun which caused the soldier to back off.   The  appellant
    ran away running past the dead soldier who had been shot.  She  injured
    herself when she ran and  met  another  girl  and  told  her  what  had
    happened.  That girl called the appellant's uncle and arrangements were
    then made for her to be taken to hospital and then to leave Sri  Lanka.
    She left Sri Lanka, going to India.  Her uncle told the appellant  that
    the army would record that they had arrested two LTTE members  who  had
    then shot two soldiers and escaped and that her life would not be  safe
    if she returned to Sri Lanka.  After five weeks in India the  appellant
    had travelled with the assistance of agents to Britain.

3.   The Secretary of State, in a detailed letter dated 2  July  2013  noted
    the basis of the appellant's claim and her immigration history  and  in
    particular the fact that she appeared unable or unwilling to give  full
    details of her travel to Britain.  In  paragraphs  23  onwards  of  the
    letter of refusal the Secretary of  State  considered  the  appellant's
    story and in effect stated that she had not been able  to  substantiate
    her claim and  that  it  was  not  plausible  that  the  appellant  had
    continued to stay at her parents' house after her sister  had  returned
    after being taken away by the soldiers on the first occasion.   It  was
    not accepted that the appellant and her family were involved  with  the
    LTTE.

4.   It was noted that the appellant had  said  that  her  sister  had  been
    forced to undress and had been raped but  that  that  was  inconsistent
    with her claim that they had been separated and  that  the  appellant's
    sister had been taken outside the house where she was attacked.  As the
    appellant had said that she had not seen her sister since the  incident
    there was no way that she could state that she knew what had  happened.
    Moreover the appellant had  claimed  that  her  sister  had  shot  both
    soldiers who had abducted the appellant but was unable to  explain  how
    or where she had obtained the gun and was unable to say if the soldiers
    were armed.  It was therefore not accepted that the appellant  and  her
    sister had been attacked by two soldiers.

5.   With regard to the appellant's travel from  Sri  Lanka,  it  was  noted
    that the details she gave of whether or not she had been accompanied by
    agents was inconsistent and moreover that she had said that she had had
    no contact with anyone in Sri Lanka and therefore did not know  if  the
    authorities were looking for her or for any other member of her family.
     It was stated it was not  considered  credible  that  the  appellant's
    uncle whom she claimed had treated her like a daughter and taken her to
    hospital after the attack and arranged for her travel to Britain  would
    not maintain contact  with  her  nor  was  it  credible  that,  as  she
    asserted, the person with whom she was living would speak to her  uncle
    on the telephone but would prevent her from doing so on the grounds  of
    safety.  It was thought that if she were genuinely in fear of her  life
    she would have spoken on another telephone or used an alternative means
    of communication to contact her uncle.

6.   Judge Brenells heard the appeal on 13 December  2013.   He  had  before
    him a witness statement from the appellant, one from her guardian, S  A
    and a psychological report by a Dr Rozmin Halari.

7.   In paragraphs 13 onwards he set out his findings  of  "credibility  and
    fact".  He did not accept the reasons why the  appellant  had  gone  to
    visit her parents and considered that if the appellant had done so  and
    was aware that her sister had been raped it lacked credibility that she
    would have remained.  Moreover he  did  not  consider  the  appellant's
    evidence regarding the route and method she took  to  travel  from  Sri
    Lanka to the United Kingdom was credible, placing weight  on  the  fact
    that the appellant had said that she had travelled by boat from Colombo
    to India which had taken about three quarters of an  hour.   He  stated
    that that was not possible.  He also did not consider it credible  that
    she would not have been in contact with her family  since  arriving  in
    Britain.  He criticised the fact that the appellant gave no details  of
    anything that had occurred in Sri Lanka to her  family  after  she  had
    left.  He noted that there were some inconsistencies as to when the two
    soldiers had been shot and he referred briefly to  what  the  appellant
    was recorded as having told Dr Halari.  He found  that  her  story  was
    "highly unlikely".  He stated in paragraph 19:-

         "Having obtained a weapon and killed the first soldier  the  sister
         is then said to have not fled,  but  returned  and  threatened  the
         second soldier.  Since the appellant says  she  heard  the  gunshot
         that must have killed the first soldier it is  most  unlikely  that
         the second soldier would not have also heard the shot and  gone  to
         his colleague's aid or at the  very  least  taken  steps  to  guard
         himself.   Rape  by   Sri   Lankan   soldiers   is   not   unknown.
         Nevertheless, I find it highly unlikely that in an  attempted  rape
         that  the  appellant's  sister  shot  and  killed  two  Sri  Lankan
         soldiers.  The claim that two soldiers were killed  within  minutes
         of each other  and  the  manner  their  deaths  are  said  to  have
         occurred, leads me not to accept that this event occurred."


8.   In paragraph 20 he dealt with the report of Dr Halari.  He wrote:-

         "I have read in detail Dr Halari's report, much of which  is  based
         on information given to him by the Appellant who I find not  to  be
         credible.  I accept that the Appellant has  been  traumatised,  but
         there could be many reasons for this.  Since I do  not  accept  the
         Appellant's story, I do not accept that the cause of her trauma was
         the attempted rape by two  soldiers  who  were  killed  during  the
         incident.  At paragraph 31 of the report Dr Halari states that  the
         doctor who treated  the  Appellant  after  her  overdose  told  the
         Appellant not see a psychiatrist  because  the  Home  Office  would
         reject her application if she did so.   Dr  Halari  is  there  only
         relaying what the Appellant has told him - but she  says  she  took
         the overdose after her application had  been  rejected  and  so  it
         could have no bearing on  the  Home  Office's  consideration.   The
         doctor who is alleged to have given this advice  to  the  Appellant
         must be ascertainable from the  Appellant's  medical  records.   No
         evidence has been obtained from  him  to  support  the  Appellant's
         allegation that such advice was given to her.  I  also  have  noted
         that the Appellant, in response to a question I put to her  at  the
         hearing, stated that she has registered with a GP and is not on any
         medication.  Whilst Dr Halari found that the Appellant is suffering
         from moderate levels of depression, he does  not  indicate  whether
         this level of depression  is  to  be  expected  in  anyone  fearing
         removal after a failed asylum  application.   At  paragraph  56  Dr
         Halari indicates that the Appellant told him she could not speak at
         her interview 'about the rape  or  the  soldiers  because  she  was
         scared this would tarnish her reputation and she feared  that  this
         would affect her future'.  I accept that the Appellant said that to
         Dr Halari, but she gave clear information about  the  rape  of  her
         sister and the attempted rape of  herself  in  the  course  of  her
         interview.  She clearly was prepared to mislead Dr Halari."


9.   In paragraph 21 he said:-

         "If the  Appellant's  account  is  correct,  her  sister  shot  two
         soldiers, killed one and probably killed the other.  Her sister was
         therefore in as much and probably more danger  than  the  Appellant
         was.  The Appellant did not leave Sri Lanka immediately  after  the
         incident yet she offers no explanation as to what happened  to  her
         sister."

10.  In the following paragraph he referred to the risk  factors  identified
    in GJ & Others (post civil war returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC) UKAIT 00049 (?).  He  said  there  was  no  evidence  which
    established the appellant fell into any of the categories of  those  at
    risk.  He therefore dismissed the appeal.

11.  Lengthy grounds were then submitted.  They asserted that the judge  had
    been wrong to find the appellant was not credible  and  said  that  the
    starting point was that the judge had  failed  to  properly  apply  the
    lower standard of proof.  At the hearing before  me  Mr  Turner  stated
    that where the judge had, in paragraph 9 stated that "the burden is  on
    the appellant to show as at  the  date  hereof  there  are  substantial
    grounds  for  believing  that  she  meets  the  requirements   of   the
    Qualification  Regulations...".   He  was  setting  out  an   incorrect
    standard of proof.  The grounds went on to suggest that the  judge  had
    placed undue weight on minor inconsistencies and it was  asserted  that
    the report of Dr Halari "goes some considerable  way  to  corroborating
    her account".  It was stated that the judge had not  properly  assessed
    the report in the round when assessing her  account  and  that  he  had
    considered the report having already made adverse credibility findings.
     It was stated that the conclusion of the judge that the appellant  had
    been attempting to "mislead" Dr Halari was unsupported by reasons.



12.  The grounds went on to argue that the various  findings  of  the  judge
    that the appellant would have been unlikely to have gone to  visit  her
    parents and regarding her departure from Sri Lanka were untrue was  not
    based on any inconsistency or implausibility.  It was claimed  that  if
    the judge had been concerned about these issues that should  have  been
    put to the appellant.  There was nothing, it was  inserted  implausible
    in her account.

13.  It was asserted finally that the  appellant  was  plainly  at  risk  or
    there was  a  real  risk  that  she  was  wanted  as  someone  who  had
    participated in the killing of two Sri Lankan army soldiers.

14.  At the hearing of the appeal Mr  Turner  referred  to  the  grounds  of
    appeal and asserted that the determination did not  indicate  that  the
    judge had considered the appellant's case with  anxious  scrutiny.   He
    stated that the standard of proof was wrong and then  referred  to  the
    report of Dr Halari which he stated  was  detailed  and  had  not  been
    properly evaluated by  the  judge.   He  asserted  that  there  was  no
    detailed analysis of what the doctor had said  and  that  much  of  the
    conclusions the judge had based on speculation.  He emphasised that the
    judge had made his credibility findings before considering the report.

15.  In reply Ms Isherwood stated that there was no error of  law  and  that
    because of the sheer lack of credibility in the  appellant's  claim  it
    was not a decision which should be set  aside.   The  grounds  were  in
    effect, a mere disagreement  with  the  findings  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to make.  She emphasised the lack  of  information  which  the
    appellant was willing to put forward and that the judge was correct  to
    find there was no reason why the appellant should  not  have  contacted
    her family.  She referred to the delay between the alleged incident and
    the appellant leaving Sri Lanka.

16.  Mr Turner in reply raised  issues  which  he  had  not  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal or in his opening submissions to me.  These were  the
    fact that there had been two witnesses in the appeal but the judge  had
    not commented on the  evidence  of  the  second  witness  and  made  no
    findings as to whether or not he was telling the  truth  regarding  his
    inability to contact the appellant's uncle.

17.  In reply Ms Isherwood stated that the judge clearly  had  not  believed
    that witness - he had had before him and had indeed  commented  on  the
    witness's statement and that there was therefore not a  material  error
    when dealing with the evidence.   Moreover,  she  emphasised  that  the
    medical report had properly been considered under the guidelines in the
    determination of the Tribunal in JL  (medical  reports  -  credibility)
    China [2013] UKUT 145 (IAC).

Discussion

18.  This is certainly a brief determination although the  reality  is  that
    the appellant's story is also brief and lacking in detail.

19.  The first issue raised by Mr Turner was that of the standard  of  proof
    used by the judge.  It is  correct  that  when  considering  an  asylum
    appeal as opposed to  an  appeal  under  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  the
    terminology of "reasonable likelihood" or "real  risk"  would  be  more
    appropriate.  Nevertheless the judge has indicated that he was applying
    a lower standard of proof than that of balance of probabilities.

20.  Turning to the findings of fact made  by  the  judge  I  consider  that
    there was little of a moment in his conclusion  that  it  was  unlikely
    that the appellant would have visited her parents and indeed the weight
    he placed on the lack of information about the  appellant's  travel  to
    Britain although I consider that it would have been appropriate for the
    appellant to have been questioned about that at the hearing.

21.  The point raised by Mr Turner at the end of the  hearing  -  one  which
    was not raised in the grounds of  appeal  -  that  the  judge  made  no
    comment on the credibility of the second witness is a matter of further
    concern.  However, the issue which concerns me most is the approach  of
    the judge to the medical report.  I have considered the judgment of the
    Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ  367  which  relates  to  an
    appeal in which an Adjudicator had found the appellant to be incredible
    with regard to his story of ill-treatment in the DRC  before  referring
    to the medical report.  In paragraph 24  of  that  judgment  Wilson  LJ
    states:-

         "It seems to me to axiomatic that a fact-finder must not reach  his
         or her  conclusion  before  surveying  all  the  evidence  relevant
         thereto."

22.  He referred to the judgment in HE (DRC -  credibility  and  psychiatric
    reports) [2004] UKAIT 00321 where the Tribunal had said:-

         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
         credibility the Adjudicator should deal with it as an integral part
         of the findings on credibility rather than just as an add-on, which
         does not undermine the  conclusion  to  which  he  would  otherwise
         come."

23.  Lord Justice Wilson went on to say that the adjudicator in the case  of
    Mibanga had  erred  by  addressing  the  medical  evidence  only  after
    articulating conclusions that  the  central  allegations  made  by  the
    appellant  were  "in  her  extremely   forceful   if   rather   unusual
    phraseology, 'wholly not credible'."

24.  In paragraph 32 of the judgment of Sir Mark Potter,  the  President  of
    the Family Division in SA (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302:-

         "...where  there  is  medical   evidence   corroborative   on   the
         appellant's account  of  torture  or  mistreatment,  it  should  be
         considered as part of the whole package of evidence  going  to  the
         question of credibility and not simply treated as  an  'add-on'  or
         separate exercise or subsequent assessment only after a decision on
         credibility has been reached on the basis of  the  content  of  the
         appellant's evidence or his performance as a witness."

25.  While Sir Mark Potter went on to state that in that  case  what  should
    be looked at is the substance of the  decision.   In  effect,  what  is
    required is that the judge has to look at all  the  evidence  including
    medical and psychiatric reports in the round.

26.  While I have some sympathy for the judge as, on the face  of  it  there
    is much of the appellant's story that lacks credibility the reality  is
    that, as the judge accepted, she has been traumatised in some way and I
    consider that the judge erred in law by not engaging  with  that  issue
    before concluding that the appellant was not credible.  It was his duty
    to consider the appellant's claim holistically rather than to find that
    the appellant was not credible and then to consider the medical report.
     There is also, I consider, the error that he did not make any findings
    on the evidence of the supporting witness.

27.  I therefore consider that it is appropriate that, having  found  errors
    of law in the determination of the First-tier Judge that I  should  set
    aside the decision and further that this appeal should be  remitted  to
    the First-tier for its decision afresh on all issue.  I  consider  that
    the paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President Tribunal's Directions are met
    and that therefore that is the appropriate course of action.

Decision

28.  This appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a hearing afresh.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


