
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06240/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2016                             |On 27 May 2016                    |
|Prepared 9 May 2016                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                           MR Kaveh Mohamad Panahi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O E Duru, instructed by Jemek Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a  national  of  Iran,  date  of  birth  2  April  1979,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to make  removal  directions
    on 8 August 2014.  The appeal against that decision came before  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Devlin  (the  judge)  who  on  26  November  2014
    dismissed the appeal with reference to Refugee Convention, Humanitarian
    Protection and Article 3 ECHR grounds and with reference to  Article  8
    ECHR.  There has been no appeal maintained against the judge's decision
    [D] on the Article 8 ECHR claim nor under the  Immigration  Rules  (the
    Rules) particularly 276ADE of the Rules.

2.   The heart  of  the  attack  upon  the  judge's  decision  lies  with  a
    criticism that the judge had failed  to  give  sufficient  or  adequate
    weight to expert opinion provided by a Mr Rashti  who  had  written  an
    authentication report in respect of the 'document', variously  referred
    to as either a 'warrant' or a 'summons', said  to  be  issued  for  the
    Appellant  to  secure  his  attendance  on  a  given  date;  presumably
    contingent upon being served in time upon the Appellant.  The  document
    does not disclose what was  the  offence  or  matter  that  was  to  be
    addressed.  Any inference that there is reference to criminality simply
    comes from a requirement to present himself at an executive  branch  of
    the Criminal Sentences (Revolutionary Matters) of Mahabad  'to  provide
    an explanation'.  The document  does  not  refer  any  actual  criminal
    proceedings on the face of it.

3.    The  judge,  in  admittedly  very  short  paragraphs,  addressed   the
    Authentication Report from Mr Rashti, which set out his  qualifications
    and experience, made [D 135 to 162]  a  number  of  criticisms  of  the
    document and/or its potential relevance at  all;  bearing  in  mind  it
    relates to an earlier  period  seemingly  unconnected  to  the  alleged
    incidents which the Appellant feared would give rise to risk on return.
     The judge criticised the relevant document and its potential to  be  a
    risk to the Appellant on return to Iran.

4.   Ms Duru amongst other things relied on the judge's finding  that  there
    were certain consistencies in the evidence provided by  the  Appellant.
    Consistency does not of itself establish that the contents are  correct
    but it may go to the reliability and  weight  of  recollection  or  the
    contemporary nature of the documentation.  Be that as it may ultimately
    Ms Duru was driven to argue that a  different  view  should  have  been
    taken by the judge of that evidence.  In the light of the  decision  in
    ER [2004] QB 1044 C.A.  it  seemed  to  me  that  her  criticisms  were
    essentially seeking to re-argue the merits of the claim to be  at  risk
    on return and were a bare disagreement with the judge's view upon  that
    expert evidence.

5.     The judge was of course not bound by the opinion  of  an  expert  but
    when differing from the expert needed to give reasons; which he did.  I
    conclude on a fair reading of the judge's decision  that  he  did  give
    sufficient and adequate reasons why he rejected the document  (warrant)
    for what it  was claimed to be.  In the  circumstances  the  judge  was
    fully entitled to reach the  view  on  risk  on  return,  whatever  the
    Appellant may later have been claiming in relation to  his  involvement
    in anti-government activity, involuntary or  otherwise,  with  PJAK  or
    otherwise involved in crime  such  as  smuggling:  To  do  so  did  not
    disclose any error of law.

6.   The second issue on risk on return was the straight return of a  failed
    asylum seeker to Iran and whether that had been properly considered  in
    the light of the country guidance then in being in BA [2011] UKUT 36 CG
    and in particular SB [2009] UKAIT 00053 CG.

7.   It was accepted by Ms Duru, and therefore the argument was  cut  short,
    that on a return as a failed asylum seeker only the Appellant  was  not
    at risk of harm as claimed.   Thus,  on  the  face  of  it,  absent  of
    positive findings that the Appellant had been involved  in  criminality
    or politically related activities there was no other basis on which  he
    faced a risk on return.  In the light of the evidence Ms Duru confirmed
    that the Appellant had no previous convictions, there was  no  criminal
    record or anything outstanding against  him.  She  said  there  was  no
    knowledge exactly as to what were the nature  of  the  proceedings,  if
    they truly exist, back in 2011 and  2012.  There  was  no  evidence  of
    political activity of  a  kind  likely  to  give  rise  to  an  adverse
    interest.  There was no current evidence of a  continuing  interest  in
    the Appellant.  Similarly, there was no evidence of his being  involved
    in opposition activities against  the  ruling  regime  in  Iran  either
    before or sur place.  In those circumstances  it  is  clear  that  that
    issue of a straight return was not going to give rise to any particular
    interest in the Appellant.

8.    At the start of the hearing, in the light of the possibility that  the
    cases of BA or SB may be reviewed and their weight in country  guidance
    terms reassessed, which remains unknown, I raised  the  point  with  Ms
    Duru. She took instructions and indicated that the Appellant wished the
    hearing to proceed and so no application for an adjournment was made.

9.     I find there is no substance in the grounds  of  appeal  raised.  The
    Original Tribunal made no error of law.


Decision
 The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

Anonymity Order.
No anonymity order was requested and none is necessary.


Signed                                  Date 24 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
