
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06372/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2016               |On 27 October 2016              |
|Prepared on 20 October 2016     |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    B. K.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant claimed asylum in the UK on 13 October 2014,  and  said
       that she had entered the UK illegally three days earlier.  Her  claim
       was based upon her assertion that she was a citizen of  Eritrea,  and
       as such faced a real risk of harm upon removal from the  UK  to  that
       country.
    2. Although the Respondent accepted that the Appellant was a citizen  of
       Eritrea, her asylum application was refused on 26 March 2015,  and  a
       decision was made to remove her  from  the  UK  in  consequence.  The
       Appellant duly appealed that immigration decision and her appeal  was
       in due course heard by First Tier Tribunal Judge Fisher.  The  appeal
       was dismissed in a decision promulgated on 22  January  2016  in  the
       course of which her account of being a Pentecostal Christian, and her
       experiences as such in Eritrea was rejected as untrue. The Judge went
       on to conclude that although  the  Appellant  claimed  to  have  left
       Eritrea illegally at the age of 14 in the company of any aunt,  since
       the Appellant was now the mother of a young child (born on 20  August
       2015) she was exempt from national service, as  indeed  was  conceded
       before him. He concluded that the Appellant did not face a real  risk
       of being required to perform national service, and, that he  was  not
       satisfied she would face any punishment for illegal exit.
    3. The Appellant lodged an application with the First Tier Tribunal  for
       permission to appeal. The application was refused by Judge Lever on 4
       April 2016 on the basis that it was no more than a disagreement  with
       the Judge's findings and identified no  arguable  material  error  of
       law. Undaunted the Appellant renewed the  application  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal, asserting that the Judge had failed to make any finding  on
       whether she had left illegally, and  thus  the  Judge  had  conflated
       punishment for illegal exit with exemption from national service  and
       had thus failed to follow the guidance to be  found  in  MO  (illegal
       exit - risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 190.
    4. That application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on  12
       May 2016.
    5. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 14 June 2016. She  pointed
       out that the Judge's adverse credibility findings were  unchallenged,
       and that it was therefore open to the Judge to  conclude  as  he  had
       (after referring himself to the guidance in MO)  that  the  Appellant
       had not established that she was at any risk of harm upon  return  to
       Eritrea.
    6. The Appellant made no application pursuant  to  Rule  15(2A)  of  the
       Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.
    7. Thus the matter came before me.


  Error of law?
    8. On behalf of the Appellant Ms Brakaj accepted that the Judge had made
       a  series  of  adverse  credibility  findings  in  relation  to   the
       Appellant's evidence, and that he had rejected  her  claim  to  be  a
       Pentecostal Christian as a lie.
    9. Ms Brakaj also accepted, as her  predecessor  before  the  Judge  had
       done, that the Appellant was now  exempt  from  national  service  in
       Eritrea as the mother of a young child.
   10. Although the Appellant had asserted that she had  left  illegally  at
       the age of 14 in the company of an  aunt  leaving  the  rest  of  her
       family behind in  Eritrea,  the  Respondent  had  not  accepted  this
       element of her claim and had pointed to evidence  that  the  Eritrean
       authorities did grant some adolescents exit visas, whilst refusing to
       grant exit visas to entire families.
   11. Ms Brakaj argued that the Judge had made a material error of  law  in
       failing to make a clear finding of fact either that the Appellant had
       left illegally as she claimed,  or  legally  as  the  Respondent  had
       argued it was possible for her to do. She confirmed that this was the
       sole complaint advanced, and although this appeared initially  to  be
       her case she confirmed that she did not pursue  the  suggestion  that
       the Judge had erred by failing to identify evidence in the bundle  of
       documents lodged for the appeal that the  Appellant's  representative
       had not directed him to.
   12. Mr McVeety argued that a proper reading of the decision  led  to  the
       conclusion  that  the  Judge  had  rejected  the  entirety   of   the
       Appellant's  account.  Without  any  reliable  positive  evidence  to
       indicate the circumstances in which the Appellant had left Eritrea it
       followed that there was no  obligation  upon  the  Judge  to  make  a
       finding that she had left illegally, and indeed no proper basis  upon
       which he could have done so.
   13. Furthermore Mr McVeety argued, as the Judge had identified,  but  the
       grant of permission did not, the Appellant had claimed to  have  left
       Eritrea in 2003, and not after 2008. Thus the guidance to be found in
       MO about  the  change  in  attitude  on  the  part  of  the  Eritrean
       authorities to the issue of exit visas since 2006,  and  particularly
       since September 2008, was relevant. Whilst on the Appellant's account
       she left when she was older than the age of 8 it did not  necessarily
       follow from that alone that she must have left illegally.


  Conclusions
   14. In my judgement it is clear from paragraph 23 of the Judge's decision
       that he did not accept the Appellant's claim as to when, or how,  she
       had left Eritrea. He made specific reference to the  guidance  in  MO
       that illegal exit by a person approaching draft age cannot be assumed
       if they have been found wholly incredible, and pointed  out  that  he
       had rejected the Appellant's evidence. It is plain that  he  was  not
       prepared to accept in those circumstances her evidence as to when and
       how she had left. That was a conclusion that was well open to him  on
       the evidence, and one to which he was entitled to come, and for which
       he gave adequate reasons. This was not a case in which the  Appellant
       must have left illegally, whatever the  truth  of  the  rest  of  her
       account of her experiences.
   15. Having reviewed the decision, and the criticisms made of it,  in  the
       light of  the  new  country  guidance  decision  of  MST  and  Others
       (national service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 443 I  am
       satisfied that there is no need to reconvene the hearing for  further
       argument. I am also satisfied that this guidance discloses  no  error
       of law in the Judge's approach to the evidence before him.
   16.  In  the  circumstances,  and  notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
       permission to appeal was granted, the grounds  disclose  no  arguable
       error of law in the Judge's approach to the evidence.  The  Appellant
       has therefore failed to establish that there was  any  error  of  law
       that requires the decision to be set aside and remade.  The  decision
       to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.



  DECISION

  The Decision of the First Tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  22
  January 2016 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
  decision to dismiss the appeal that requires  that  decision  to  be  set
  aside and remade. The decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
  confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

Unless and until the Tribunal directs otherwise  the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him. This direction applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and  to  the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  proceedings
being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 20 October 2016
