
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06538/2013
                                                               AA/07668/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 April 2016                      |On 11 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     YX
                                     DH
                                     HL
                                     GH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms A Radford, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors

Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  respondents.
This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any  failure  to
comply  with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to   contempt   of   court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. By my decision  promulgated  on  13  October  2015  (appended  to  this
    decision), I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").
    I hereby remake the decision of the FtT.

 2. The first respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of China
    born on [ ] 1992. The other respondents are her children, born on  [  ]
    2010, [ ] and [ ] 2015. The claimant is married to a Chinese  national,
    born on [ ] 1982, who has been in the UK since February 2003 and is the
    father of all three of the claimant's children. He made an unsuccessful
    asylum claim over ten years ago and has remained in the UK  ever  since
    notwithstanding the absence of a lawful basis to do so.  He  claims  to
    have an outstanding legacy application with the appellant  (hereinafter
    "the Secretary of the State"). The claimant's husband is not a party to
    these proceedings.

 3. The claimant entered the UK in May 2009 and applied for asylum  shortly
    thereafter. Her appeal was refused and the present appeal  arises  from
    the Secretary of State's refusal letter dated 21 June  2013  which  was
    supplemented by a further letter dated 11 July 2014.

 4. The claimant claims that:

      a. she has a well founded fear of persecution in China because

          i. she is a Roman Catholic member of an unregistered  church  who
             was arrested and ill treated before leaving China; and

         ii. she has three children and therefore is in breach  of  China's
             family planning scheme; and

      b. she and her three children have a family and private life in the UK
         such that their removal to China would be in breach  of  Article  8
         ECHR.

 5. At the error of law hearing I found that the FtT made an error  of  law
    because, in respect of the claimant's asylum claim it   (a)  failed  to
    follow  the  apparently  applicable  country  guidance  cases   of   QH
    (Christians-risk) (China) CG  [2014]  UKUT  86  (IAC)  and  AX  (family
    planning scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC); (b) failed  to  give
    any reasons why it departed from those country guidance cases; and  (c)
    failed to explain why those country guidance cases did not apply to the
    factual matrix in issue.

 6. In respect of the FtT's factual findings, I found that  those  relating
    to the claimant's asylum claim, including  her  religious  affiliation,
    her arrest in and departure from China, and  her  journey  to  the  UK,
    should be preserved.  The FtT did not assess the claimant's  Article  8
    claim and to the extent it made any factual  findings  relevant  to  an
    assessment of the claimant's (and her children's)  family  and  private
    life in the UK they were not preserved.

 7. In remaking this appeal I have kept in mind,  and  applied,  the  lower
    standard of proof applicable in protection claims.

Preserved findings of fact relevant to the claimant's asylum claim

 8. The claimant was born and grew up in Nanjing City in Jiangsu  Province.
    She is an only child who, along with her parents, was a  member  of  an
    unregistered Christian church group that consisted of around 50  people
    and would gather at her house every week. The group was led by a friend
    of her father.  She  would  follow  adult  members  of  the  church  in
    publicising her religion by spreading information in public  every  two
    or three weeks.

 9. In May 2009 a church meeting at her home was interrupted by the  police
    and she, along with other members, including her parents, was arrested.
    She was taken to the police station where she was  separated  from  her
    parents and taken to a Junior Rehabilitation Centre. She was locked  in
    a tiny room and  ill  treated.  The  ill  treatment,  as  described  at
    paragraph 15 of the claimant's witness statement dated 9 January  2014,
    included being slapped, having her hair pulled and being kicked  and  a
    sharp needle being put through the gap between her nail and skin.

10. The claimant was detained for three days. Her release  was  facilitated
    by her uncle but she does  not  know  how.  The  circumstances  of  the
    release were that a person wearing plain  clothes  approached  her  and
    said her uncle was waiting outside and she  should  leave  as  soon  as
    possible. She was taken to a side door and told to run.  She  then  got
    into her uncle's car and was drive to a remote area  where  she  stayed
    for a week on her own. Her uncle arranged for her to leave  China  with
    an agent, who took her to the UK via Turkey, leaving her in China Town,
    London.

Evidence relevant to the Article 8 claim

11. The claimant filed a consolidated bundle of evidence dated  25  January
    2016 along with a supplemental bundle dated 30 March 2016. The  bundles
    include witness statements from four individuals who gave oral evidence
    before me: the claimant, her husband, a youth work team  manager  Peggy
    Jhugroo who has known the claimant since 2009 or 2010, and Xue Wen Pan,
    a pastoral worker at the Chinese Church in London  who  first  met  the
    claimant in October 2009. Apart from Ms  Jhugroo,  the  witnesses  gave
    evidence through an interpreter.

12. In addition, the bundles include witness statements from Nicky  Stoupe,
    who is an  advisor  specialising  in  work  with  unaccompanied  asylum
    seeking children; Sarah Bloom,  who  is  a  manager  at  an  agency  in
    Wandsworth that works with young mothers; Saskia Dodds-Smith, who is  a
    Youth Worker for Wandsworth Council; Mary Walsh,  a  child  minder  who
    knows the claimant's family very well; and David  Yi  Dai,  who  was  a
    pastoral worker at the Chinese Church  until  September  2012  who  has
    known the claimant since 2009.

13. I confirm that in making findings of fact in respect of the  claimant's
    Article 8 claim, I have taken into account the evidence  provided  from
    the aforementioned  nine  witnesses  as  well  as  the  other  evidence
    submitted in support of the claimant's  claim  including,  inter  alia,
    educational certificates relevant to the claimant  and  her  two  elder
    children, letters from the Chinese Church  and  the  claimant's  eldest
    daughter's school.

14. The evidence of the nine witnesses is broadly consistent and is to  the
    effect that:

      a. The claimant and her children are well-integrated into,  and  enjoy
         being a part of, society in the UK. The  claimant  has  made  great
         strides to build her life in the UK. She is  responsible  and  well
         respected  member  of  society  who  provides  good  care  for  her
         children.

      b. The claimant and her children attend an English language church  as
         well as a  Chinese  Church  and  Christianity  is  a  fundamentally
         important part of their lives. The claimant volunteers at a  "Young
         Mum's group".

      c. The claimant's two elder children are in year 1 and nursery,  where
         they are both happy and well integrated, with English  being  their
         first language  (they  understand,  but  are  reluctant  to  speak,
         Mandarin). The child in nursery is hearing  impaired  and  wears  a
         hearing aid. He is  seen  in  school  once  a  month  by  a  speech
         therapist. The  two  elder  children  have  friends  and  socialise
         outside the Chinese community.  Ms  Jhugroo  commented  that  their
         favourite foods are "fish and chips" and "McDonalds".

      d. The claimant has made efforts  to  learn  English  and  ensure  her
         children speak English (despite Chinese  being  the  language  used
         between her and her husband). She does not  limit  herself  to  the
         Chinese community.

      e. The claimant made some efforts, through the Red  Cross  and  letter
         writing, to contact her family in China but has not managed to make
         contact with them.

      f. The claimant finds the notion of having  to  return  to  China  and
         raise her children there devastating and is fearful as to what will
         happen to them. She has also found the appeal  extremely  worrying.
         She has seen her GP about depression and was referred  in  December
         2015 to see a psychologist, with whom (at the time of the  hearing)
         she had had  three  sessions.  Peggy  Jhugroo  describes  seeing  a
         significant deterioration in the  claimant's  mental  health  since
         around December 2015 and thinks she needs hell and support.

      g. The claimant lives with her husband. He states that his  life  with
         his wife and children makes him happy and feel  like  he  has  come
         into his own. In his statement dated 9 January 2014 he states  that
         "watching my children grow and attend school in  this  country  has
         made me very proud and happy".

      h. The claimant's husband states that he will not go to China with his
         wife  and  three  children.  In  cross  examination,  the  claimant
         responded to questions about why her husband would not travel  with
         her to China  by  stating  that  it  was  his  decision.  In  cross
         examination, he said he could not go back to China because  of  the
         risk he faced and that he  was  gathering  more  evidence,  at  the
         suggestion of his solicitors, to make a new asylum application.  He
         said that his solicitors had not told him what evidence to obtain -
         only that he needed some; and that he was trying to obtain  records
         from police in China.

15. The claimant submitted  a  report  dated  18  March  2016  by  clinical
    psychologists Dr Chisholm and Dr Whittaker-Howe. The report  was  based
    on a single assessment which took place  on  16  March  2016,  with  an
    interpreter, lasting approximately three hours.  The  report  describes
    the claimant as having had a significant deterioration  in  mood  after
    her asylum application was rejected and persistent anxiety about  being
    returned to China. The report concludes that based  on  the  claimant's
    self report she meets the  diagnostic  criteria  for  Major  Depressive
    Disorder and that it is highly unlikely she was  malingering,  feigning
    or exaggerating. The diagnosis is  said  to  result  from  her  current
    circumstances and be exacerbated by the lack of controls she  has  over
    her current situation. The  report  also  states  that  the  claimant's
    mental health is impacting on her ability to  care  for  her  children.
    The report states that the children are well  cared  for  and  securely
    attached to their father  and  that  "they  will  be  harmed  from  the
    separation of their father". It concludes that her mental health  "will
    likely worsen if she  is  returned  [to  China],  further  harming  her
    ability to parent and placing her and her children at risk."

16. I have also considered a report by Judith Jones, an independent  social
    worker, dated 22 April 2014 and based on a day spent with the family on
    12 March 2014. An interpreter was required. Inter alia,  she  described
    the claimant  and  her  husband  as  having  a  good  and  affectionate
    relationship and the children being attached  to  them.  She  commented
    that the claimant's husband is the main care giver  with  the  children
    being as attached to their father as to their mother. She described the
    emotional impact of the family being separated as devastating. She said
    she took very seriously the claimant's husband's words  about  what  he
    and his wife mean to each other and that

         "... they fulfil in each other the sense of family which they  have
         both lost. Were they to lose this I would predict that  both  would
         be devastated and this would  impact  on  the  parenting  of  their
         children"

17. Ms Jones is pessimistic about how the claimant would cope with (at that
    time, just two) children in China and it was her "firm" opinion that it
    would cause significant harm if the children were not able to  stay  in
    the UK with both parents. She explained that

         "... the children are at a pivotal stage  in  their  attachment  to
         both parents. Currently all is going well. The consequence of  this
         process being disrupted or broken are very serious indeed."

Findings of fact

18. The following findings of fact are additional to the findings  of  fact
    that have been preserved from the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  described
    above.

19. Having considered  all  of  the  evidence  before  me  (both  oral  and
    written), I find the claimant to be a credible witness who has given an
    accurate description  of  her  family  circumstances  in  the  UK.  The
    evidence  she  has  given  has  been  internally  consistent,  and   is
    consistent with that of the professionals and friends  who  have  given
    evidence in support of her case.

20. I did not, however, find her husband to be a credible witness.  He  was
    evasive and ambiguous when questioned about his immigration status.  In
    his witness  statement  he  refers  to  having  an  outstanding  legacy
    application. The reality of his position, however, is that he  made  an
    unsuccessful asylum application in 2003 and has since remained  in  the
    UK without having a lawful basis to do so. He claims to be planning  to
    make a fresh  application  or  appeal  but  acknowledged,  under  cross
    examination, that his solicitors  told  him  he  did  not  have  enough
    evidence and would need to obtain such evidence (but did  not  indicate
    to him what in fact he would need).

21. The claimant's husband has said he will  not  accompany  his  wife  and
    children to China.

22. The evidence of the independent witnesses  (including  that  of  Judith
    Jones, who is a very experienced social worker who had the  opportunity
    to spend time with the family) is that the  claimant  and  her  husband
    have a close and loving relationship with each  other  and  with  their
    children. When asked why her husband would  not  travel  with  her  and
    their children to China,  the  claimant  responded  that  it  was  "his
    decision". In answering the same question, the claimant's husband  gave
    an  unclear  and  difficult  to  follow  answer   that   talked   about
    difficulties he had in China because of debts his father had accrued in
    his name running a book shop selling restricted books. My understanding
    is that he claims to fear both creditors (because of the debts) and the
    government (because of the books sold in the book shop).

23. The claimant's husband is in the UK unlawfully  and  has  no  right  to
    work. His evidence is that he does not work and spends his time looking
    after his children. Moreover, the expert evidence (which I  accept)  is
    that he is a caring and involved parent who is is strongly attached  to
    his three children.

24. Taking together all of the evidence relevant to the claimant's husband,
    I do not accept he would remain in the UK whilst his family are removed
    to China given that the consequence of this decision would be  that  he
    would be separated from his wife and she would be left having to manage
    three children on  her  own  despite  having  mental  health  problems.
    Knowing that the expert view, as expressed clearly in Ms Jones' report,
    is that the impact on his children of being separated from him could be
    devastating, I do not accept he would stay in  the  UK  (where  in  any
    event he has no legal right to remain) without them.

25. Accordingly, my findings  of  fact  ,  which  supplement  the  findings
    preserved from the FtT decision, are that:

      a. The claimant and her husband have three young children, the  eldest
         of whom was born on 7 August 2010. They are a close and  supportive
         family unit.

      b. If the claimant is removed to China she will  travel  there,  as  a
         family unit, with her husband and three children.

      c. The claimant and her children are well integrated into life in  the
         UK.  The  two  elder  children  attend  school  and  nursery,  have
         friendships with British  children  and  prefer  to  speak  English
         (although understand Mandarin). The  claimant  volunteers  and  has
         built strong and close relationships  in  the  UK  outside  of  the
         Chinese community (as well as within it).

      d. The claimant is extremely worried about returning to China and  the
         outcome of this appeal and this has resulted in  depression  and  a
         recent diagnosis of a Major Depressive Disorder.

      e. The claimant is no longer in contact with her family in China,  not
         having been able to establish contact with them.

Country Guidance Cases relevant to this appeal

26. QH (Christians-risk) (China) CG [2014] UKUT 86 (IAC). This is a  recent
    decision based on  a  wide  range  of  evidence,  as  set  out  in  the
    appendices, including reports from Dr Hancock  and  Professor  Aguilar.
    The headnote to QH states that the risk of persecution  for  Christians
    expressing and living  their  faith  in  China  is  "very  low,  indeed
    statistically negligible". The risk to Christians  who  practice  their
    faith in unregistered house churches is  given  specific  consideration
    and it is found that that there  may  be  a  risk  of  persecution  for
    certain individuals who conduct themselves in such a way as to  attract
    local authorities' attention to them  or  their  political,  social  or
    cultural views.  Consideration is also given to internal relocation  as
    a response to persecution  and  it  was  found  that  the  lack  of  an
    appropriate  hukou  alone   will   not   render   internal   relocation
    unreasonable or unduly harsh.  Notwithstanding  the  finding  that  the
    number of Christians persecuted is very  low,  at  paragraph  [117]  QH
    states that "a fact-specific assessment is necessary in each case where
    a church or individual is said to be experiencing difficulties".

27. AX (family planning scheme) China CG [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC).  In  this
    case, where expert  evidence  by  Professor  Aguilar,  Dr  Sheehan  and
    Professor Hualing was considered, it was found that although in general
    there is no real risk of forcible sterilisation or forcible termination
    in China for a mother of more than one child such  risk  can  arise  if
    there is a crackdown in a returnees "hukou" area.  It  was  also  found
    that it may be possible  to  avoid  the  risk  by  moving  to  a  city.
    Paragraph [14] of the headnote states that, unless  there  is  credible
    evidence of individual pursuit:

         "The country evidence does not indicate a real  risk  of  effective
         pursuit of  internal  migrant  women  leading  to  forcible  family
         planning actions...Therefore, internal relocation will,  in  almost
         all cases, avert the risk in the hukou area"

28. AX recognised that persecution can arise from some of the  consequences
    of breaching family planning rules. At paragraph [176] it states:

         "The requirement to pay for education,  contraception  and  medical
         care does not, without more, amount to persecution,  but  if  there
         are factors individual to the family (such  as,  for  example,  the
         inability of the parents to support themselves because of injury or
         ill health), we accept that it is capable of doing so."

Reports of Dr Sheehan

29. The claimant relies on the expert evidence of Dr  Sheehan.  I  did  not
    hear oral evidence from Dr Sheehan but I have considered  her  detailed
    report dated 16 January 2014 along with her supplemental  reports.  Her
    reports address both the risk arising from the claimant's  practice  of
    Christianity as well as her contravention of family planning rules.

30. Dr Sheehan  has  produced  an  extensive  and  detailed  analysis.  She
    concludes that  the  government  is  intensifying  efforts  to  collect
    information on house  churches  such  that  anyone  connected  to  such
    churches could be targeted and is at an increased  risk  of  detention.
    She expressed disagreement with the  Upper  Tribunal  in  QH,  who  she
    considered had failed to take account of  a  whole  category  of  house
    church classified as "evil cults". At paragraph [6] of her supplemental
    report dated 20 October 2014 she questioned the credibility of  the  QH
    for describing the risk to Christians as  "virtually  negligible".  She
    states that shortly after QH was promulgated  the  Chinese  authorities
    started an extensive campaign against churches in a region that  in  QH
    had been presented as an example of a thriving Christian community.

31. In respect  of  the  claimant's  breach  of  family  planning  law,  Dr
    Sheehan's view was that  the  claimant  would  be  at  risk  of  forced
    sterilisation. She also considered that the claimant would be  required
    to pay a very substantial fine and that internal relocation  would  not
    be an option because of the difficulties  that  this  would  entail  in
    respect of her children. She  considered  that  the  claimant  and  her
    family could become destitute.

Reports of Stephanie Gordon

32. The claimant has submitted a report from Ms Stephanie Gordon  dated  16
    March 2015 along with two supplemental reports (27 January 2016 and  16
    March 2016). Ms Gordon states in her reports that  notwithstanding  the
    recent change in China to a two (rather  than  one)  child  policy  the
    claimant would still be at risk  because  of  her  third  child,  which
    places her in breach of the family planning  rules,  and  would  likely
    face the risk of forced sterilisation as well as the requirement to pay
    a significant "social compensation fee". Being "forced" could take  the
    form of the bureaucratic system effectively  forcing  sterilisation  by
    making access to a hukou for her child conditional on it. In  addition,
    failure  to  pay  the  "fee"  would  give  rise  to  a  risk  of  hukou
    registration for her third child being  withheld,  repeated  detentions
    and freezing of her bank accounts until it was paid. Her child,  denied
    a hukou, would not able to access education  or  obtain  ID  documents.
    Moreover, internal relocation would not avoid the  requirement  to  pay
    the fee.





Other materials

33. The claimant submitted various article and  reports  with  up  to  date
    information on China and I confirm I have  read  and  considered  these
    alongside the reports of Ms Gordon and Dr Sheehan.

Discussion

34. I address firstly the  claimant's  claim  that  she  faces  a  risk  of
    persecution arising from her Christianity.

35. My starting point is to assess her claim in light  of  QH  (Christians-
    risk) (China) CG [2014] UKUT 86 (IAC). I have considered the criticisms
    of QH made by Dr Sheehan but do not accept them. QH is a well  reasoned
    and thoughtfully drafted  decision  where  it  is  apparent  the  Upper
    Tribunal has engaged in detail with a wide range of evidence pertaining
    to the situation for Christians in China. I  am  not  persuaded  by  Ms
    Radford's submissions, based on the arguments made by Dr Sheehan in her
    report, that I should depart from QH, either because it  misinterpreted
    the information before  it  and  thereby  underestimated  the  risk  to
    Christians or because since the decision was  made  the  condition  for
    Christians has substantially, and in a way  that  is  material  to  the
    claimant's claim, deteriorated.

36. QH makes it  clear  that  the  vast  majority  of  Chinese  Christians,
    including members of unregistered churches, do not face a real risk  of
    persecution as a consequence of their religious faith or  practice  and
    are able to worship in communities as they wish to. Indeed, the general
    conclusion in QH is that Christianity is "flourishing" with individuals
    moving freely between State and unregistered churches. The headnote  to
    QH describes the risk to Christians as being  "statistically  virtually
    negligible".

37. However, QH  recognises  that  some  Christians  may  face  a  risk  of
    persecution.  Paragraphs 4(iv) and (v) of the headnote state:

         (iv) There may be a risk of  persecution,  serious  harm,  or  ill-
         treatment engaging international protection for certain  individual
         Christians who choose to worship in unregistered churches  and  who
         conduct  themselves  in  such  a  way  as  to  attract  the   local
         authorities' attention  to  them  or  their  political,  social  or
         cultural views.

         (v)  However, unless such individual is the subject  of  an  arrest
         warrant, his name is on a black list, or he has a pending sentence,
         such risk will be limited to the local area in which the individual
         lives and has their hukou.

38. For the reasons I will now explain, I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  a
   reasonable degree of likelihood that the claimant  will  be  at  risk  of
   persecution on return to China. The risk does not arise from the way  she
   would wish to practice Christianity and manifest her faith in China - the
   claimant practices her religion in a private and  family  orientated  way
   that would not attract the attention of authorities and  which  QH  makes
   clear would not lead to persecution. Rather, the  risk  arises  from  the
   circumstances surrounding her detention in 2009 and the implications this
   has for the likely interest the authorities will have in  her.   Applying
   paragraphs 4(iv) and (v) of the  headnote  to  QH  to  the  specific  and
   particular circumstances of the claimant, I find as follows:

      a. The claimant worshiped in an unregistered church which met  in  her
         house with her father having a senior position in that church.  One
         of the practices in which she engaged  was  going  into  public  to
         spread her beliefs once every two or three  weeks  along  with  the
         adult members of her church, whose lead  she  would  follow.  These
         factors, by themselves, fall significantly short of placing her  at
         risk and do not explain why the authorities would be interested  in
         her.

      b. In 2009 the claimant was arrested along with her family at her home
         whilst a church service was ongoing. She was  then  separated  from
         her family and interrogated and subjected  to  ill  treatment.  The
         claimant does not know why her church (and her family) were singled
         out in this way, which is understandable given her age at the time.
         What is clear is that detention she experienced is not commonplace.
         The evidence from QH does not support it being other than very rare
         indeed  for  someone  with  no  leadership   role   or   particular
         significance in a church (other than being a child of  one  of  the
         leaders) to find herself subjected to detention. The fact  of  this
         detention having taken place (which is a preserved finding from the
         FtT) indicates that the claimant attracted, in a most serious  way,
         the attention of the authorities, although the actual  reasons  for
         this remain unclear.

      c. The circumstances of the claimant's  release  from  detention  were
         highly  irregular.  She  fled  from  detention  (her  uncle  having
         facilitated her  release  by  means  the  claimant  was  unable  to
         explain) and then remained in  hiding,  in  a  remote  area,  until
         leaving China. As the claimant left detention without authorisation
         to do so, it follows that she may be of continuing interest to  the
         authorities as someone who  absconded  or  is  thought  to  possess
         information that remains of interest to the authorities.

39. QH recognises that a person who is subject of an arrest warrant  or  is
    on a black list may be at risk of persecution and unable to avoid  that
    risk by locating internally.  Given  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    claimant left detention, I find there to  be  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that she is subject to an arrest warrant or is otherwise  of
    continuing interest to the authorities.

40. As stated at paragraph [117] of QH:

         "... a fact-specific assessment is necessary in each case  where  a
         church or individual is said to be experiencing difficulties".

41. QH, who was never subject to detention and  ill  treatment.  Given  the
    circumstances of the claimant's detention  and  escape  from  detention
    (which are preserved findings of fact from the FtT)  there  is,  in  my
    view, a real and substantial danger that she is of continuing  interest
    to the authorities and that on return  she  will  be  (a)  at  risk  of
    persecution in her local area; and (b) unable to avoid  persecution  by
    moving to another part of China.

42. Accordingly, the claimant's asylum appeal is allowed.

43. Having allowed the claimant's appeal on the grounds described above, it
    is not necessary for me to consider the other  aspects  of  her  claim.
    However for completeness I note that  I  would  not  have  allowed  her
    asylum appeal had it been brought solely on the basis of  risk  arising
    from having three children  and  thereby  being  in  breach  of  family
    planning laws. It is clear from AX (family planning  scheme)  China  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC) that if the claimant were to face  problems  in
    her local area she could relocate internally. Whilst this would  entail
    difficulties, there are no particular factors in her  case  (where  she
    would have the benefit of travelling with and  receiving  support  from
    her husband) that would elevate these to the level of persecution.

44. I also would not have allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8  had  the
    claimant not succeeded in her asylum claim. In brief: in respect of her
    Article 8 claim, the issue to be determined under the Immigration Rules
    is whether, pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(i)(vi), there would  be  "very
    significant  obstacles"  to  her  integration  into  China.  She  would
    certainly  face  some  obstacles.  These  include  that:  she  will  be
    travelling and will need to start a new life with three young children;
    she suffers from serious depression that affects her ability to  parent
    her children and this may be  exacerbated  given  her  strong  wish  to
    remain in the UK; she may need to relocate internally  having  breached
    the family planning laws; and she may be denied a hukou for one or more
    of her children and face significant financial penalties. On the  other
    hand, she is a Chinese national who has  lived  most  of  her  life  in
    China, speaks Chinese, practices her faith in a Chinese Church  and  is
    married to a Chinese national who would be accompanying her  to  China.
    Weighing  these  factors,  whilst  I  accept  the  claimant  will  face
    difficulties and obstacles, given  in  particular  that  she  would  be
    travelling as a family unit with  her  husband  (who  has  consistently
    provided a caring and supportive role to her and her children) I am not
    satisfied that the "very significant obstacles" threshold is met.

45. In respect of the claimant's Article 8 appeal outside  the  Rules,  she
    (and her children) clearly have a private life  in  the  UK  such  that
    Article 8 is engaged and therefore it is the proportionality  of  their
    removal that is at issue. The best interests of the claimant's children
    are of particular significance in assessing proportionality.  Whilst  I
    accept that their best interests may be to remain in the UK with  their
    parents, there are countervailing factors which suggest their interests
    lie equally in moving to China, so long as it  is  with  both  parents.
    They understand Mandarin, are Chinese citizens and both  their  parents
    are Chinese. They are still at an age  where  their  primary  focus  is
    their parents and above all else their best  interests  are  to  remain
    with both parents. Having regard to the best interest of the  children,
    as well as the mandatory considerations  in  s117  of  the  Nationality
    Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 (none of which assist the claimant),  I
    am satisfied that, were it not for  the  claimant's  successful  asylum
    claim, there would not be compelling reasons to allow the appeal  under
    Article 8 outwith the Rules.





Decision

46. The decision of the FtT promulgated on 28 May 2015  was  set  aside.  I
    substitute a decision whereby I allow the appeal on asylum grounds.
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 5 May 2016                    |

