
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06219/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th May 2016                              |On 7th June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN



                                   Between


                           RAJEEVAN JEEVAGANESHAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Judge  Hosie,  who
    in a determination promulgated on 19 November 2015 dismissed the appeal
    of Mr Jeevaganeshan against  the  respondent's  decision  of  18  March
    refusing his asylum  claim and the decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom to Sri Lanka,.

2.   The challenge to the decision is essentially two-fold  as  set  out  in
    the grounds by Mr Jaisri and the first of these  is  that  the  judge's
    credibility findings were flawed.  In that  regard  there  are  various
    points raised, the main one perhaps I will come onto in a moment. There
    is an argument that a claim by the appellant as to the partial  closure
    of the A9 road lacks plausible reasoning.  There is also  a  contention
    that there was a failure to give any consideration to the  evidence  of
    the witness and references also to the evidential value of letters sent
    by the appellant's mother and the evidence  from  his  lawyer  and  the
    question of whether too much weight was attached to the  fact  that  he
    did not claim asylum as quickly he might have done. And the final point
    is the point concerning the judge's conclusion at paragraph 21 that the
    claim was not credible but followed  by  reference  thereafter  to  the
    medical evidence.

3.   Dealing with the first points which are I think matters that  are  less
    relied by Mr Jaisri and the medical  evidence  point  but  nevertheless
    they are matters that require consideration. I think there is  a  point
    about the lack of reasoning in relation to the road closure, though  it
    is not a major point.

4.   There is the point concerning the witness and Ms  Isherwood  makes  the
    point there that he could say nothing in particular because he  was  in
    the United Kingdom and that is also relevant  to  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to claim asylum at an earlier stage because  he  was  in  the
    country of somebody who knew the procedures well, and I think there  is
    some force in that point.

5.   There is then more force, I think, although  again  it  is  not  a  key
    issue to the letters sent and the evidence from the lawyer, I think  as
    Mr Jaisri says the fact that a  question was raised about the  lawyer's
    letter in the decision letter did not absolve  the  judge  from  giving
    some consideration to them.

6.   But I think the main  concern  is  that  about  the  treatment  of  the
    medical evidence.  The judge considered  the  evidence  essentially  at
    paragraphs 17 to 20 and then said "I do not find the  appellant  to  be
    credible" and then went on to make alternative findings  which  I  will
    come on to as they form the second part of the challenge.  So  he  gave
    consideration to what the position was in respect  of  the  appellant's
    claim and then came on at paragraph 23 to  look  at  the  psychological
    evidence of Dr Dhumad, the diagnosis of PTSD and Dr  Martin's  evidence
    concerning the fact that he may have been harmed by  others  given  his
    analysis of the appellant's scarring, infliction by others by proxy was
    described in the note and the judge took note of all  of  the  evidence
    and the  claim  that  he  had  been  detained  and  tortured  by  state
    controlled agents and did not need to show  that  the  fear  was  well-
    founded.

7.   I think there is real force in the criticism  in  this  regard.   There
    are a number of authorities that have made it  clear  over  the  years,
    Mibanga for example referred to in the grounds, that the evidence needs
    to be considered in the round rather than making a credibility  finding
    and then going on to say "Well it would not make any difference even if
    I had looked at the medical evidence" as it has to be looked at overall
    and perhaps the evidence of Dr Martin in this  regard  is  particularly
    powerful.  He clearly regard to the guidance in the Istanbul  protocol.
    He looked at the scarring carefully and the ways in which it might have
    been inflicted and came to the view he  did,  and  this  needed  to  be
    factored into the credibility evaluation.

8.    So  in  my  judgement  the  credibility  findings  are  flawed  as   a
    consequence.  That might not matter if  the  alternative  findings  are
    sound.  As I say, the judge went on to say "Even  if  I  did  find  him
    credible  I  am  not  satisfied  even  to  the  lower  standard  he  is
    necessarily likely to be a target on return to Sri Lanka."

9.   There is a point picked up by  Judge  Cox  in  granting  permission  to
    which  Mr Jaisri has also  referred  to  about  the  use  of  the  word
    'necessarily' which is a matter of concern.  It does appear to  elevate
    the standard to a higher one  than  that  of  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood or real risk. And then the judge went  on  to  consider  the
    claim.

 10. I think the main problem that I see with this  alternative  finding  is
    really the point that is encapsulated at paragraph 3(2) of the grounds.
    The judge does say that even if he had been detained  and  tortured  by
    state controlled agents he has not shown a well-founded risk. But if it
    were the case that that happened in 2012 then it seems to me  that  the
    judge needed to consider in context  and  more  specifically  from  the
    background evidence whether that could give rise to a real risk,  I  do
    not ignore Ms Isherwood's point that the appellant does not on the face
    of it appear to fall within any of the country guidance factors but  if
    it is accepted that he had been detained and ill-treated as  relatively
    recently as 2012 then there needed to be a more specific  and  detailed
    consideration given  to why it would be nevertheless that he would  not
    face a real risk on return.

11.  So I do not think that the determination is as it  were  saved  by  the
    alternative findings. The flawed credibility findings remain  a  matter
    of concern and are unsafe, and therefore the decision is set aside  and
    will be reheard in my view most appropriately on reconsideration in the
    First-tier Tribunal.  So it will be  remitted  back  to  Hatton  Cross.
    Tamil interpreter.  2 hours time estimate.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              07.06.2016

