
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/06955/2014
                                                               AA/07121/2014
                                                               AA/07122/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2nd November 2015                 |On 10th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                 ALTA CURRI
                                     RnC
                                     RAC
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms L Mair of Counsel instructed by Immigration
                    Advice Service Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Lambert of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 2nd February 2015.

 2. My view is that there should only be one  Appellant,  that  being  Alta
    Curri.  The second and third Appellants are  her  minor  children  born
    26th January 2010 and 26th September 2012  respectively.   Their  names
    and appeal numbers have been added to the First-tier Tribunal  decision
    in manuscript, and permission to appeal was granted, referring  to  all
    three  Appellants,  although  the  second  and  third  Appellants  were
    referred to as being dependants of the first Appellant.

 3. The appeals entered by the second and third Appellants were found to be
    invalid by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Monro in a  decision  dated
    25th September 2014.  There appears to have been no challenge  to  that
    decision, and therefore the second and third Appellants should not have
    been named as Appellants in the First-tier decision.  I  conclude  that
    their position is that they do not have a  valid  in-country  right  of
    appeal, which is the decision that was made by Judge Monro.

 4. The Appellant is a female Albanian citizen born  19th  May  1988  whose
    asylum claim was refused by letter dated 27th August 2014, and  on  1st
    September 2014 a decision was  made  to  remove  her  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 5. The appeal was heard by the FtT on 28th January  2015.   After  hearing
    evidence from the Appellant, the FtT decided that  the  claim  was  not
    credible and the Appellant would not be at risk if returned to Albania.
     The appeal was dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection, and human
    rights grounds.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the Appellant had  claimed  asylum  on
    two grounds, the  first  being  that  she  was  a  victim  of  domestic
    violence, and the  second  being  that  she  was  a  victim  of  sexual
    trafficking.  It was contended that the  FtT  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant had not been physically ill-treated by her husband's  family,
    had neglected to consider that domestic violence is not  restricted  to
    physical  ill-treatment.   Reference  was  made  to  the   Respondent's
    definition of domestic violence as stated in her policy guidance, which
    confirms domestic violence can include but  is  not  limited  to  abuse
    which is psychological, physical, sexual, financial, or emotional.

 7. It was also contended that the FtT had erred in paragraph 9.10  of  the
    decision  by  recording  that  the  Appellant's  counselling  had  been
    initiated by a referral from a social worker, and had  not  taken  into
    account an NHS letter confirming that the Appellant had  been  accepted
    for counselling following an assessment by the NHS.  The  referral  for
    counselling was therefore not accepted  simply  on  the  basis  of  the
    assessment by the social worker.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The Grounds of Appeal assert  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
             approach to the  first  Appellant's  claim  to  have  suffered
             domestic violence.  The determination, it is argued,  suggests
             the judge required evidence of  physical  abuse  before  being
             entitled to find the Appellant was  the  subject  of  domestic
             violence.  Although the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
             Appellant gave a credible account of both being trafficked and
             facing any fear from her husband's family (para  9.11),  there
             were no actual findings of fact relating to the treatment  the
             Appellant claims she received from her husband's  family.   It
             is unclear whether the judge accepted or rejected the evidence
             from the Appellant identified at 9.5 (being upset,  unable  to
             cope, and having  suffered  in  her  in-laws'  house)  or  the
             assertions in the Appellant's  statement  (under  the  heading
             'relationship with husband's family'), although the judge does
             note an inconsistency in respect of the Appellant's ability to
             visit her parents' home (9.6).

         3.   It is arguable that the judge failed to make material findings
             of fact in respect of the Appellant's claimed fear from her in-
             laws, despite rejecting her claim to have been trafficked, and
             that the judge misdirected herself in respect of what needs to
             be proven in order for there to be domestic violence.

         4.   The grounds also contend  that  the  judge  misunderstood  the
             basis of a referral for counselling and  that  this  may  have
             reduced the reliance  she  placed  on  the  medical  evidence.
             Although less meritorious I grant permission on this ground as
             well".

 9. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  contending,  in  summary,  that  the  FtT  had  directed   itself
    appropriately and the grounds amounted to a lengthy  disagreement  with
    the reasoned findings that had been made.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Submissions

11. Ms Mair relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, and in summary submitted that the FtT  had  erred
    by failing to make findings in relation to the domestic abuse which the
    Appellant claimed to have suffered from her in-laws.  This was an issue
    raised in both the witness statements submitted by the Appellant to the
    FtT, and in questions 33-34 of the interview record.

12. It was accepted that there was some reference to domestic  violence  in
    paragraphs 7.2 and 9.5 of the decision, but no material  findings  were
    made.  It was further submitted that the FtT failed to have  regard  to
    the correct definition of domestic abuse, which was not  restricted  to
    physical ill-treatment.

13. It was submitted that the FtT had erred in paragraph 9.10 by indicating
    that the Appellant's counselling had been initiated by referral from  a
    social worker, whereas there had in fact been an NHS assessment.

14. Mr McVeety  relied  upon  the  rule  24  response.   Dealing  with  the
    counselling issue, Mr McVeety pointed out that there was no psychiatric
    report and no counselling report.  The FtT had  not  erred  by  stating
    that the counselling had been  initiated  by  referral  from  a  social
    worker, as this was in fact exactly what had happened.

15. Mr McVeety submitted that the  FtT  had  not  stated  anywhere  in  the
    decision, that domestic violence was restricted to  physical  violence.
    The FtT had considered credibility  in  the  round,  and  explained  in
    paragraph 9.6 why the Appellant was  found  incredible.   In  paragraph
    9.11 the FtT had rejected the core of the account, and reasons had been
    given which were adequate and sustainable.

16. By way of response Ms Mair submitted that  the  most  anxious  scrutiny
    must be undertaken when considering domestic abuse, and  the  reference
    by the FtT in paragraph  9.5  to  a  lack  of  physical  ill-treatment,
    indicated that the FtT was restricting domestic  violence  to  physical
    ill-treatment.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

18. I consider firstly the contention that the FtT failed to make  material
    findings of fact in respect of the Appellant's claimed fear from her in-
    laws, and whether the FtT failed to appreciate the  correct  definition
    of domestic violence.  I  find  no  error  of  law  for  the  following
    reasons.  The FtT decision must be read as a  whole.   The  Appellant's
    account was rejected in paragraph 9.11, and this included rejection  of
    the Appellant's claimed fear from her in-laws.  For ease of reference I
    set out below paragraph 9.11 of the FtT decision;

         '9.11    The cumulative effect of all of the above concerns  as  to
             the credibility of the evidence put forward by  the  Appellant
             is such that I find no substantial grounds for  thinking  that
             the core elements of her account of having been trafficked  to
             the  United  Kingdom  or  having  any  well-founded  fear   of
             persecution from either her own or her  husband's  family  are
             likely to be true'.

19. The FtT gave adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant's  account
    lacked credibility, and these reasons are contained in paragraphs  9.5-
    9.10.  Adequate reasons for those findings are contained  within  these
    paragraphs.

20. The FtT did not restrict the definition of domestic violence to include
    only physical violence.  In paragraph 9.5 the FtT was setting  out  the
    Appellant's account that she was not physically ill-treated,  and  this
    was also referred to in paragraph 7.2 of the decision.  These  findings
    were taken from the Appellant's witness statements, and  her  interview
    record (question 34).  The FtT noted in paragraph 9.6 an  inconsistency
    in the Appellant's account, in that it was  claimed  that  her  in-laws
    would not let her contact anybody, but would allow her to visit her own
    parents and stay for several weeks.

21. In my view the FtT has made it clear that the  Appellant's  account  of
    suffering domestic violence,  which  was  not  restricted  to  physical
    violence, from her in-laws was not accepted.  The FtT did not misdirect
    itself as to what needs to be proved in order for there to be a finding
    of domestic violence.

22.  I  find  no  merit  in  the  contention  that   the   FtT   erred   in
    misunderstanding the evidence as to counselling.  The FtT  recorded  in
    paragraph 9.10 that the medical evidence disclosed no clear  diagnosis,
    and was correct to  find  that  the  counselling  was  initiated  by  a
    referral from a social worker, although following that  referral  there
    was an NHS assessment and counselling commenced.  I find  no  error  on
    this point.

23. In my view the grounds contained within the application for  permission
    to appeal demonstrate a disagreement with the  conclusions  reached  by
    the FtT, but do not disclose an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that  the  decision  must  be  set
aside.  I do not set aside the decision, and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.   There  was  no
request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity  order  is
made.


Signed   Date 4th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 4th November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
