
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06607/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Centre City Tower,         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 11 February 2016                  |On 01 March 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              W M K (zimbabwe)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms R Petersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Boylan-Kemp  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court,
    Birmingham on 4 August 2015) dismissing his appeal against  a  decision
    by the Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him as a  refugee,  as
    otherwise requiring international human rights protection; and  against
    the Secretary of State's concomitant decision to remove him to  the  UK
    as a person subject to administrative removal under Section 10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The First-tier Tribunal did not  make
    an anonymity direction, but in view of the nature  of  the  appellant's
    asylum claim, I consider  it  is  appropriate  that  the  appellant  is
    accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal, but  on  a
    renewed  application  for  permission,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer
    granted permission to appeal on 16  November  2015  for  the  following
    reasons:

         "3.  The grounds of appeal have  been  prepared  by  the  appellant
             himself.  They focus on  the  judge's  findings  [54-58]  that
             there is insufficient evidence that the Zimbabwean authorities
             will be  able  or  inclined  to  link  his  anti-state  online
             presence in the form of  a  pseudonym  with  him.   The  judge
             accepted that the appellant's uncle was involved  in  the  MDC
             [52] in the manner claimed by the appellant  [37].   In  these
             circumstances the judge was obliged to consider whether  there
             is a real risk of the authorities carefully  scrutinising  his
             activities upon return.  The judge was not "persuaded" by  the
             appellant's evidence but  arguably  applied  an  impermissibly
             high burden of proof.  It is also arguable that the judge  has
             given insufficient reasons why a period of two years away from
             Zimbabwe does not amount to "significant absence."

         4.   The judge was well aware of  the  appellant's  studies  at  De
             Montfort University but was concerned as to how the  appellant
             was supporting  himself  [78]  yet  it  is  apparent  that  no
             questions were put to the appellant regarding  this  and  this
             may have arguably caused unfairness."

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. Both parties were legally represented before  Judge  Boylan-Kemp.   The
    appellant's case was that he had approximately 30 siblings.  His mother
    lived in Mozambique, and his father had  moved  to  the  United  States
    where he had died in 2011.  After his father left for the USA  in  1999
    the appellant was looked after by his extended family, living with  his
    Uncle "G" from 2002 until he came to the United Kingdom as a student in
    November 2012.  Uncle G was a member of the United People's Party (UPP)
    and stood as an independent candidate in his local area.  The  UPP  was
    absorbed into ZANU-PF in 2013.  At that point, Uncle G defected to  the
    MDC.

 4. The appellant was educated to A level standard in Zimbabwe.  In 2010 he
    undertook a diploma in French language at the University of Algeria  in
    Algeria.  On 4 November 2012 he came to the UK on a student  visa.   He
    returned to Zimbabwe on 7 July 2013.

 5. On his return, the appellant  said  he  was  immediately  subjected  to
    harassment from unknown persons.  He was denied access to the  communal
    well, he was heckled  in  the  street  on  the  basis  of  his  imputed
    political affiliation, and he received threats of  torture  and  death.
    The harassment was due to his  relationship  with  his  uncle  who  had
    defected to the MDC.  The appellant himself had never had any  personal
    involvement with the MDC.

 6. The appellant also received  verbal  harassment  from  local  villagers
    because they believed him to be gay due to a Facebook  picture  of  him
    being dressed in a high school skirt.  The appellant was not gay.   The
    appellant reported the abuse to the police, but they did not respond to
    his complaint.

 7. On 12 July 2013 a ZANU-PF rally was organised.  The appellant  did  not
    attend the rally,  and  as  a  result  people  attended  his  home  and
    threatened to torture him for being a traitor.  The  following  day  he
    travelled to Harare and stayed  with  a  friend.   The  appellant  then
    returned to his home, and found that it had been burnt to  the  ground.
    He was advised that this had been done by the youth  militia,  who  had
    been looking for him.  So the appellant then flew back to the  UK,  and
    claimed asylum on his arrival in the UK on 24 July 2013.

 8. At the  time  of  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant was  following  a  computer  science  degree  at  an  English
    university.  He had successfully completed his first year, and had just
    entered his second year.

 9. Since being in the UK, the appellant has  started  an  online  petition
    relating to the abduction of a human rights activist  by  the  name  of
    Itai Dzamara.  He had also written a blog under the name of John Smith.
     The appellant's evidence was that the authorities in Zimbabwe would be
    able to trace him through his IP address.

10. On the issue of risk on return, the appellant contended he  would  face
    persecution and risk of death and serious harm  due  to  his  perceived
    political affiliation and his perceived homosexuality.  He would not be
    able to relocate because he was an MDC supporter and there was  a  test
    of allegiance to the ZANU-PF everywhere in Zimbabwe.

11. The judge received oral evidence from the appellant, and he was  cross-
    examined by the Presenting Officer.

12. In  his  subsequent  decision,  the  judge  set  out  his  reasons  for
    dismissing the appellant's asylum claim  at  paragraphs  [34]  onwards.
    The judge addressed in considerable detail  what  he  characterised  as
    differing accounts given by the appellant of  the  incident  where  one
    night a flash mob of 30 to 40 ZANU-PF youth militia passed through  his
    homestead in order to recruit people to an upcoming rally.

13. At paragraph [45], the judge said upon consideration of "these  varying
    accounts", he found the appellant's evidence as to what happened during
    the incident was  inconsistent.   It  had  developed  and  become  more
    personal to him each time he had recounted  the  incident.   The  judge
    found that in his  asylum  interview  it  appeared  that  what  he  was
    describing was an attempt by the youth militia to encourage everyone in
    the locality to attend an upcoming rally and that  their  actions  were
    not directed specifically or personally towards him.   In  his  witness
    statement, his evidence was that the youth militia's appearance at  the
    homestead was directly due to him not attending the rally  and  because
    they believed he was a traitor for not being present.  Then, during the
    hearing, he had given evidence that the group had also made screams and
    chants about his  picture  on  Facebook.   The  judge  found  that  the
    apparent discrepancies in  the  appellant's  account  of  the  incident
    undermined his credibility.

14. The judge went on to discuss in detail the appellant's varying accounts
    of what had happened next.  He concluded, at the end of paragraph [48],
    that the inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence as  to  chronology
    and focus of  "these  incidents"  undermined  the  credibility  of  his
    account.

15. At paragraph [49], he said he had also given weight to  the  fact  that
    despite saying he was attacked and persecuted in his witness statement,
    the appellant's oral evidence was that he was not physically assaulted.

16. At paragraph [50]  the  judge  said  he  was  not  persuaded  that  the
    appellant had come back from Harare to find that his uncle's  home  had
    been destroyed as described, or that, if it had  been  destroyed,  that
    the reasons for the destruction related to him.

17. At paragraph [51], he found not credible the appellant's evidence  that
    he fled to Harare where he  sold  what  possessions  he  had  to  raise
    sufficient monies to travel to the UK and it was at this point that  he
    then decided to return to his uncle's home to collect the  reminder  of
    his possessions.  He did not find it credible that if the appellant was
    in fear of persecution as he asserted, he would have chosen  to  return
    to his uncle's home to collect some  identifiable  belongings  when  he
    already had the money to leave the country without placing  himself  at
    further risk.

18. Overall, whilst he  accepted  the  appellant's  uncle  might  have  had
    involvement with the MDC (although the appellant had not  produced  any
    evidence to substantiate this), he  was  not  persuaded  the  appellant
    himself was persecuted whilst in Zimbabwe.  He found that the appellant
    was not at risk of persecution  on  return  due  to  imputed  political
    opinion through association with his uncle as the uncle was now  living
    in South Africa; and when the appellant was living in Zimbabwe, he  did
    not suffer any physical harm, either actual or attempted.

19. The judge went on to address the  appellant's  sur  place  claim.   The
    appellant said that since arriving in the UK he  had  been  politically
    active via an online blog and Facebook page in the name of John  Smith,
    and that he had been in communication with a controversial  blogger  in
    Zimbabwe.  The appellant had  produced  various  online  materials  and
    screen shots at pages 21 to 30  of  his  bundle  to  substantiate  this
    claimed activity.

20. In evidence-in-chief,  the  appellant  was  asked  how  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities would know that he  was  the  person  responsible  for  the
    petition and blog as he had used a generic name (John Smith) and  there
    was nothing in either of the sources to  link  the  appellant  to  this
    name.  The appellant replied that as he had used the same computer  for
    his university work, the Zimbabwean authorities would be able to  trace
    the online activity through his IP address, and thereby identify him as
    the person responsible for the creation of the petition and  the  blog.
    Under cross-examination the appellant confirmed that he had no evidence
    that the Zimbabwean authorities could use his IP address to  glean  his
    identity.  He had never linked the John Smith account to his own  name,
    and therefore he did not know  how  the  Zimbabwean  authorities  would
    actually link it to him.

21. At paragraph  [57],  the  judge  said  he  was  not  persuaded  by  the
    appellant's evidence or by the submissions of his legal  representative
    that the Zimbabwean authorities had  the  capability  to  discover  the
    identity of an  individual  via  an  IP  address  search,  nor  was  he
    persuaded that the Zimbabwean authorities had been assisted  by  either
    China or Russia in developing this level of online intelligence.

22. On the issue of risk on return, the appellant's  representative  relied
    on CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG  [2013]  UKUT  0059
    for the proposition that the appellant might well find it difficult  to
    avoid adverse attention, amounting to serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-
    PF authority figures and those that  they  controlled,  given  that  he
    would be returning from the United Kingdom after a significant  absence
    to  a  rural  area  of  Zimbabwe,  other  than  Matabeleland  North  or
    Matabeleland South.

23. The judge accepted that the appellant's home in  Zimbabwe  was  not  in
    Matabeleland North or Matabeleland South, but  rather  it  was  in  the
    north east of Harare and  therefore  there  was  a  potential  for  the
    appellant to experience difficulty in his return.   But  he  found  the
    appellant had not had a significant absence from Zimbabwe.  He had been
    in the UK for a relatively short period of just over two  years.   Also
    during this time he had been involved in higher education and therefore
    his time in the UK had an element of legitimacy  to  it.   Furthermore,
    between 2010 and 2011 the appellant had spent time in Algeria, also for
    the purposes of engaging in higher education.  He  had  not  faced  any
    hostility on his return home due to his absence.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

24. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, the appellant relied on a skeleton argument dated 2 February  2016
    and the evidence attached thereto which he had served pursuant to  Rule
    15(2A).

25. In his skeleton argument, he relied on an article dated 11 January 2016
    entitled "20 cops arrested  for  complaining  about  late  salaries  on
    WhatsApp".  The article reported that at least twenty  police  officers
    in Bindura were questioned last week after they  allegedly  made  "bad"
    comments over delayed salaries and bonuses on  a  WhatsApp  group  that
    they had created.  Although not stated in the  article,  the  appellant
    said that it had been  later  revealed  that  a  government  agent  had
    infiltrated the group,  and  this  agent  had  thereby  discovered  the
    content of the WhatsApp communications.  The appellant said that he had
    offered to construct websites on behalf of activists  in  the  UK,  and
    some of them might be wolves in sheep's clothing. Thus  he  might  have
    unknowingly  revealed  his  identity  to  spies  for   the   Zimbabwean
    government.

26. In addition, the university in England which he attended had a distinct
    IP address.  So when he had made anonymous  postings  on  Facebook,  it
    would have been apparent to the reader  that  the  postings  originated
    from this particular university.

27. He had now been four years away from  Zimbabwe,  including  the  period
    from July 2013 to February 2016.  He had spent nine months completing a
    French course in Algeria, not  two  years  as  wrongly  stated  by  the
    respondent.  He had returned from Algeria as a  youthful  20  year  old
    with a valid reason for travel, which perhaps explained why he had  not
    faced any trouble going through immigration on that occasion.   It  was
    also necessary to bear  in  mind  the  cyclical  nature  of  Zimbabwe's
    political violence.  The  Zimbabwe  of  2011,  when  he  returned  from
    Algeria, was different from the Zimbabwe of July 2013, when he returned
    from the UK.

28. In his oral submissions, he confirmed that it was not his case that  he
    could  be  traced  to  an  individual  IP  address.  He  had  used  the
    university's Wi-Fi in order to  post  things  online.   He  had  posted
    messages online for over a month prior to the hearing in the First-tier
    Tribunal.  He indicated to me that he was no longer  engaging  in  such
    activity.  His Facebook account had now been blocked,  so  he  did  not
    have access to it.  He believed that  the  Zimbabwean  government  were
    responsible for closing down his Facebook account.  All his postings to
    Zimbabwean websites were getting removed,  so  he  had  given  up  such
    online activity before his Facebook account was closed.

Discussion

29. The judge correctly directed himself as to the  appropriate  burden  of
    proof in paragraph [10] of his decision, namely that he needed to apply
    the lower standard of proof of "a real risk" as opposed to  the  higher
    standard of proof of the balance of probabilities.   Accordingly,  when
    the judge refers at paragraph [57] to  not  being  "persuaded"  by  the
    appellant's evidence or by the submissions of his legal representative,
    it should be inferred that the judge is applying the lower standard  of
    proof, not an impermissibly higher standard of proof.

30. Having reviewed the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, I
    find there is no merit in the suggestion that the  judge  did  in  fact
    apply an impermissibly high burden  of  proof.   The  judge  has  given
    adequate reasons for finding that the  appellant's  limited  sur  place
    activities did not engender a real risk of persecution on return.   The
    additional evidence that the appellant has since filed with  the  Upper
    Tribunal does not, in my judgment, take matters any further.   It  does
    not retrospectively cast doubt  on  the  soundness  or  safety  of  the
    judge's decision that there was not a  real  risk  that  the  appellant
    would be personally connected with the online activities  in  which  he
    had engaged so as to engender a real risk of him  being  persecuted  on
    that account by state or non-state agents on return to Zimbabwe.

31. The judge gave anxious scrutiny to the question of whether there was  a
    real risk of the authorities carefully scrutinising his activities upon
    return on account of his uncle's involvement with the MDC or on account
    of his absence abroad.  As submitted by Ms Petersen, the judge rejected
    the appellant's account of past persecution on return  to  Zimbabwe  in
    July 2013, and it was therefore entirely logical that  the  apprehended
    risk to the appellant from his uncle's historic  involvement  with  the
    MDC was going to be even less now, as his  uncle  had  moved  to  South
    Africa.

32. The judge's task was to assess risk  on  return  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing (4 August 2015).  It was open to him to find that there was not
    a real risk of the appellant facing  adverse  attention,  amounting  to
    serious ill-treatment, from ZANU-PF authority figures  and  those  whom
    they controlled in the event of a hypothetical return  to  Zimbabwe  in
    August 2015, for the reasons which he  gave  in  paragraph  [62].   The
    error of law challenge by the appellant overlooks  the  fact  that,  in
    addition to the time which he had spent in Algeria, when he returned to
    Zimbabwe in July 2013 he had also spent some eight months  in  the  UK.
    So cumulatively he had spent nearly two years abroad,  but  nonetheless
    he did not encounter, in the light of the judge's primary  findings  of
    fact, hostility amounting to persecution, despite the fact that in  the
    interim his uncle had switched his allegiance to the MDC.

33. Turning to the appellant's alternative claim under Article  8  ECHR,  I
    find there is no unfairness in the  judge's  observation  at  paragraph
    [78] that he had no information as to how the appellant was  supporting
    himself financially in respect of his living costs. The  appellant  had
    the benefit of legal representation and it  was  incumbent  on  him  to
    produce evidence of financial independence, if he  wished  to  rely  on
    this as a positive factor in the proportionality  assessment.   It  was
    not the duty of  the  judge  or  the  Presenting  Officer  to  try  and
    establish whether the appellant was financially independent  by  asking
    him questions as to how he was supporting himself  in  respect  of  his
    living costs.  Furthermore, even if  he  was  financially  independent,
    this was not going to have a significant impact on the  proportionality
    assessment, following AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
