
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06876/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 January 2015                            |On 6 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SONGIDA BEGUM
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw of Counsel, instructed by Lawland
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Miller promulgated on 19  November  2014  allowing  Ms  Begum's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    dated 21  August  2014  to  remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
    consequence of refusing her application for asylum.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Begum  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter  refer  to
    Ms Begum as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.



3.   The Appellant is a national of Myanmar whose date of birth is given  as
    1 January 1984.  Her immigration and personal histories are a matter of
    record and set out in the Respondent's  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter
    ('RFRL') of 21 August 2014 and also summarised at paragraphs  11-13  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  It is unnecessary for  me  to  re-
    rehearse such matters here.

4.   In considering the Appellant's appeal it is  evident  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had regard to  the  seeming  peculiarities  of  the
    Appellant's claimed history that might have undermined her credibility,
    but was ultimately satisfied in respect of  the  explanations  offered,
    and accepted the Appellant's account: see in particular paragraphs  32-
    35.

5.   However,  with  particular  reference  to  the  case  of  AH  (disputed
    nationality - risk on return -  Rohingya  Muslim)  Burma  [2004]  UKIAT
    00085, the Judge concluded that the Appellant had  not  demonstrated  a
    risk of persecution were she to be returned to Myanmar at  the  present
    time: see paragraph 36 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

6.   The Judge did however allow the appeal on  human  rights  grounds  with
    reference to Article 8 private life.  It is this aspect of the decision
    that the Respondent has challenged by way of the grounds in support  of
    the application for permission to appeal.

7.   The basis of the Respondent's  challenge  is  summarised  at  paragraph
    1(a) of the grounds in these terms:

         "It is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has
         materially erred in law  by  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  on
         Article 8 grounds, yet dismissing it  on  asylum  grounds.   It  is
         respectfully submitted that the reasons provided at paragraph 39 of
         the determination for allowing the  appellant's  appeal  are  those
         which are protection based issues  which  fall  under  the  Refugee
         Convention or Articles 2 and 3.  It is respectfully submitted  that
         these  are  issues  which  would  not  fall  into  an   Article   8
         proportionality balancing exercise."


8.   Paragraph 39 of the determination is in these terms:

         "Whilst Section 117B, when applied in this case,  does  not  assist
         the Appellant in any way, the fact still remains that it  would  be
         extraordinarily difficult for her to  return,  as  a  member  of  a
         minority which experiences severe discrimination, to a  land  which
         she has not seen since she was 5 years old.  It is  also  difficult
         to see how she could be removed to Bangladesh, a country where  she
         has no rights of residence at all.  It is in these somewhat unusual
         circumstances, therefore that I have come to  the  conclusion  that
         this appeal should succeed, there  being,  as  I  find,  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules."


9.    The  Respondent's  grounds  otherwise  plead  that  the  findings   at
    paragraph 39 are contradictory  when  compared  with  the  findings  at
    paragraph 36 in respect of the Refugee Convention, and also plead  that
    the Judge erred in the application of section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in that  the  factors  required  to  be
    considered all pointed in an adverse direction yet the Judge reached an
    overall favourable conclusion in the appeal.

10.  In my judgment the difficulty that the Respondent's challenge faces  is
    that it ignores what the First-tier Tribunal Judge said at paragraph 37
    of the determination:

         "With regard to Article 8, however, I  reached  somewhat  different
         conclusions.   Under  paragraph  276ADE(vi),  I  have  to  consider
         whether she has any "ties (including social,  cultural  or  family)
         with the country to which (s)he would have to  go  if  required  to
         leave the UK".  I have no difficulty at all in finding that she has
         no ties whatsoever with Burma/Myanmar which she left when  she  was
         only 5, her family having moved to a refugee  camp  in  Bangladesh.
         She does not, moreover, have a Bangladeshi passport and  I  am  not
         altogether surprised at what she states was the response, when  she
         enquired as to whether it was possible for her to obtain one."


11.  The Respondent's challenge does  not  seek  to  impugn  the  assessment
    under paragraph 276ADE(vi), and Ms Pal today does not seek  to  advance
    any submissions over and above those set out in the grounds of  appeal.
    There being no challenge to the assessment under the Rules, I note that
    paragraph 276BE specifies that limited leave to remain on  the  grounds
    of private life in the UK may be granted for a period not exceeding  30
    months provided that the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE are met.  The appeal therefore fell to
    be allowed under the Rules.   In  those  circumstances  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's application of, and consideration pursuant to, section
    117B of Part 5A of the 2002 Act as amended by the Immigration Act  2014
    was unnecessary.

12.  I note that the terms of Section 117A of the 2002 Act specify:

         "(1) This part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
             question of whether an interference with a person's right to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2)."


13.  I do not understand this to mean that where a case succeeds  under  the
    Rules there is still an additional requirement to have  regard  to  the
    public interest as defined in part 5A of the 2002 Act.  If an applicant
    satisfies the Rules the public interest is of necessity satisfied.  The
    'public interest question' does  not  then  re-emerge  in  a  different
    guise. Ms Pal did not seek to advance an opposing proposition.  In  the
    circumstances, if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  it  was  in
    considering section 117B at all; any error  in  the  way  in  which  he
    considered section 117B cannot undermine his conclusion under paragraph
    276ADE.  In the circumstances I find that the challenge raised  by  the
    Secretary of State in effect misses the point, and  as  such  does  not
    make any difference to the outcome reached by the First-tier Tribunal.

14.  In such circumstances it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  engage  in  the
    substance of the matters raised by the Respondent.  Were it necessary I
    would have been minded to reject the submissions in the grounds  (which
    Ms Pal did not seek to amplify) in any event.  It  seems  to  me  as  a
    matter of principle that where a  particular  factor  falls  under  the
    parameters of a protection claim but falls  short  of  establishing  an
    entitlement  to  protection,  it  is  not  inevitably   excluded   from
    consideration in the context of an  Article  8  claim.   Moreover,  the
    challenge in respect of section 117B is  essentially  premised  on  the
    factors listed thereunder being determinative, whereas  they  are  only
    factors to which the Tribunal "must (in particular) have  regard",  and
    as such as not inevitably determinative.   However  I  reach  no  final
    conclusion on these matters as it is unnecessary.

15.  In all of the circumstances I conclude that the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained  no  material  error  of  law  and  accordingly
    stands.   The  Respondent's  challenge  to  it  is  rejected,  and  the
    Appellant's appeal remains allowed on Article 8  human  rights  grounds
    with reference to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

16.  As an aside I raised the question whether the Secretary  of  State  had
    given any express consideration to the issue of whether  the  Appellant
    had been trafficked.  It is not apparent from the papers,  and  Ms  Pal
    was unable to confirm from her file, if this was the case or  not.   It
    is not for me to express any view on the matter, or indeed to recommend
    that any particular steps now be taken.  However, in light of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's findings consistent with the matters advanced  by
    the Appellant during the course of her interview, it  may  yet  be  the
    case that the Secretary of  State  considers  it  appropriate  for  the
    responsible  section  of  her   Department   to   give   some   further
    consideration to this, particularly if it  might  secure  some  further
    immigration advantage to the Appellant.  Equally  it  is  open  to  the
    Appellant through her representatives to make  further  representations
    in this regard.  I say no further on the matter.

Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  no  material  errors
and stands.

18.  The Secretary  of  State's  appeal  is  dismissed.  Ms  Begum's  appeal
    remains allowed on Article 8 human rights  grounds  with  reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the hearing on 29 January 2015.



Signed        Date: 5 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

