
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06345/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                              mrs Sebie Dogjani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins (Counsel, instructed by Marsh &
Partners Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania.  She appeals against a  decision
    and reasons of the FtT (Judge Grice) promulgated on 2 November 2015  in
    which the appeal was dismissed on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and
    human rights grounds.

Background

2.   The appellant has two dependent children born on 25 March 2013  and  18
    October 2014 who are also Albanian nationals.  She entered the UK in or
    about May 2012 and claimed asylum on 23 February 2013.   The  basis  of
    her claim was that she was a victim of domestic  violence  from  family
    members, following her marriage in Albania to  Mr  Dogjani  and  having
    failed to enter into a marriage arranged by her family.   There  was  a
    suggestion of a blood  feud  involving  the  two  families  in  Albania
    however this issue was not actively pursued at the  appeal  before  the
    FtT. Mr  Collins accepted this claim as being somewhat speculative.

FtT findings and decision

3.   In a detailed and lengthy decision and reasons the FtT found  the  core
    of the appellant's claim was wholly lacking in credibility [79 - 94].

         a)   There was a nine month delay before making a claim for asylum.
          Her explanation for the delay was rejected.  [81]

         b)   The appellant's claim that she circulated amongst friends  and
         ex-boyfriends upon whom she depended for financial  support  within
         the UK was  generalised  and  lacking  in  detail  and  lacking  in
         credibility.  [82]

         c)   The appellant's account of the paternity of  her  younger  son
         was not consistent and her explanation for the discrepancy  in  her
         accounts was not convincing.  [83]

         d)   The appellant's account that she last met her husband in April
         2012 was not consistent with the claimed date  of  birth  of  their
         son, some eleven months later.  [84]

         e)   The FtT found the appellant's explanation how she was able  to
         obtain a UK birth certificate for her son without reference to  his
         father being present, was inherently unlikely.  [85]

         f)   The FtT found the appellant's  evidence  in  relation  to  her
         inability to contact her husband since  coming  to  the  UK  wholly
         unconvincing in the circumstances.  [86]

         g)   The FtT found her explanation for his inability  to  accompany
         to the UK lacking in credibility.  [87]

         h)   The FtT did not accept that the appellant had  been  abandoned
         by her husband in the light of the  length  and  history  of  their
         marriage and relationship.  [88]

         i)   The FtT found it incredible that  the  appellant  conducted  a
         clandestine relationship with her husband in the  circumstances  as
         claimed.  Further there was no marriage certificate produced.  [89]

         j)   At [90] the FtT referred to the frequency of forced  marriages
         occurring in rural areas of Albania with reference to  page  23  of
         the appellant's bundle.   The  FtT  specifically  found  that  this
         background material did not lend support to the appellant's claim.

         k)   The FtT found the appellant's account of escape from her  home
         and meeting up with  her  husband  to  go  to  Kosovo,  lacking  in
         credibility having considered the same in the context of her  claim
         that she had brought the family into dishonour by her  actions  and
         which had led to physical abuse of her.  The FtT did not find  this
         to be plausible and/or further in the context  that  she  left  the
         house some ten days after the claimed assault alone on the  pretext
         of visiting her cousin.  [91]

         l)   The evidence as to a blood feud was pure speculation.  [92]

         m)   Her account  of  the  reasons  for  obtaining  a  passport  in
         November 2011 (five months before she was told  that  her  arranged
         marriage was imminent) was unconvincing.  [93]

         o)   At [94] the FtT concluded "looked at in the round, I find  the
         appellant's international protection claim  completely  lacking  in
         credibility.

Grounds of Application for Permission

4.   The appellant argued that there were a series  of  material  errors  of
    law  which  individually  and  collectively   rendered   the   decision
    unsustainable.

Ground 1

5.   The FtT found the appellant's claim completely lacking  in  credibility
    based on  a  "wholesale  adverse  finding  largely  predicated  on  the
    appellant's actions since her arrival in the UK" [81-88]  and  the  FtT
    failed to assess that claim in the light  of  the  background  material
    other than at [89-93].

Ground 2

6.   The FtT failed to consider the appellant's account in  the  context  of
    her being from the rural  north  (where  Kanun  law  predominates)  and
    without regard to the country guidance in EH (blood feuds)  Albania  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC) and the most recent Operational  Guidance  Note
    ("OGN") for  Albania  dated  14  October  2014.  At  section  3.20  OGN
    reference is made to the  pervasive  and  endemic  nature  of  violence
    towards  women,  particularly  from  family  members  and  the  limited
    protection available to victims.  The FtT made no specific  finding  as
    to the claim that she was seriously assaulted  by  family  members  and
    failed to take into  account  that  she  had  scars  on  her  chin  and
    forehead.  The appellant has two children  who  will  be  perceived  as
    illegitimate by her family. This is a risk factor following AM  and  BM
    (Trafficked women) Albania [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC).

Permission to Appeal

7.   Permission was granted by FtT Judge Osborne, who  considered  that  the
    grounds were arguable in the light of the appellant being  from  Kukes,
    and the  FtT's  failure  to  consider  EH  and  the  recent  background
    material.  FtT Judge Osborne acknowledged that the decision and reasons
    were otherwise detailed and careful but the FtT's failure to  refer  to
    the pertinent country guidance  case  and  recent  background  evidence
    undermined the substantive findings of fact to  the  extent  that  they
    amount to an arguable material error of law.

Error of Law Hearing

Submissions

8.   Mr Collins submitted that the essence of the appellant's claim was  her
    fear of domestic violence from her family. He conceded that  the  blood
    feud claim was too speculative and was not pursued.

9.   Mr Collins further accepted that the findings as  to  credibility  were
    open to the FtT to make. However the FtT erred by failing  to  take  as
    its starting point the evidence  of  the  endemic  nature  of  domestic
    violence particularly in the north of Albania.  The FtT engaged in some
    assessment of the background evidence but this  was  insufficient.   No
    reference was made to either the Operational Guidance Note nor  to  any
    of the relevant country guidance cases.  Mr Collins  acknowledged  that
    neither EH nor AM and BM were specifically "on point" as the appeal did
    not involve a blood feud nor trafficking.  However he argued  the  risk
    factor for example, the presence of  illegitimate  children,  featured.
    The factual nexus was arguably consistent with the background  material
    and in the light of the  FtT's  failure  to  consider  the  same,  this
    amounted to a material error of law.

10.  Ms Isherwood  relied  on  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter.   It  was
    accepted that the appellant was from Albania.  No  specific  acceptance
    had been made that she was  from  the  north.   There  was  no  medical
    evidence as regards scarring.  The adverse  credibility  findings  were
    sustainable on the evidence before the FtT which made  the  appellant's
    challenge immaterial.  All of the findings made by the FtT  at  [81-86]
    were entirely open to it to make.  It was clear that the FtT considered
    some of the background material as reference  is  made  to  it  in  the
    appellant's bundle at [90] and the FtT  specifically  stated  that  the
    appellant's claim did not fall in  line  with  that  material.   Having
    regard to the submissions made by both representatives before  the  FtT
    and the contents of the Reasons for Refusal Letter, it was  clear  that
    the FtT had considered the background evidence  of  domestic  violence.
    The FtT did not accept any aspect of her claim at all.

11.  Mr Collins responded by confirming that the  appeal  proceeded  on  the
    basis that the appellant was from Kukes.  He  reiterated  the  argument
    that the FtT failed to properly  engage  with  the  starting  point  as
    submitted by Mr Harding at the FtT.  The FtT must assess credibility in
    the context of the background material. There was arguably  uncertainty
    as to whether or not this had been done.

Discussion and Decision

12.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision,  which  I  now  give
    with my reasons.  I find that there was no material error of law in the
    decision and reasons of the FtT in dismissing the appellant's claim for
    international protection.  The claim made by the appellant was that she
    had suffered from abuse and domestic violence from her  family  because
    she had entered into a  marriage  against  their  wishes  and  had  not
    entered into a marriage arranged by family members.  Although there was
    some suggestion that a blood feud had arisen  between  the  appellant's
    family and the family in the proposed arranged marriage, this issue was
    not actively pursued on behalf of the appellant.  In any event the  FtT
    found the claim to  be  based  entirely  on  speculation.   Mr  Collins
    confirmed that the appellant's claim was pursued only on the  basis  of
    the fear of domestic violence.

13.  Whilst acknowledging that the FtT focused in the main on  events  since
    coming to the UK and making adverse findings of credibility thereon, it
    cannot be said that the FtT did not consider the claim in the light  of
    the background material at  all.   In  a  very  thorough  and  detailed
    decision  and  reasons  the  FtT  set  out  all  of  the  evidence  and
    submissions.  It is clear that the FtT was provided with  the  relevant
    background evidence as it referred to the same in the  summary  of  the
    representative's  submissions.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtT  made
    reference to and took into account the background material at [90]  and
    specifically  considered  the  appellant's  claim  in  the  context  of
    background material concerning forced marriages  and  violence  towards
    women. I conclude that the FtT's assessment of credibility of the claim
    was reached having regard to the internal and external  consistency  of
    the evidence.  Having regard to the decision and reasons as a whole,  I
    am satisfied that the FtT not only made  findings  of  fact  that  were
    sustainable on the evidence adduced, but also   having  regard  to  the
    background  evidence  of  domestic  violence  towards  women.   As  was
    conceded by Mr Collins there was no country guidance case on point  and
    whilst the FtT may have been assisted in part by reference to EH and AM
    and BM, this appeal was  not  a  case  involving  a  blood  feud  or  a
    trafficked woman.

Decision

14.  Accordingly I find no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.


Signed   Dated 8.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

No anonymity order.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.  The appeal is dismissed.


Signed   Date 8.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
