
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA063872015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st April 2016                        |On 14th June 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               ms saira rashid
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stephen Vokes (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp, promulgated on 12th August 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 10th July 2015.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, and was born on  20th  November
    1980.  She is a female.  She first arrived in the UK on 10th March 2013
    on a visitor's visa which was valid until 26th August 2013.   She  then
    claimed asylum shortly before the expiry  of  her  visit  visa  on  6th
    August 2013.  She was referred to the Coventry Law Centre.   They  have
    acted for her ever since.  The asylum claim was rejected on 27th  March
    2015  together  with  the  claim  for  humanitarian  protection   under
    paragraph 339C of HC 395.  The reasons given  by  the  Respondent  were
    that it was not accepted that her claim that she feared persecution and
    ill-treatment from her father on account of her refusal  to  marry  her
    cousin, the chosen spouse by her family, would put her in difficulty.

 3. In fact, the refusal letter notes how  the  visit  visa  was  initially
    refused on 23rd May 2012 because it was considered that  the  Appellant
    was not a genuine visitor to the UK.  It was considered that she  would
    not leave the UK at the end of the visit.  The Appellant then  appealed
    that decision and a visa was granted only after her winning her  appeal
    on 26th February 2013.  The Respondent rejected the  Appellant's  claim
    that her father arranged her marriage to her paternal cousin while  she
    was in the UK.  Indeed, the Respondent Home Secretary placed particular
    weight on the fact that the Appellant failed to mention in the  witness
    statement that two wedding invitations had been received by  family  in
    the UK and that names were spelt incorrectly on these invitations.

 4. Furthermore, the Respondent also placed weight upon the fact  that  all
    the  letters  submitted  as  evidence  of  the   Appellant's   father's
    intentions towards her of her family members and  are  therefore  self-
    serving.  The Appellant did contact the forced marriages  unit  but  no
    further investigation was carried out and therefore little weight could
    be placed upon this fact.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant did not know  about  arranged  marriages  being  very  common
    within Pakistan.  Moreover, it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    father mistakenly alerted her as to the marriage prior to  her  leaving
    the UK.  Quite simply, the claim that the Appellant's father was out to
    kill her was rejected.

 5. In any event, the Appellant would be able  to  relocate  internally  if
    necessary and it will be reasonable for her to do so because she  spoke
    the language of the country, had been educated there, and had  relevant
    work experience skills, being a teacher in a school in Pakistan.

The Judge's Findings

 6. The judge found that the inconsistencies in the documents  in  relation
    to the spelling of the names and so on did not mean that the  documents
    were not genuine or that they were created purely for  the  purpose  of
    the appeal because in  that  case  "the  invitations  would  have  been
    identical and the names would have been spelt correctly to ensure  that
    there were no questions raised as to  their  validity"  (see  paragraph
    43).

 7. On the other hand, the  judge did find that it was highly  likely  that
    the Appellant would have an arranged marriage "due to  this  being  the
    norm within her culture, but I am  not  persuaded  that  the  Appellant
    would have known  specifically  about  the  arranged  marriage  between
    herself and  a  paternal  cousin".   This  is  because,  as  the  judge
    concluded, "I found the Appellant to be  a  credible  witness  and  her
    evidence was that she did not know about her father's plans in  advance
    of the receipt of the invitation" (paragraph 46).

 8. Finally, the way that the judge treated the evidence of the Appellant's
    relatives was to say that,

         "although  I  appreciate  that  the  majority  of  the  Appellant's
         evidence as to the individual risk to her is from her own relatives
         and is therefore to a degree self-serving, I do not see what  other
         evidence  she  could  have  provided  in  this  respect  ..."  (see
         paragraph 53).

 9. The outstanding issue, in these circumstances, therefore,  remained  as
    to the possibility of internal relocation for the Appellant, given that
    a finding of risk of persecution had been found with  respect  to  her.
    The judge held  that,  although  the  submission  from  the  Respondent
    Secretary  of  State  was  that  the  Appellant  had  excelled  in  her
    employment, was reasonably well educated, and there should be no reason
    as to why she could not relocate internally within Pakistan, as a  lone
    woman the Appellant could not reasonably do so.  The way in  which  the
    judge came to this conclusion was after first concluding that,

         "I am not persuaded by the assertion that  the  Appellant's  father
         would be able to find the Appellant easily if she were to  relocate
         elsewhere in Pakistan as there has been  no  evidence  provided  to
         suggest her father has such a powerful reach" (paragraph 58).

    It was after this that the judge concluded that,

         "however, I do find that requiring her  to  relocate  as  a  single
         female in Pakistan without any familial support  available  to  her
         would be unreasonable and would be unduly harsh.  Therefore, I find
         internal relocation would not be a viable option for the Appellant"
         (paragraph 58).

10. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

11. The grounds of application state that there has been  no  consideration
    by the judge of the availability of shelters  and  the  possibility  of
    internal relocation, given the judge's findings  that  the  Appellant's
    father could not relocate her elsewhere in Pakistan and  that  she  has
    the ability to find employment in Pakistan.  She was  a  teacher.   The
    refusal letter made this clear.  This oral context ought to  have  been
    considered by the judge.

12. On 27th August 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the basis that
    the judge ought to have considered the guidance in the country guidance
    case and to have assessed the possibility  of  internal  relocation  in
    that context.

Submissions

13. At the hearing before me on 21st April 2016,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  stated  that  the  oral
    challenge here is to the availability and  reasonableness  of  internal
    relocation for a woman for whom there would  not  be  a  risk  of  ill-
    treatment in any part of the country.  Mr  Mills,  in  a  dextrous  and
    skilful submission before  me,  stated  that,  although  the  operative
    country  guidance  case  at  the  time  of  the  determination  was  KM
    (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 216, the Upper Tribunal  had since then provided
    a guidance in the case of SM (lone woman - ostracism)  Pakistan  [2016]
    UKUT 67.  Whilst it was accepted that this decision was  obviously  not
    available before the judge, there is evidence that was put  before  the
    Tribunal in the latter case, which would have been  publicly  available
    for consideration by Judge Boylan-Kemp, but which was overlooked,  such
    that it could not reasonably have been  concluded  that  the  Appellant
    could not access the availability of shelters in another  part  of  the
    country or in another part of Lahore.  The hearing before Judge Boylan-
    Kemp was, after all, on 10th July 2015.  The case of SM [2016] UKUT  67
    was heard even before then by the Upper Tribunal on 21st May 2015,  and
    judgment then only subsequently promulgated on 2nd February 2016.

14. Second, and no less importantly, Mr Mills submitted that, even if  that
    evidence  was  not  before   the   Tribunal   of   Judge   Boylan-Kemp,
    nevertheless, the judge does not really deal  with  the  issue  of  the
    reasonableness or internal relocation by demonstrating any  substantive
    engagement for the facts on the ground.  All that the judge states  (at
    paragraph 58) is that, "I do find that requiring her to relocate  as  a
    single female in Pakistan without any familial support available to her
    would be unreasonable and  unduly  harsh".   This,  was  a  conclusion,
    however.  It was not the provision of reasoning behind that conclusion.

15. Third, a proper analysis was particularly important in a case  such  as
    this, where the judge had already found that the Appellant's father was
    not such a powerful person as to be able to reach out to the  Appellant
    in another part of the country.  All the more so, therefore,  that  the
    judge should have considered whether, without  familial  support  being
    available to her, the Appellant could relocate safely  somewhere  else,
    including in the same city.  What SM (lone woman - ostracism)  Pakistan
    [2016] UKUT 67 now made clear was that, (as suggested in head  note  4)
    that,

         "it will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,  or
         older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps  if  a
         woman has qualifications enabling her to get well  paid  employment
         and pay for her accommodation and childcare if required".

    Such a change, submitted Mr Mills, required the judge to  provide  more
    than just a conclusion in his decision, on the facts before  him,  than
    simply a conclusion at paragraph 58.

16. For his part, Mr Stephen Vokes submitted that there could be  no  error
    of law in the determination of Judge Boylan-Kemp.   This  was  for  the
    following reasons.  First, it was elementary law that a decision  maker
    can only decide upon the materials that were before the decision maker.
     There is no suggestion that any of the objective  material  which  was
    before the Upper Tribunal in 2015 where it heard SM on 21st  May  2015,
    was equally available for consideration before the  Tribunal  of  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp.  The judge decided on the evidence before him.   He  could
    not be criticised for that.

17. Second, the judge had  stated,  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  before
    paragraph 58, the  materials  that  demonstrated  the  difficulties  in
    internal relocation, and not least by  reference  to  the  case  of  KA
    (Pakistan) [2012] UKUT 216.   All  there  could  be,  therefore,  is  a
    "reasons challenge", but this  was  unsustainable.   Mr  Stephen  Vokes
    directed my attention to the  established  case  of  Slimani  (Algeria)
    [2001] UKIAT 00009, where Mr Justice  Collins  had  stated  that,  "the
    realities that it is quite impossible to set out a  detailed  checklist
    of what must be done in all cases".  His Lordship stated that,

         "the only guidance needed is that the conclusions reached  must  be
         justified and it  must  be  clear  that  any  adverse  findings  in
         particular are based on evidence put before the Adjudicator or  the
         Tribunal and a proper explanation must be given  to  show  why  the
         conclusions on the issues of substance had been reached.   We  have
         no wish to encourage lengthy decisions.  Succinctness is  a  virtue
         ..." (at paragraph 10).

18. Third, a consideration of the judge's determination demonstrates how he
    did get to grips with the facts of the case.  At paragraph 34 the judge
    observes the Respondent Home Secretary's case that the Appellant  would
    be able to relocate internally  if  necessary  and  that  it  would  be
    reasonable for her to do so.  At paragraph 36 onwards the judge  begins
    to give his reasons.  At paragraph 51  the  judge  observes  that  "the
    Appellant had a very good job in Pakistan and that she  had  held  this
    position for a number of years before taking an agreed short  break  to
    come to the UK to visit her cousin" (paragraph 51).   At  paragraph  53
    the judge deals with the majority of  the  Appellant's  evidence  being
    from her relatives and concludes that not much  more  could  have  been
    provided.  At paragraph 55 the judge stated  that,  "I  find  there  is
    nothing to  suggest  that  the  Appellant  would  find  sufficiency  of
    protection but rather that she would fall into the  general  rule  that
    protection was unavailable for women fearing  gender  based  violence".
    At paragraph 56, which is a key paragraph  in  the  determination,  the
    judge observes that the refusal letter had  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    internal relocation at paragraph 29 through to 36,

         "and concludes that it will not be unreasonable for  the  Appellant
         to relocate to Lahore as she will be able to fly into one of  three
         international airports in Pakistan and that she  will  be  able  to
         access State support  shelters  and  crisis  centres  provided  for
         women".

    This is because the Appellant spoke the language of the country and had
    already demonstrated considerable personal fortitude in relocating to a
    country where she did not speak the language fluently.

19. The judge had dealt with  all  these  matters  before  concluding  that
    internal relocation was not reasonable and would be unduly harsh  given
    that the Appellant was a single female in Pakistan (a  matter  accepted
    in the Respondent's bundle at paragraph  1.3.14  with  respect  to  the
    difficulties regarding internal relocation for women).

20. Mr. Vokes also referred to a section from the Human  Rights  Commission
    in Pakistan (at paragraph 2.4.1) which confirms that  it  is  difficult
    for a single woman to live alone in Pakistan given the  need  generally
    speaking for  economic  dependency.    Mr  Vokes  submitted  that  this
    section plainly showed that internal relocation would be  unduly  harsh
    in this case.

21. In reply Mr Mills stated that the  author  of  the  report  from  Human
    Rights Commission in Pakistan had expressed this is an opinion and that
    the "qualification" to this by the UK Government was  set  out  in  the
    "Policy Summary" of the Respondent's evidence  at page 87, where  there
    is a section that  makes  its  clear  that,  "each  case  needs  to  be
    carefully considered on its fact" and  that,  "internal  relocation  to
    avoid risk for gender based violence may  be  viable  in  some  limited
    cases".  Generally, shelters produced effective  protection  elsewhere.
    The Appellant could find such protection elsehwhere.

22.  Second,  the  judge  actually  agrees  (at  paragraph  58)  that   the
    availability of shelters elsewhere will provide  her  with  protection,
    because her father would not have a reach powerful  enough  to  get  to
    her, but the only question was whether this would be  unduly  harsh  or
    not.

23. Third, in that event, the only issue was whether  she  could  relocate,
    and in deciding that she could not, the judge  provided  no  reasoning.
    It is important for the losing party to know why they have  lost.   The
    Respondent Secretary of State cannot be sure of that.

Error of Law

24. I am satisfied that the making of the evidence by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1)  of  TCEA  2007)  such
    that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the  decision.   My
    reasons are as follows.

25. First, the judge (at paragraph 58) simply reached the  conclusion,  and
    does not provide reasons for why she concludes that "a single female in
    Pakistan without any familial support available to her" would not  find
    it reasonable to relocate.

26. Second, the error of law is all the more glaring given  that  the  only
    basis upon which the judge shows an  analysis  of  the  feasibility  of
    internal relocation is her statement (at paragraph 54) that the "Policy
    Summary" (which appears at page 57 of the Appellant's  bundle),  is  to
    the effect that, "effective protection is, in general, unlikely  to  be
    available for women fearing gender based violence.  However, each  case
    needs to be carefully considered on its  facts".   The  judge  did  not
    consider this case "carefully" on its  own  facts.   Indeed,  what  the
    judge went on to say was that, "I find there is nothing to suggest that
    the Appellant would find sufficient protection  but  rather  she  would
    fall into the general rule that protection was  unavailable  for  women
    fearing gender based violence" (at paragraph 55).  To that extent,  the
    judge avoided  consideration  of  the  circumstances  in  which,  after
    considering each case carefully on its own  facts,  it  could  be  said
    whether or not  the  possibility  of  internal  relocation  was  indeed
    available on the facts of  this  case.   That  is  an  important  point
    because on the judge's own finding, she had  earlier  stated  that,  "I
    have given weight to the fact that the Appellant had a very good job in
    Pakistan and that she had held this position for a number of years ..."
    (paragraph 51).  In these circumstances, if anyone was likely  to  find
    internal relocation (particularly in circumstances where the threat  to
    her from her family did not extent to all parts  of  the  country),  it
    would be a woman in the Appellant's position.  The matter needed proper
    consideration.

27. Thirdly, the "Policy Summary" (which appears at page 87 of the  bundle)
    also makes it clear that, "internal relocation to avoid risk for gender
    based violence may be viable in some limited cases".  The judge  should
    have considered whether this was one such limited kind of  case.   This
    was particularly important, given that (at the risk of reputation)  the
    judge had found that the Appellant's father would not be able to  trace
    her away from her locality, and the Appellant was a person who had held
    "a very good job in Pakistan".  In the absence of proper  reasoning  in
    this respect undermined the findings made by the judge.

Re-Making the Decision

28. I remade the decision on the basis of  the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I note that both Mr Vokes for the Appellant and  Mr  Mills  for
    the Respondent Secretary of State, were agreed, that in the event of my
    finding there to be an error of law, I should  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.  This indeed is the normal course of  action  under  Practice
    Statement 7.2 which enjoins the Upper Tribunal to proceed to remake the
    decision subject to the exceptions set out therein.   I  am  dismissing
    this appeal for the following reasons.

29. First, fundamental to the Appellant's situation is the  fact  that  she
    "had a very good job in Pakistan and that she had  held  this  position
    for a number of years ..." (see paragraph 51 of  the  original  judge's
    determination).  It is also fundamental  that  the  Appellant's  father
    would not be able to find the Appellant easily "if she were to relocate
    elsewhere in Pakistan as there has been no evidence provided to suggest
    her father has such a powerful reach" (paragraph  58  of  the  original
    determination).  In this context, even were the position to  have  been
    considered at the time of the original  judge's  determination  it  was
    incumbent upon her to have regard to the "policy summary" which  states
    (at paragraph 1.3.15) that, "educational  and  professional  women  may
    find it possible to support themselves in alternative locations".  This
    is an Appellant who speaks the language of her country and has  already
    demonstrated considerable dexterity and resourcefulness in coming to  a
    country like the UK, the language of which she  does  not  use  as  her
    first language.  Shelters and crisis centres are available in Lahore as
    they are in other major cities in Pakistan.

30. I note Mr Vokes' submission  before  me,  made  passionately  and  with
    vigour that the case of KA [2010] UKUT 216 made it  clear  that  "young
    adult women are likely to find it more difficult  to  live  alone  than
    others" (paragraph 240).  However, to say that it is more likely to  be
    in difficulty, is not to say that all cases are going to  be  presented
    with a difficulty  making  relocation  unduly  harsh,  particularly  in
    circumstances where it is already recognised that a critical feature in
    the ability of being able to relocate is educational  and  professional
    attainment.  Added to this is the fact  that  the  Appellant  faces  no
    persecution from her father away from her  locality.   It  is  for  the
    Appellant to demonstrate why she would not be  able  to  find  internal
    relocation, given that the basis of refugee law  is  the  provision  of
    surrogate protection, which means  that  international  protection  can
    only be accessed if the country of nationality  is  unable  to  provide
    essentially, and on the facts of this  case,  it  is  plain  that  such
    sanctuary  can  be  provided,  particularly   for   an   educated   and
    professional young woman, in circumstances that are by no means  unique
    in a country like Pakistan for such women.

31. Second, but more importantly, in remaking the  decision  this  Tribunal
    now has to consider the position that  appertains  at  this  moment  in
    time, and that position is the one dictated  by  the  latest  operative
    jurisprudence in this jurisdiction, namely, the case of SM (lone  woman
    - ostracism) Pakistan  [2016]  UKUT  67,  which  makes  it  clear  that
    internal relocation may be an option in one of  the  Pakistan's  larger
    cities, and that this depends on the social and  educational  situation
    of the woman in question.

32. The Appellant is a person who has excelled in  her  employment  and  is
    reasonably well educated.  The case of SM makes it clear that,

         "it will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,  or
         older women to seek internal relocation to a city.  It helps if the
         woman has qualifications enabling her to get well  paid  employment
         and pay for accommodation and childcare if required".

    There is nothing to suggest here why this would not be  the  case.   If
    anything, the facts of this case suggest that this is an Appellant  who
    already, was not only educated, but in professional  employment.   Were
    she to go into a shelter, there is no  reason  why,  upon  leaving  the
    shelter subsequently down the line, she would not, in a  country  where
    women teachers are far and between, be able  to  get  employment  in  a
    school again.  Her track record suggests that she would.  There is also
    the possibility that the Appellant could enter a privately run shelter,
    and the case of SM makes it clear that these could provide longer  term
    support while the woman regularises her social situation.

33. It is vitally important to recognise that  there  are  variations  with
    respect to the position of single women across Pakistan.  These are  in
    relation to the age, prosperity and educational status of the women  in
    question.  This was recognised in SM when the Tribunal referred to  the
    expert report of an assistant professor from the  Metropolitan  College
    of Denver who had stated that, "Pakistan has [a] very sharp  rural  and
    urban divide", and that it would depend on which problems and  in  what
    context they are living (see paragraph 56 of SM).   Urban  centres  are
    more individualistic, more literate, and have better infrastructure and
    transportation facilities "and plenty of job opportunities i.e. skilled
    or unskilled" (see paragraph 56).  It is also the case that a  province
    like the Punjab,  where  Lahore  is  located  is  "more  educated  than
    liberal" (see paragraph 56 at page 14 of the determination).

34. In short, if one were to apply SM (lone women -  ostracism)  CG  [2016]
    UKUT 67, it is plain that this Appellant can, on  the  lower  standard,
    find internal relocation without any  difficulty  that  is  viable  and
    reasonable for her to do.  This latest country guidance case  makes  it
    clear that,

         "educated women, those with marketable employment skills, and older
         women, may well be able to relocate to a city and live  alone:  the
         risk of ostracism leading to destitution is not the  same  in  that
         case.  It is more likely that those who reach  the  United  Kingdom
         would fall into the latter category" (see paragraph 72).

35. In SM, the Tribunal held that there was no risk, on the facts  of  that
    case, of ill-treatment to the Appellant in  Lahore,  and  the  Tribunal
    went on to say that, if the risk were to exist in the Appellant's  home
    area in Lahore, we do not consider that she has discharged  the  burden
    upon her of showing that she could not  relocate  to  another  part  of
    Pakistan where she would be safe.

36. For all these reasons, this appeal must be dismissed.

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original Immigration Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
