
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06014/2014
                                                               AA/06358/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2015                    |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AAH
                                     WUH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants, AAH and WUH, were born in 1982 and  1988  respectively,
    are brothers, and citizens of Afghanistan.  The appellants entered  the
    United Kingdom as students and returned to Afghanistan but returned  to
    the United Kingdom and claimed asylum in 2013.  By  decisions  dated  4
    August 2014, the appellants were  refused  asylum  and  decisions  were
    taken to remove them from the United Kingdom by way of directions.  The
    appellants appealed against those decisions to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Turnock) which, in a decision promulgated  on  8  January  2015,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellants now appeal, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. It was the basis of the appellants' case before the First-tier Tribunal
    that they would face a real risk of persecution  from  members  of  the
    Afghan parliament due to  political  opinions  imputed  to  them.   The
    appellants are the sons of SAH who held a position of seniority  within
    a department of  the  Afghan  government.   The  judge  concluded  that
    neither appellant was at real risk of persecution or ill-treatment upon
    return to Afghanistan.

 3. There are three grounds of appeal.  First,  it  is  asserted  that  the
    judge wrongly demanded corroboration of  evidence  when  assessing  the
    credibility of the appellants.   At  [81]  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellants claimed that there had been an attack on  their  father  and
    their father  had  been  in  talks  with  the  police  and  the  Afghan
    government to "provide further safety  as  well  as  catch  the  people
    responsible" (sic).  Those talks appear to have occurred in August 2013
    at a time when the appellants returned to the United Kingdom to  attend
    their graduation ceremony scheduled for November that year.  The  judge
    observed, "[the claim that the appellants' father is in talks with  the
    police] would be consistent with the police having taken an  attack  in
    July [2013] seriously which would mean that some evidence of  a  police
    report could be expected".  At [91] the judge noted that, at the end of
    November 2013, the  appellants  claimed  that  they  had  called  their
    employers to let them know they would not return to Afghanistan as they
    were in danger.  The judge wrote,

         "... they claim that they were told that  armed  men  had  attended
         their places of employment [in Afghanistan] looking for  them.   No
         evidence  has  been  provided  from  either  place  of   employment
         confirming that such events took place.  I do not find  that  claim
         to be credible."

    Further, the appellants claimed  that  their  father  was  treated  for
    injuries in hospital following an attack in July 2013 by  two  "unknown
    men on a motorbike".  The judge observed that there was

         "... no indication of the precise nature of the  injuries  suffered
         nor whether such injuries are consistent  with  a  claimed  attack.
         There is no evidence of the police becoming involved nor any report
         in any  media  evidence  provided  of  any  attack  upon  a  senior
         government officer."

 4. I do not consider that the judge has penalised the  appellants  in  his
    credibility assessment by unreasonably demanding corroboration of their
    accounts.  In each of the cases which I have described above, the judge
    has recorded that there  had  been  made  available  no  evidence  from
    sources which would have been very  likely  to  have  produced  written
    reports or notes of the events in question and, in the case of physical
    injuries (viz. the treatment of the appellants' father at  hospital)  a
    contemporaneous medical report or record.  In the case of the  physical
    injuries, it was reasonable of the judge to  observe  that  the  letter
    from the Spin Ghar Hospital had been unexpectedly  vague  in  referring
    only to the  dressing  of  "wounds"  and  the  issuing  of  a  "medical
    prescription".  It was reasonable of the judge to doubt the credibility
    of that part of the account in  the  light  of  the  vagueness  of  the
    medical evidence provided.  In the case of the incident reported by the
    father to the police, it was also reasonable for the judge to take into
    account the absence of a police report.  There is  no  suggestion  that
    the  judge  sought  to  criticise  the  appellants  for   having   left
    Afghanistan  without   first   obtaining   and   bringing   with   them
    corroborative documentary evidence.  He was, however, entitled to place
    little weight on the medical report because it was so vague and to have
    some doubt regarding the alleged attack on the appellants'  father  not
    only because of the inadequacy of the medical report but because  there
    had been also no police report evidence provided where  such  a  report
    might have been expected.

 5. Secondly, the judge is criticised for having  failed  to  consider  the
    appellants' evidence "in the round".  That ground has  no  merit.   The
    judge has carried out a very  detailed  factual  assessment  and  I  am
    satisfied that he has not reached any conclusions as to the credibility
    of the account which was put to him without first considering  all  the
    evidence both written and oral.

 6. Thirdly, the judge is criticised  for  having  arrived  at  conclusions
    which were not open to him on the evidence.   At  [95],  Judge  Turnock
    stated that the appellants had secured jobs  in  Afghanistan  but  that
    they would "no doubt feel more secure living in the UK".  The  argument
    advanced is that, if generalised dangers were  in  existence  when  the
    appellants returned to Afghanistan and had  sought  and  obtained  jobs
    there, then the "general country situation" could  not  have  explained
    their fear of returning in 2013.  That  ground  of  appeal  is  without
    merit.  It is entirely  reasonable  for  the  judge  to  observe  that,
    although they had jobs in Afghanistan, the appellants might  feel  more
    secure living in the United Kingdom which, by any standards, is a safer
    environment than Afghanistan.  It was open to the judge to place weight
    on the fact that the appellants had left jobs in Afghanistan to come to
    the United Kingdom and that  this  supported  their  claim  to  have  a
    subjective fear of living in Afghanistan but, equally, it was  open  to
    the judge to conclude that  the  appellants  had  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom because they might have better financial  and  other  prospects
    living here rather than in Afghanistan.

 7.  Judge  Turnock  has  produced  a  careful,  even-handed  and  detailed
    decision.   He  has  had  regard  to  all  relevant  evidence  and  has
    supported his findings of fact with clear and cogent reasoning.  I find
    that he has not erred in law for the reasons asserted in the grounds of
    appeal or at all.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. The appeals are dismissed.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 20 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

