
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06526/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 17 February 2016                  |On 25 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     S P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Seehra (counsel) instructed by Nag Law,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I make an anonymity order under Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify  the  appellant,  to  preserve  the  anonymity  direction
deemed necessary by the First-tier Tribunal.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Shiner promulgated on 20 November 2015, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 14 October 1976 and is  a  national  of  Sri
Lanka.

4.    On 31 March 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for asylum, but granted limited leave to remain in the UK  until
30 September 2017.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Shiner  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  and,  on  15  December  2015,  Judge
Cruthers gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "I consider it is arguable  that  if  those  elements  of  the  account
    accepted by the Judge (see paragraph 2 of the grounds) are  taken  with
    the guidance in GJ and Others(post civil war:  returnees)Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) then, arguably, the  Judge  should  have  found
    that the appellant would face a real risk of persecutory ill  treatment
    if returned to Sri Lanka."

The Hearing

7.    (a)   Ms Seehra, for the appellant, adopted the terms of  the  grounds
of appeal. She told me that at paragraph 2 of the grounds of appeal she  had
set out the positive findings of fact that were made by the Judge. She  told
me that against the background of those  positive  findings  the  Judge  had
failed to take account of the cumulative effect of the  appellant's  profile
in the eyes of the Sri Lankan authorities. She told  me  that  although  the
Judge takes guidance from the case of GJ, he does  so  by  considering  each
singular aspect of the  appellant's  profile  rather  than  considering  the
cumulative effect of the various strands of the  appellant's  profile  as  a
member of an LTTE martyr family, and active LTTE supporter in  the  diaspora
and a man associated with LTTE charities who has made  a  televised  speech,
which had been broadcast in Sri Lanka, seeking a separate Tamil state.

    (b)    Ms Seehra argued that the Judge had failed to  provide  adequate
reasons for his findings of fact, in particular in relation to  the  profile
the appellant would have in the eyes of  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.  She
argued that the Judge had failed  to  make  findings  of  facts  on  crucial
evidence. She explained that the appellant's  sister  had  written  letters,
which were before the Judge, on which the Judge made no findings in  fact  -
and that the decision is silent on  the  existence  of  those  letters.  She
argued that the Judge had misinterpreted the evidence about the  appellant's
returns to Sri Lanka in 2005 and 2010, and failed to  take  account  of  his
exit from Sri Lanka in 2011 by boat. She told  me  that  she,  herself,  had
made a number of submissions to the Judge which  are  not  recorded  in  the
decision.

    (c)    Ms Seehra's overarching submission is  that  if  the  Judge  had
considered the appellant's overall profile and then correctly  followed  the
guidance from GJ, he  would  have  allowed  the  appeal.  Ms  Seehra  placed
reliance on extracts from the respondent's COIS  reports  of  November  2010
and March 2012. She urged me to set the decision aside and to set a  further
hearing in the Upper Tribunal because, she told me, there  are  findings  in
fact  which  are  outstanding  and  updated  background  evidence  will   be
necessary.

8.    Mr Bramble, for the respondent, told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material or otherwise. He adopted the  terms  of  the
respondent's rule 24 response dated 15 January 2016. He referred to [62]  to
[90] of the decision and told me that  the  Judge  had  taken  a  structured
approach to  the  evidence,  considering  each  aspect  of  the  appellant's
profile and carefully weighing up the impact of that profile  in  the  light
of the guidance given in the case of GJ. He  told  me  that  the  Judge  had
carefully made findings of fact and then followed country  guidance,  before
coming to the conclusion that the appellant would not be at risk  on  return
to Sri Lanka. He told me that the conclusion reached by the Judge  was  well
within the range of conclusions reasonably open to the Judge  to  reach.  He
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    The Judge commences his  findings  of  fact  at  [62].  He  employs  a
methodical approach, separating each significant aspect of  the  appellant's
claim & then considering  each  separate  aspect  under  clearly  identified
headings. On the whole, the Judge accepts the  appellant's  account.  It  is
only at [90] that the Judge rejects some aspects of  the  appellants  claim.
It is there that the Judge finds that the appellant has not previously  been
arrested, detained or tortured by the Sri Lankan authorities.  It  is  there
that he finds that the appellant does not have a profile which  would  cause
the Sri Lankan authorities to have an interest in him.

10.   At [59] the Judge correctly sets out  the  guidance  contained  within
the case of GJ and identifies the risk factors.  In  GJ  and  Others  (post-
civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  the  Tribunal
held that the current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or
serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or  otherwise,
are: (a) Individuals who are, or are  perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are, or are  perceived
to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism
within the diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within  Sri  Lanka.  (b)
Journalists whether in print or other  media)  or  human  rights  activists,
who,  in  either  case,  have  criticised  the  Sri  Lankan  government,  in
particular its human rights record, or who are associated with  publications
critical of the Sri  Lankan  government.  (c)  Individuals  who  have  given
evidence to the Lessons Learned and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating
the Sri Lankan security forces, armed forces or the Sri  Lankan  authorities
in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may  have  witnessed  war  crimes
during the conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones  in  May  2009,  only
those who have already identified themselves by giving such  evidence  would
be known to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are  at  real
risk of adverse attention or persecution on return as  potential  or  actual
war crimes witnesses. (d) A person whose  name  appears  on  a  computerised
"stop" list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of  those  against
whom there is an extant court order or arrest  warrant.   Individuals  whose
name appears on a "stop" list will be stopped  at  the  airport  and  handed
over to the appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance of  such  order
or warrant.

11.   The appellant claims that he falls within  the  first  of  those  risk
categories; he claims that he is viewed by the Sri Lankan authorities  as  a
person with a significant role in post-conflict Tamil separatism within  the
diaspora. It was  also  argued  before  the  First-tier  that  even  if  the
appellant does not fall within a risk category  set  out  in  GJ,  he  still
faces a real risk of persecution, relying on the ratio of MP.

12.   In MP (Sri Lanka) and NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  829,  the
Court of Appeal upheld GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka
CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and found that there was no legal  error  in  the
Upper Tribunal's country guidance on Sri Lanka despite the fact that it  had
narrowed the risk categories from those in  the  Eligibility  Guidelines  of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.  It  was  stated  however
that the Upper Tribunal had not prescribed "that diaspora  activism  is  the
only basis on which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing" a  future
threat and thus of being at risk on return. "There may, though untypically,
be other cases where the evidence shows particular  grounds  for  concluding
that the Government might regard the applicant as posing  a  current  threat
to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  even  in  the  absence  of
evidence that he  or  she  has  been  involved  in  diaspora  activism".  At
paragraph 16 the Court of Appeal acknowledged that  no  doubt  it  would  be
easier to infer that the test relating to current risk categories in  GJ  is
satisfied where elaborate links are established than where they are not.  At
paragraph 43 it was said that the Upper  Tribunal  in  GJ  was  entitled  to
attach significance to the fact that the appellant has not  participated  in
Tamil separatist activity in the United Kingdom but that is not an  absolute
prerequisite for protection under the guidance.

13.   Paragraph 2 the grounds of appeal correctly sets out  the  appellant's
profile as the Judge found  it  to  be.  The  appellant  has  a  history  of
involvement with LTTE. His older brother was a major in the  LTTE  army  who
was killed in the conflict. The  appellant  was  an  LTTE  member  (although
perhaps a less willing members than his brother) in both 1992 and 1998.  The
appellant's family are considered to be an LTTE martyr family,  and  because
of that,  the  appellant  has  been  photographed  with  LTTE  leaders.  The
appellant is a supporter and fundraiser for the white pigeon charity,  which
the Sri Lankan authorities suspect of  being  a  funding  source  for  Tamil
separatists. The appellant made a political speech at his wedding which  was
broadcast on both UK and Sri Lankan television.

14.   The Judge considered each of those factors separately, and  considered
that each separate factor did  not  amount  to  anything  more  than  a  low
profile LTTE supporter who would  be  of  no  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities. What the Judge did not do is consider the cumulative effect  of
each of those individual factors. One factor on its  own  may  be  something
that the Sri Lankan authorities will ignore, but the  cumulative  effect  of
each separate factor may create a different profile, and it is that  profile
which the Judge did not consider. I have to determine whether  or  not  that
amounts to a material error of law. To  answer  that  question,  I  consider
what effect the appellants accepted cumulative profile has.

15.   The appropriate guidance is to be found in the cases  of  GJ  and  MP.
The appellant has been photographed with LTTE leaders. He is  identified  as
a member of an LTTE martyr family. His speech calling for a  separate  Tamil
state has been broadcast on television in Sri Lanka. He is  known  to  be  a
donor to the white pigeon charity.

16.   The appellant's LTTE involvement, his association  with  LTTE  leaders
and his wedding speech are all of some age. It  is  accepted  by  the  Judge
that the appellant returned to & lived in Sri Lanka between 2010  and  2011.
The appellant's activities for white pigeon ceased, on his own evidence,  in
2006. The television documentary that featured the appellant  was  broadcast
in Sri Lanka in 2006.

17.   No realistic dispute is taken to the Judge's  findings  of  fact.  The
Judge rejected the appellant's claim  of  arrest  and  torture  in  2010/11.
When  each  of  the  findings  which  favoured  the  appellant   are   taken
cumulatively, the appellant's profile is that of a Tamil whose  family  were
LTTE supporters,  and  whose  siblings  died  fighting  for  LTTE.  But  the
appellant's account of sur place activities is  rejected.  The  Judge  finds
that each individual aspect of the appellant's profile amounts  to  no  more
than low-level LTTE support. The historic nature  of  the  evidence  of  the
appellant's LTTE profile counts against him, so that when an  holistic  view
is taken of the cumulative strands of the appellant's  accepted  profile  it
can be seen that his public LTTE activities ended  in  2006.  The  appellant
returned to Sri Lanka in 2010.

18.   The risk categories are clearly set out in GJ and have been  confirmed
in MP. The findings of fact  made  by  the  Judge,  and  relied  on  by  the
appellant at  number  of  paragraph  2  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  taken
cumulatively are insufficient  to  demonstrate  that  the  appellant  has  a
significant role  in  post-conflict  separatism  within  the  Diaspora.  The
appellant does not fall within the risk categories  identified  in  GJ.  The
appellant does not fall within the exceptions noted in MP.

19.   In so far as the Judge made  an  error  in  failing  to  consider  the
cumulative effect of the various strands of the  appellant's  profile,  that
is not a material error of law because the error makes no difference to  the
decision.

20.   The remaining  grounds  of  appeal,  and  the  remaining  submissions,
whilst made with care and skill, amount to little more  than  an  expression
of dissatisfaction with the facts as the Judge  found  them  to  be.  It  is
argued that the  Judge  failed  to  take  account  of  documentary  evidence
produced from the appellant's sister, and that  the  Judge  failed  to  give
reasons for rejecting certain aspects of the appellants claim.

21.   At paragraph 49 of MA (Somalia) [2010] UKSC 49, 24 it  was  said  that
"Where a tribunal has referred to considering all the evidence, a  reviewing
body should be very slow to conclude  that  that  tribunal  overlooked  some
factor, simply because the factor is  not  explicitly  referred  to  in  the
determination concerned". McCombe LJ in VW  (Sri  Lanka)  C5/2012/3037  said
"Regrettably, there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases,  when  a
First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  given  a  judgment  explaining  why  he  has
reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously  areas
of evidence that have been less fully dealt with than  others  and  then  to
use this as a basis for  saying  the  judge's  decision  is  legally  flawed
because it did not  deal  with  a  particular  matter  more  fully.   In  my
judgment, with respect, that is no  basis  on  which  to  sustain  a  proper
challenge to a judge's finding of fact"

22.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

23.   In reality, although skilfully presented, what is  argued  amounts  to
little more than a disagreement with the facts as the Judge  found  them  to
be. No error of law is identified in the second, third or fourth grounds  of
appeal.

24.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

25.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

26.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 22 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
