
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3rd October 2016                        |On 25 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS



                                   Between

                                   ALI [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Warren (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Foudy, promulgated on  9th  May  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester Piccadilly on 18th April 2016.  In  the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, applied for, and was granted, permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iran, and was born on  11th  July
    1987.  He appealed against a decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  28th
    August 2014 rejecting his claim  for  refugee  asylum  status  and  for
    humanitarian protection.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he was born  into  a  Muslim  family,  he
    spent a few months with the Basij at his father's request (which is the
    moral police that enforces Islamic values in Iran); that  he  moved  to
    the holiday island of Kish where he met a lot of Christians and ran his
    own shop there; that some local Filipino workers gave him  books  about
    Christianity and sparked his interest; that he started playing music to
    attract customers to his shop  at  New  Years  in  2014  whereupon  the
    authorities raided his shop and when he refused to turn off  the  music
    he was beaten and the shop was wrecked; that the  authorities  returned
    to the shop the next day and searched it and  found  copies  of  banned
    films and books about Christianity; that his uncle then helped  him  to
    flee; that he attends the World Harvest Bible Church in Manchester  and
    has now been baptised; and that finally, he seeks protection because he
    would face persecution in Iran over his religious conversion.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge found that the Appellant had consistently claimed that he was
    averse to Islam because he did not agree  with  the  harsh  punishments
    advanced in the name of Islam and the heavy-handedness of the religious
    zealots and that the Appellant had given  largely  correct  answers  to
    questions about Christianity that were put to  him  in  interview  (see
    paragraph 24).  Furthermore, Pastor Murphy gave evidence  that  he  had
    spent a great deal of time with the Appellant over the last  two  years
    and was convinced that he was a genuine Christian and she  also  stated
    that the Appellant was an unfailing attender at the  church  and  Bible
    study classes and he was a willing helper with any work (paragraph 24).



 5. The judge went on to allow the appeal on the grounds  that  "there  are
    substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  this  Appellant  will  face
    deprivation  of  life,  torture,  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  if
    returned to Iran" (see paragraph 30).

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the  judge  has  found  that  the
    Appellant is a genuine Christian convert but there has been a  complete
    lack of finding in relation to the potential behaviour of the Appellant
    and his conduct upon return to Iran which would give  rise  to  a  real
    risk of harm.  This is a reference to the well-known case of HJ (Iran).
     It is also said in the Grounds of Appeal that following  the  Tribunal
    decision in FS  and  Others  (Iran)  [2008]  UKAIT  00082  there  is  a
    distinction between ordinary converts and a proselytiser and that  what
    needs to be looked at is not only the church to which the individual is
    an adherent but the way in which the individual returnee is  likely  to
    behave.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 3rd October 2016, Miss Warren, appearing on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that the case of
    SZ and GM (Christians; FS Confirmed) Iran CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00082  was
    authority for the proposition that it is not enough to make  a  finding
    that a person is a Christian convert  because,  the  main  question  is
    whether such a person is then likely to proselytise and that it is  not
    enough to say that once one has converted one succeeds  (see  paragraph
    138 of SZ).  Second, if one looks at the skeleton argument  of  Miss  C
    Warren before the First-tier Tribunal Judge dated 25th August 2015, she
    expressly draws attention (at paragraph 12) to the case  of  HJ  (Iran)
    and the need to demonstrate how a  person  is  likely  to  behave  upon
    return to Iran, so that this was clearly a live issue before the  judge
    and the judge failed to consider it.  In her  skeleton  argument,  Miss
    Warren had said, "it follows the questions to be asked are (1) would  A
    have to hide his religion on return to Iran, and (2) is the reason  why
    he would change his behaviour due  to  fear  of  persecution?"   Those,
    submitted Mr Whitwell, were the main questions, and the judge failed to
    deal with them in that order.  Finally, the judge stated that, "I  also
    find it credible that members of the Basij have some sexual interest in
    the Appellant because in repressive societies  sexual  exploitation  is
    sometimes heightened,"  and  there  was  no  basis  for  such  a  bland
    statement.

 8. For her part, Miss C Warren submitted that the reference by  the  judge
    (at paragraph 20), to the fact  that  in  repressive  societies  sexual
    interest is heightened and that on this basis she found that members of
    the Basij might have a sexual interest in the  Appellant,  was  a  side
    issue because the Appellant had only had a fleeting  acquaintance  with
    the Basij, and even that at the insistence of his father,  and  it  had
    nothing to do  with  the  essential  claim,  which  was  based  on  the
    Appellant having converted from the Muslim religion  to  the  Christian
    religion.

 9. The main point here was that since 2014,  notwithstanding  the  Supreme
    Court judgment in HJ (Iran), which did pose the two distinct  questions
    as highlighted by Miss Warren in her skeleton  argument  (at  paragraph
    12), the Home Office had a policy,  which  was  re-issued  in  December
    2015, where, as far as Muslim converts in Iran  are  concerned,  it  is
    necessary only to show that there is a genuine conversion  because  the
    deteriorating situation for religious converts in Iran  has  been  such
    now that this would automatically attract the risk of ill-treatment.

10. The approach advocated in HJ (Iran) applies  only  to  members  of  the
    Christian minority, because it is only there that the question is asked
    as to how they are likely to behave upon return to  Iran,  but  to  all
    intents and purposes, if there is a Muslim  convert  to  the  Christian
    religion, then given that Sharia law does not allow conversion from the
    Muslim  faith,  ill-treatment  and  adverse   attention   automatically
    follows.

11. In short, this Home Office guidance now postdates HJ (Iran) by some six
    years, but it is the Home Office policy and what the  judge  was  doing
    was applying  the  official  Home  Office  policy.   The  policy  bears
    consideration because at page 6 (at  paragraph  3.1.4),  it  is  stated
    that, "the right of Muslims to change their religion is not  recognised
    under Sharia law.  Christians who have converted from Islam are at real
    risk of persecution in Iran, and a grant of  asylum  is  likely  to  be
    appropriate."

12. Miss Warren submitted that nothing could be clearer than this.  This is
    the policy that the judge followed and what was now being done  was  to
    backtrack in the Grounds of Appeal with a view to  locating  this  case
    essentially within the HJ (Iran)  paradigm,  which  had  ceased  to  be
    entirely applicable following the Home  Office  policy  that  has  been
    referred to.

13. As far as the skeleton argument before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    was concerned, Miss Warren submitted that  at  paragraph  10,  she  had
    stated,  under  the  heading  "risk  of  persecution,"  that,  if   the
    Appellant's account of conversion to Christianity  is  accepted  it  is
    submitted that this will give rise to a real  risk  of  persecution  in
    accordance with  the  Respondent's  own  view  as  expressed  in  their
    guidance: "'Iran: Christians and Christian Converts.'"   Therefore,  it
    was not the case that the judge had not been referred to the policy  in
    the form of this guidance that had been re-issued in December 2015.

14. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that he would have to accept  that  the
    Grounds of Appeal do proceed  on  the  basis  of  the  HJ  (Iran)  Iran
    paradigm because the second ground makes it clear that,

         "Although, the FTTJ has found  that  the  Appellant  is  a  genuine
         Christian convert, there has been a complete lack  of  findings  in
         relation to the potential behaviour and conduct of  this  Appellant
         on return to Iran and whether that would give rise to a  real  risk
         of harm."

15. The conversion of this Appellant had been accepted  by  the  Respondent
    Home Office and he could no go behind that.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA [2007] such that I should set aside the decision).  My reasons are
    that this is a case where the judge was applying the guidance, and this
    was the guidance that had been referred to the judge in  Miss  Warren's
    skeleton argument, and on this basis it is quite clear that "Christians
    who have converted from Islam are at real risk of persecution in  Iran,
    and a grant of asylum is likely to be  appropriate."   The  judge  gave
    detailed reasons for why this conversion was a genuine  conversion  (at
    paragraph 24). Pastor Murphy's evidence was taken into account  and  he
    was found to be a wholly credible witness in support of the  Appellant.



17. The Appellant's case is not one that falls squarely within HJ (Iran) in
    that, following this guidance which  has  been  re-issued  in  December
    2015, it is enough for a person born in a Muslim family to show that he
    has converted to Christianity in a genuine manner, and then the  policy
    in the form of the guidance stands to be applied.   The  way  in  which
    this policy was applied was entirely open to the judge  in  the  manner
    that it was applied.  No criticism can be made of that.

18. There remains a question  about  the  judge  having  made  comments  at
    paragraphs 19 to 20, but these are peripheral to the essential  finding
    that this was a genuine conversion and that the Appellant would  be  at
    substantial risk of persecution as  a  result  of  his  conversion  (at
    paragraph 30).

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2016






