

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA069142015




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On June 13, 2016                   |On June 14, 2016              |
|                                   |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MRS AVIN SADIQY
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain (Legal representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran. She claimed to have  arrived  in
       the United Kingdom on October 6, 2014 and having  been  detained  by
       the police the following day  she  claimed  asylum.  The  respondent
       refused her asylum claim on March 31, 2015 under paragraph  336  and
       issued directions for her removal as an illegal entrant  by  way  of
       directions under paragraphs 8-10 of schedule 2  to  the  Immigration
       Act 1971.

    2. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on April 17, 2015.

    3. The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Dickson
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on June 23,  2015  and  in  a
       decision promulgated on July 15, 2016  he  refused  the  appellant's
       appeal.

    4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on July 27,  2015  submitting
       the Judge had erred.

    5. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Page on September 29, 2015 who found  the  appeal  was
       out of time and there  were  no  reasons  given  to  extend  it  and
       secondly he found there was no material error. Permission to  appeal
       was renewed and it came before Upper Tribunal Lindsey on November 2,
       2015. She found an arguable error in law for the reasons put forward
       in the original grounds.

    6. In a Rule 24 response dated December 18, 2015 the respondent opposed
       the appeal.

    7. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives.

    8. No anonymity direction has been made.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

    9. The original grounds of appeal were out of time and neither Judge of
       the First-tier Tribunal Page nor Upper Tribunal Lindsey had extended
       time.

   10. The explanation provided was that the appeal had been faxed in  time
       but an error report had not been  seen  until  after  the  time  for
       appealing had elapsed. Mr Hussain invited me to  extend  time  under
       Rule 21(7) of the The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008.

   11. Mr McVeety did not object and accordingly I extend time.

SUBMISSIONS

   12. Mr Hussain relied on the grounds and submitted the Judge  had  erred
       in his assessment of the evidence by failing to have regard  to  the
       appellant's own circumstances and the fact she was  un-educated  and
       vulnerable. He had found her to have given inconsistent evidence but
       in doing so he misunderstood the evidence. Whilst she  was  able  to
       remember specific dates she had been unable to recall how  old  when
       she met Amir but this should not be held against her.

   13. Mr McVeety relied on the Rule 24 letter and argued that it had  been
       open to the Judge to make findings in her and the  evidence.  Having
       considered her version of events the judge  found  against  her  and
       these grounds of  appeal  amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a  mere
       disagreement.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   14. The appellant's asylum claim was based on her alleged adultery.   It
       was acknowledged both before the Judge and  myself  today  that  the
       Judge was concerned with credibility.

   15. The grounds of appeal allege the Judge  failed  to  carry  out  that
       assessment fairly.

   16. The Judge  made  findings  on  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
       evidence. These are highlighted in his decision at  paragraphs  [23]
       to [28]. The Judge placed great weight on the answer she gave during
       cross-examination when she was asked how old she was when she  began
       her relationship with Amir. He recorded and  it  is  not  challenged
       that she stated it was in the month of Aban in 1392  which  put  the
       date between October 23, 2013 and November 21, 2013.  Based  on  her
       year of birth being 1989 this would have made her twenty-four  years
       of age. However, she had  previously  claimed  to  have  been  in  a
       relationship with Amir since she was seventeen or eighteen years  of
       age. The Judge was aware of her vulnerability  because  he  recorded
       this in in paragraph  [22]  of  his  decision  but  he  nevertheless
       concluded she lacked credibility  on  that  inconsistency  when  she
       later claimed she did not know how old she was.

   17. Mr Hussain submitted more weight  should  have  been  given  to  her
       personal circumstances but the assessment of her credibility  was  a
       matter for the Judge who heard her  give  evidence.  He  would  have
       noted she displayed an ability to accurately record dates and events
       in her interview and this discrepancy in a core issue of  her  claim
       was so significant that he made an adverse  credibility  finding.  I
       find nothing wrong with that approach and the Judge was  entitled  t
       make the finding he did.

   18. The other issue raised was whether the Judge erred in  the  timeline
       of the appellant's relationship with Amir generally.  The  appellant
       gave answers about how long she had known Amir for in her  interview
       and when inconsistencies were highlighted she provided  a  statement
       that sought to explain the  inconsistencies.  The  Judge  considered
       that and at paragraph  [26]  gave  his  reasons  for  rejecting  her
       explanation and preferring the respondent's arguments.  Again,  that
       approach was open to the Judge.

   19. This was a credibility issue and the Judge found she  was  not  a  a
       credible witness.

   20. Nothing I have heard to day persuades me that there is an  error  in
       law and I uphold the original decision.

DECISION

   21. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       original decision


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No order is made because no fee was paid.


Signed                            Dated

 [pic]

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Alis
