





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06877/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |           Decisions and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 19 February 2015                  |           On 3 March 2015           |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                          Mr Jan Mohammed Miakhail
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty, counsel (instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. On 30 December 2014 the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing
      the appellant's appeal was set aside following a hearing.  The  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge had not sufficiently engaged  with  three  reports
      that had been produced. This resulted in a  failure  to  consider  the
      relevance of the appellant's  mental  health  issues  insofar  as  the
      respondent was contemplating removing him to Kabul.


   2. In particular, there was reference by the Judge to a complete lack  of
      evidence from a  consultant  psychiatrist.  There  had  been  evidence
      produced from Dr Applebee who had  specific  training  in  psychiatric
      conditions.  Further,   the   First-tier   Tribunal   had   considered
      alternatives to the causes for the appellant's depression. He had  not
      set out  any  of  his  experience  or  qualifications  entitling  such
      conclusions to be drawn. Moreover,  it  is  not  clear  in  any  event
      whether being removed from the culture of his birth or from his family
      or chemical imbalance or vitamin deficiency  can  be  responsible  for
      causing PTSD.


   3. In the circumstances, the question of whether it would be unreasonable
      or unduly harsh for  this  appellant  to  be  returned  to  Kabul  was
      required to be grappled with and evaluated in greater depth. This  had
      not taken place.


   4. The decision was accordingly set aside.


   5. At a  case  management  hearing  on  19  February  2015,  the  parties
      submitted at the outset that the matter  should  be  remitted  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision. It was  requested  that  the
      matter be submitted to Taylor House at the convenience of the parties.




   6. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
      regarding the issue of remitting an appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
      for a fresh decision. In applying the Statement I  am  satisfied  that
      the effect of the error has been to deprive the appellant  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal of a full opportunity of having his case  properly
      presented and considered. Moreover, I am satisfied that there will  be
      a substantial amount of evidence led.


      Notice of Decision


      The appeal is accordingly remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  (Taylor
      House) for a fresh decision to be  made.   The  date  arranged  is  13
      August 2015


      No anonymity direction is made.














      Signed:  Deputy Upper tribunal Judge Mailer


      Date:  2/3/2015

