
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06138/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 March 2016                              |On 14 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MS ANK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr E Tufan, a Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Claimant:          Mr A Swain of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal which allowed  Ms  ANK's  ("the  claimant")  appeal
    against the Secretary of  State's  decision  taken  on  18  March  2015
    refusing the claimant's asylum claim.

 3. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan and was born on [  ]  1968.   The
    claimant applied for a visit visa to come to  the  UK  on  13  November
    2013.  Visa applications were also made for the claimant's husband  and
    two of her children. On 28 November 2013 the claimant  was  granted  a
    visa for six months valid from 28 November 2013 to 28 May 2014.  On 13
    April 2014 the claimant claimed asylum. The claimant's husband and  two
    children are all dependants on her asylum claim. On 18 March  2015  the
    Secretary of State refused the claimant's claim for asylum.  A decision
    to remove the claimant from the UK by way of directions  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  (Removal:  Person  with
    Statutorily Extended Leave) was made.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The claimant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on 29 December 2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seifert
    allowed the claimant's appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found
    that the claimant's evidence as a whole was  generally  consistent  and
    that the claimant had a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Pakistan
    and qualified for the grant of asylum.   The  judge  found  that  there
    would not be sufficiency of protection and that internal relocation  in
    Pakistan would be unduly harsh and is not a realistic option.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred in  law  by
    failing to give adequate reasons for findings on material  matters  and
    failed to  consider  adequately  the  possibility  of  re-location.  On
    25 January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker granted permission to
    appeal.  The grounds set out that it is arguable  that  the  judge  has
    given insufficient and inadequate reasons for the decision.  Thus,  the
    appeal came before me.

Summary of Submissions

The Secretary of State's Submissions

 6. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge erred in law by failing  to
    give reasons or any adequate reasons for findings on material  matters.
    It is submitted that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons as to
    why the appellant's  account  is  accepted  and  why  there  is  not  a
    sufficiency of protection available to the claimant and her family upon
    return.  It is asserted that the judge made bare statements as  to  the
    acceptance of evidence, rather than providing evidence based  reasoning
    for the findings.   Reliance  is  placed  on  the  case  of  Budhathoki
    (reasons  for  decisions)  [2014]  UKUT  00341  (IAC)   ("Budhathoki").
    Reliance is also placed on the  case  of  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan UKUT 00641 (IAC).  The grounds draw attention to paragraph  62
    of the First-tier Tribunal's decision submitting that the findings  are
    bare statements as to the consistency of the claimant's account with no
    consideration or indication of what  the  inconsistencies  are  and  no
    reasons provided as to why  the  inconsistencies  referred  to  by  the
    Secretary of State do not undermine the appellant's credibility.  It is
    also asserted that the judge has failed to provide adequate reasons for
    finding that the appellant would  not  be  afforded  a  sufficiency  of
    protection and has no viable internal flight option.  Reference is made
    to paragraph 65 of the First-tier Tribunal decision and it is submitted
    that the findings are not supported with evidence based reasons.  It is
    further submitted that, in relation to the sufficiency  of  protection,
    internal flight would be available to  the  appellant.  The  judge  has
    failed to provide adequate reasons as to why the findings in  the  case
    of AW (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC)  ("AW")
    do not apply.  Reference is made to head note 2 of the AW case.  It  is
    asserted that the judge failed to provide reasons as to why,  in  light
    of the systematic sufficiency of state protection, the  claimant  would
    not be able to avail herself of that protection.

 7. Mr Tufan relied on the grounds of appeal.  He  asserted  that  although
    the decision appeared very detailed, that detail was only  with  regard
    to setting out the background  of  the  claim  and  the  evidence.   He
    submitted that at paragraph 60 of the decision there is  a  fundamental
    error of law.  The judge gives no reasons for the findings  made.   She
    merely sets out her acceptance of the evidence but gives no reasons and
    engages in no analysis.  He asserted that at the end  of  paragraph  60
    the judge accepted that false information was given but it is not clear
    why the judge has accepted this evidence or why  she  has  ignored  the
    inconsistencies.  He asserted that in particular there is  no  analysis
    as to why internal  relocation  is  not  a  viable  option.   Mr  Tufan
    referred to the case of SM and MH (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan  CG
    [2016] UKUT 00067 (IAC) and submitted that this  case  emphasises  that
    there is a sufficiency of protection in Pakistan.  He  relied  on  head
    note 8 which refers to women in Pakistan  being  legally  permitted  to
    divorce their husbands and remarry.  He asserted  that  Pakistan  is  a
    large country and that the appellant and her husband could go  anywhere
    within Pakistan.

The Claimant's submissions

 8. Mr Swain submitted that in paragraph 56 of the decision the  judge  set
    out his  (i.e.  Mr  Swain's)  submissions  where  he  referred  to  the
    inadequacy of protection in Pakistan.  He asserted that the  claimant's
    asylum claim was not limited to the fact  that  she  had  divorced  and
    remarried.  It was  centred  around  the  fact  that  she  had  had  an
    extramarital affair.  As a consequence of that she had divorced and had
    remarried.  He submitted that the judge had the benefit of a three-hour
    hearing and had taken the view that the claimants  were  credible.   On
    the basis of the witness evidence  and  against  the  backdrop  of  the
    objective evidence the claimant's account could not be more  plausible.
    He submitted that the fact that the claimant had  had  an  extramarital
    affair and as a result of that had a child born out of wedlock were key
    factors.  I asked Mr Swain where in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    these were identified as key factors.  After  having  spent  some  time
    looking at the evidence at my request Mr Swain referred me to paragraph
    27 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision from which he submitted it  is
    clear that the judge took into account the evidence  of  the  appellant
    from her asylum interview. After  some  further  time  considering  the
    evidence I referred Mr Swain to question 23 of that interview where the
    appellant had set out that she was at risk because of the  extramarital
    relationship and the fact her daughter was born  out  of  wedlock.   Mr
    Swain referred to the 1979 Hudood Ordinances, in particular pages 20 to
    21 of the guidance.  This he submitted was taken into  account  by  the
    judge.  The Ordinances criminalise extramarital sex and punishment  can
    include stoning to death.  He submitted that  internal  relocation  was
    simply not possible because as a matter of law the  appellant  and  her
    husband would be discriminated  against.   He  submitted  that  it  was
    evident from the points made, as  set  out  in  paragraph  56,  of  the
    decision that the judge had taken these factors into account.  This was
    not a simple case of a Sunni marrying a Shia Muslim.  He submitted that
    pursuant to the Home  Office's  own  objective  evidence  the  claimant
    satisfies the Qualification Regulations.  He also asserted that if  the
    issue was simply one of love marriages  that  would  be  sufficient  of
    itself to require protection.  He asserted that the case of SM  and  MH
    (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan country guidance [2016]  UKUT  00067
    (IAC) does not have a bearing on the instant case because the facts are
    different.  In this case a child was born out  of  wedlock  whilst  the
    appellant was married to another man.  He referred to paragraph  16  of
    the decision where the judge refers to the appellant's  assertion  that
    her brothers will kill her  daughters.   He  submitted  that  this  was
    realistic given that one of the children was born out of  wedlock.   He
    submitted that overall  the  decision  was  a  reasoned  decision  when
    considering the earlier paragraphs and the evidence previously referred
    to.

The Secretary of State's reply

 9. Mr Tufan submitted that Mr Swain had engaged in giving the reasons that
    in fact the judge should have given.  He asserted that  this  does  not
    absolve the fact that the judge erred by not undertaking the  analysis.
    With  regard  to  the  Hudood  Ordinances  he  submitted   that   these
    punishments have never been carried out and that it is clear that it is
    relevant to an assessment of risk to consider how and whether the  laws
    have ever been implemented.

10. Both representatives submitted that if I was to find a  material  error
    of law the proper approach would be for the matter to  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

11.  The judge has set out in detail the claimant's claim and evidence. She
    has also set out in some detail the submissions made. However, there is
    very little analysis of, or  engagement  with,  that  evidence  or  the
    submissions. There is also no analysis of  the  objective  evidence.  A
    judge does not have to rehearse every  piece  of  evidence  but  it  is
    necessary to provide sufficient reasoning so  that  it  is  clear  what
    evidence/issues the judge accepted and what she did not and why she has
    arrived at the conclusions that she did. As set out  in  Budhathoki  at
    paragraph 14:

         "...it is generally unnecessary, unhelpful and unhealthy for First-
         tier Tribunal judgments to seek to rehearse every detail  or  issue
         raised in the case.  ...  It is, however, necessary for  First-tier
         Tribunal judges to identify and resolve the key  conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons  for
         preferring one case to the other so that the parties can understand
         why they have won or lost."

12. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out at paragraphs 22 to 24  a  number
    of the inconsistencies noted by the Secretary of State. At paragraph 26
    to 28 the judge set out further inconsistencies noted by the  Secretary
    of State. At paragraphs 28 to 49 the  judge  set  out  the  appellant's
    evidence including the oral  evidence  from  the  claimant  and  Mr  K.
    Although  some  of  that   evidence   explained   a   number   of   the
    inconsistencies that had been noted by the Secretary of State there  is
    little or no analysis by the judge of the evidence and  reasons  as  to
    why she preferred the evidence of the claimant to that of the Secretary
    of State. With regard to its sufficiency of protection judge set out at
    paragraphs  50  to  52  the  Secretary  of  State's  arguments  and  at
    paragraphs 53 to 56 the claimant's submissions. In respect of  internal
    relocation, the judge set out at paragraphs 57 to 58 the  Secretary  of
    State arguments.

13. Having set out at length (some 36  paragraphs)  the  evidence  and  the
    submissions of the parties the judge then arrived  at  her  conclusions
    commencing at paragraph 60.  It  is  worth  setting  out  in  full  the
    conclusions reached by the judge. From paragraph 60 the judge set out:

         "60. Having considered the evidence of the whole, I have found  the
         appellant and Mr K to be credible witnesses. It is not  in  dispute
         that he is Sunni and she is  Shia.  They  have  been  in  a  loving
         relationship since 2002. The appellant and her first  husband  were
         divorced in 2013 and later that year the appellant and  Mr  K  were
         married. The originals of  the  divorce  certificate  and  marriage
         certificate have been produced. I accept their evidence that  their
         families were unaware of the marriage until 2014. They  then  found
         out that he was Sunni. Although the appellant's brother had seen Mr
         K at the  appellant's  home  in  Pakistan,  they  were  not  living
         together there and she was able to explain this on the  basis  that
         Mr K was her driver Mr K and the appellant have one child together,
         N. He also regards S like a daughter. After they came to the UK for
         a visit the appellant was informed by her friend in  Pakistan  that
         her family had found out about the relationship and  marriage.  She
         is in contact with B and her mother. Her mother  told  her  of  the
         problems the marriage  had  caused  and  that  her  family  members
         threatened to harm or kill her and  Mr  K  if  they  returned.  The
         documents provided have been described earlier  in  this  decision.
         These included FIRs. I  accept  that  these  contained  some  false
         information and appear to be designed to harm Mr K.  The  newspaper
         articles, one of which offers a  reward,  also  support  the  fears
         expressed by the appellant and Mr K. The letters from the religious
         bodies are consistent with the appellant's and Mr K's  accounts  of
         the risk to them on return.

         61. In her closing submissions Ms Watkins submitted that there were
         discrepancies in the screening interview about when the appellant's
         parents found out that this was a  Sunni/Shia  marriage.  She  also
         said that there are uncertainties as to whether the  appellant  was
         living with Mr K during the  year  before  they  left  Pakistan  or
         whether he visited her. She submitted that  there  was  uncertainty
         about how the picture of Mr  K  was  obtained,  and  submitted  the
         contents  of  the  article  page  78  of  the  appellant's   bundle
         containing (sic) confusing information. Mr Swain submitted that any
         inconsistency in the interview does not show  dishonesty  and  does
         not weaken the fear of this family if they return to Pakistan.

         62. Having considered the available evidence as a whole I found the
         account generally consistent. The few inconsistencies  referred  to
         do  not  necessarily  undermine   the   general   consistency   and
         credibility of the appellant's case.

         63.  In  respect  of  sufficiency  of   protection   and   internal
         relocation, Ms Watkins stated that the  reasons  for  refusal  were
         comprehensive. The appellant was not in Pakistan and had not sought
         protection of the police. She would be returning to  Pakistan  with
         her husband and would not  be  a  female  alone.  Even  if  it  was
         accepted that the newspaper articles were genuine,  these  were  in
         2014. They might be from newspapers with a small circulation. There
         was no evidence that the FIRs  were  centrally  circulated  in  the
         police system. Other than a few threatening phone  calls  from  the
         appellant's mother, there was no evidence of recent interest in the
         appellant in 2015. Even if that were active interest, the appellant
         could relocate.

         64. Mr Swain referred amongst other matters, to the nature  of  the
         relationship between the appellant Mr K. There was an  extramarital
         relationship and the birth of  their  child  was  outside  wedlock.
         There is no effective  state  protection  throughout  Pakistan  and
         internal flight was unrealistic. He referred in particular to pages
         21 and 22 of the Guidance.

         65.  Having  considered  the  evidence  and  submissions,  in   the
         circumstances I am satisfied that there would not be sufficiency of
         protection and that internal relocation would be unduly  harsh  and
         is not a realistic option.

         66. For the reasons given above I am satisfied  that  it  has  been
         shown that it has been shown (sic) to the  required  standard  that
         the appellant has a well-founded fear of  persecution  in  Pakistan
         and qualifies for the grant of asylum." [names removed to  preserve
         anonymity]

14. It is evident from the paragraphs set out  above  that  the  judge  has
    failed to undertake a fact-specific  analysis  of  much  the  evidence.
    Even when making her findings in these concluding paragraphs the  judge
    appears to again recite  submissions  without  a  critical  evaluation.
    There is no real explanation as to why she concluded in the  claimant's
    favour. The judge has not dealt in any detail with the discrepancies in
    evidence noted by the Secretary of State other than to say that the few
    inconsistencies  do  not  undermine  the  general  credibility  of  the
    claimant's case.

15. In particular, at paragraph 66, set out above, despite  being  referred
    to the relevant case law on risk on return and internal re-location and
    in setting out the parties'  submissions  on  the  case-law  the  judge
    failed  to  explain  why  she  considered  that  there  would  not   be
    sufficiency of protection or why she found it would be unduly harsh and
    not a realistic option for the  claimant  to  re-locate.  There  is  no
    analysis of the objective evidence by the judge.

16. It was evident at the hearing before me that Mr Swain had to resort  to
    piecing together the reasons  as  to  why  the  judge  arrived  at  her
    conclusions by referring to various paragraphs in the decision  wherein
    the judge had  set  out  submissions  and  evidence  and  then  drawing
    inferences  from  them.  Whilst  Mr  Swain  undertook  this  task  with
    meticulous attention to detail I accept Mr Tufan's submission that what
    Mr Swain was most admirably doing was  performing  the  task  that  the
    judge ought to have undertaken. It is not clear why the  judge  arrived
    at her conclusions particularly with regard to the possibility  of  re-
    location within Pakistan.

17. For the above reasons I find that there were material errors of law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision. It is far from clear  that  another
    Tribunal would have arrived at the same conclusion.

18. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  I set aside that decision pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').  I
    considered the Practice Statement concerning transfer of proceedings. I
    am satisfied that the nature and extent of judicial fact  finding  that
    is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be  re-made  is
    such, having regard to the overriding objective, that it is appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case  to  be  heard
    afresh before a  different  judge  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)  and
    12(3)(a) of the TCEA. The case is to be listed on  the  next  available
    date.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of  law.
The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The  case  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing  before  a  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Seifert.





Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 9 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

