
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06870/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination issued         |
|On 10 November 2014                           |On 12 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                        mohamed shafras abdul razick
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Seehra, Solicitor instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The appeal of  the  Appellant,  Mr  Mohamed  Shafras  Abdul  Razick,  a
    citizen of Sri Lanka, was heard  by  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  sitting  at
    Taylor House  on  7  August  2014  and  dismissed  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 9 September 2014.  Permission to appeal was granted on 1
    October  2014,  later  followed  by  procedural  directions,  by  Judge
    Macdonald in the following terms:

         "1.  The grounds of application contend that the  judge's  negative
             credibility findings flow from paragraph 16 of  her  decision.
             It is said that the judge's assessment of  the  documents  was
             flawed  and  fundamentally  unfair  in  the  absence  of   any
             challenge by the Presenting Officer.  The judge's finding that
             Mr Aneez's letter was a recitation of  instructions  from  the
             Appellant's mother and uncle was plainly wrong.  The judge had
             failed to consider PJ (Sri Lanka).  Furthermore the judge  had
             engaged in speculation and had made findings inconsistent with
             country guidance case law.


         2.   It is arguably, for reasons given in the grounds that  it  was
             an arguable error for the judge to place limited weight on the
             lawyer's letter for the reasons she gave.  Furthermore it  was
             arguably speculative for the judge to conclude that the  court
             documents/arrest warrant could not  be  verified  because  the
             signatures were illegible.  It is also arguable that the judge
             attached too much weight to the  fact  that  he  was  able  to
             depart the country without difficulty (paragraph 17).


         3.   Permission is granted on all grounds."

2.   On 9 October 2014 the Respondent served a Rule 24 Notice  opposing  the
    application for permission to appeal.

3.   At the error of law hearing Mr Wilding for the Respondent,  whilst  not
    accepting other aspects of the grounds  of  application,  accepted  the
    existence of a material error of law on the grounds set out  below  and
    recognised that none of the findings  of  fact  could  stand.   Without
    needing to hear Miss Seehra I  said  that  this  corresponded  with  my
    preliminary view of the application, which was that the  appeal  needed
    to be re-heard on all issues.  However I declined the request  by  Miss
    Seehra to restrain the Respondent from challenging the  genuineness  of
    any documents or from doing so without reasons, on the  basis  that  no
    party should be trammelled in a full re-hearing.

Determination

4.   The essential argument  is  that,  in  paragraphs  18  and  19  of  the
    determination, the judge did not properly assess the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and placed only limited weight on the correspondence  with  a
    lawyer in Sri Lanka on the basis of  the  absence  of  any  independent
    corroborative evidence.  This reasoning is not logical.  It relates  to
    a matter going to the core of  the  appeal  and  renders  the  findings
    unsafe.

5.   I accordingly set aside the determination.   The  effect  is  that  the
    Appellant has effectively been deprived of a fair hearing.  Pursuant to
    paragraph 7 of Part 3 of the Practice Directions of the Immigration and
    Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal I accordingly remit the appeal for
    re-hearing in the First-tier Tribunal by any  judge  other  than  Judge
    Wellesley-Cole.

Decision

6.      The original determination contains a material error of law  and  is
    set aside.

7.    The Appeal is to be reheard in the First-tier Tribunal  by  any  judge
    other than Judge Wellesley-Cole.



Signed
        Dated: 12 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
