
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06301/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On Tuesday 20 October 2015           |On Wednesday 21 October 2015         |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MR J A
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Williock-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Miah, Counsel


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a  protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Background

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    For ease of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the
    First-Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State  is  technically
    the Appellant in this particular appeal.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He arrived in the UK  as  a
    work permit holder on 8 August 2006.  He applied for a  certificate  of
    approval to enter into a civil partnership with a same sex  partner  in
    November 2009 which was granted on 29 November 2010.   He  applied  for
    leave to remain on human rights (Article 8) grounds on 28 November 2011
    which application was refused on 25 May 2012.  On 16 December 2013,  he
    was served notice of liability to removal as an overstayer.  He claimed
    asylum on 11 February 2014.  His asylum claim was rejected on 27  March
    2015 and a notice to remove him to Bangladesh was served leading to his
    current appeal.

 3. The Appellant's asylum claim is based  on  political  opinion  (on  the
    basis of active membership of the Youth Wing of the BNP party) and  his
    homosexuality.  His appeal was allowed  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Phull in a decision promulgated on 30 July 2015 ("the Decision").   The
    Judge rejected the claim based on political opinion but appears to have
    accepted the claim based on the Appellant's sexuality and on that basis
    has found that he would have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on
    return.

 4. The Respondent sought permission to appeal the Decision  on  the  basis
    that the Judge has failed to provide adequate reasons for  her  finding
    that the Appellant's claim to be homosexual is credible when viewed  in
    the context of  the  inconsistencies  identified  in  the  Respondent's
    decision letter.  Permission was granted by First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson on 1 September 2015 on the basis that the  Judge  had  arguably
    erred by providing inadequate reasons for her findings at [31] and [32]
    of the Decision.   The  matter  comes  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    determine whether the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the  making
    of an error of law.

Submissions

 5. Mrs Williocks-Briscoe pointed to the distinction between [25]  to  [30]
    where the Judge sets out her reasons for rejecting the claim  based  on
    BNP membership and [31] to [32] where the Judge deals with the claim to
    be homosexual.  The Judge failed to  engage  with  the  inconsistencies
    identified in the Respondent's decision letters or give reasons why she
    accepted the Appellant as credible in relation to the core of this part
    of his claim in light of  those  inconsistencies,  particularly  having
    found him not to be credible in relation to the core of  his  political
    opinion claim.  The Judge failed to engage  with  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence in relation to how he and  his  former  partner  met  and  the
    communication difficulties between them.  She accepted that Karanakaran
    does not require the Judge to deal with every point but submitted  that
    the Judge should say why she accepts or rejects parts of the claim  and
    should on that basis have dealt with the conflict of evidence.

 6. Mr Miah submitted that the Judge had adequately reasoned her (implicit)
    finding at [31] and [32] that the Appellant's claim to be homosexual is
    credible.  He referred to [10] to [13] where the  Judge  sets  out  the
    facts on which the claim is based.  The Judge considered  the  evidence
    of the relationship in Dhaka which the Judge accepts as  credible.   At
    [32] the Judge sets out the reasons why  the  Respondent  rejected  the
    claimed relationship in the UK as not  credible  but  for  the  reasons
    given in that paragraph, she accepts that this  relationship  also  was
    genuine.  The Judge was not required to set out every sentence  of  the
    Respondent's decision letter.

 7. In relation to whether it was inconsistent for the Judge  to  find  the
    Appellant credible in relation  to  this  part  of  his  claim,  having
    rejected the other part of the claim, Mr Miah submitted that when  read
    as a whole, the Appellant was not disbelieved in relation to the  claim
    relating to his political  opinion.   That  aspect  of  his  claim  was
    rejected on the basis that the evidence was not sufficient to meet  the
    standard of proof in order to make out that part of the claim.  Even if
    the Appellant was not believed in relation to this part of  the  claim,
    that did not mean that he could not be  believed  in  relation  to  the
    claim based on his sexuality (relying on the case of Chiver).

Decision and reasons

 8.  The  Appellant's  claim  to  be  homosexual  was  evidenced  by  three
    relationships.  The first was that, whilst in Bangladesh and before  he
    moved to Dhaka, he realised when sharing a bed with other boys  in  his
    family that he had sexual feelings towards  other  boys.   He  said  at
    interview that he did not have sex with any boys at that time but later
    contradicted that and said that he had sex with his  cousin.   When  he
    moved to Dhaka, he claimed to have been in a relationship with  another
    man, Joshim, with whom he shared a flat for two years.  They were in  a
    sexual relationship but could not express that relationship outside the
    home for fear of repercussions.  He has since lost contact with Joshim.
     In the UK, the Appellant  relies  on  a  relationship  with  a  Polish
    national, Rummel.  The Appellant claims that they  met  in  July/August
    2009 although it appears from evidence apparently given  by  Rummel  in
    February 2010 that this may have been 2008.  The Appellant  and  Rummel
    claimed in a written document dated 15 February 2010 that they met on a
    train but in interview the Appellant says that they met when they  were
    introduced by a friend at his friend's house.  In the document dated 15
    February 2010, they said that they had been living together  for  three
    months.  At interview, the Appellant said that  they  had  never  lived
    together although they met up at a friend's house four  or  five  times
    per week.  He lived  with  his  brother.   Rummel  lived  in  a  rented
    property.   The Appellant obtained a certificate of approval  to  enter
    into  a  civil  partnership  with  Rummel  in  November  2009  but  the
    relationship broke down when Rummel disappeared in October 2010 and the
    Appellant has not seen him since.  It is also  worth  noting  that  the
    Appellant says that his friend interpreted for him and Rummel  so  that
    they could communicate as the Appellant spoke little English.

 9. I set out below [31] and [32] of the Decision where the Judge  set  out
    her findings in relation to the above facts:-

    "[31]  I turn to consider the appellant's claim that  he  would  be  at
    risk in Bangladesh because he is a homosexual.  I find the  appellant's
    evidence to be credible that he had a sexual encounter with his  cousin
    before he left  for  the  [sic]  Dhaka,  where  he  worked  and  had  a
    clandestine sexual relationship with another man, Joshim, for 2  years.
    I find that the appellant's account is consistent throughout his  claim
    about  his  relationship  with  Joshim.   I  find  he  gives  a  candid
    explanation that because of the anti gay culture in Bangladesh  he  and
    Joshim were unable to display any affection or reveal  their  sexuality
    to the community because of a fear of reprisals.

    [32]   The respondent alleges that the appellant is  not  a  homosexual
    because in the UK he claims to have entered  a  relationship  with  the
    Polish  national,  Rummel,  but  the  relationship  ended  before   the
    certificate of approval was granted.  The fact the  relationship  ended
    cannot in my view be construed as the appellant not being a homosexual.
     I find what goes to his credibility is that he did not  embellish  the
    details of his relationship.  He was candid that the  relationship  was
    conducted behind closed doors at a friend's house.  He and  Rummel  did
    not display any affection or touch  one  another  in  public  to  avoid
    adverse attention. I accept his explanation that he is  at  a  loss  to
    understand why his partner left him."

10. Although as those paragraphs show, the Judge  did  not  make  a  direct
    finding that the Appellant's is a homosexual based on  that  assessment
    of the evidence, it is clearly inferred from the paragraphs that follow
    that she accepted that claim and found him to be at risk on  return  to
    Bangladesh on that account.

11. I am acutely aware that the Judge heard the Appellant give evidence and
    it was for her to assess credibility based on that evidence.   However,
    where there were inconsistencies in that evidence  based  on  what  the
    Appellant had said at various times in the past, it  was  incumbent  on
    the Judge to at least make reference to those  inconsistencies  and  to
    make findings giving reasons  why  facts  were  found  to  be  credible
    notwithstanding  those  inconsistencies.   The  lack  of  reasoning  in
    relation to the Appellant's sexual encounter prior to moving  to  Dhaka
    may be inconsequential.  He had said at one time that he did  not  have
    sex with another male before Joshim but changed his account.   However,
    the Judge had to accept one or other account and has done so.  That was
    sufficient given the limited inconsistency.

12. However, the reasoning in relation to the acceptance that the Appellant
    was in a relationship with Rummel is inadequate.  It is clear from what
    is set out  at  [8]  that  there  were  major  inconsistencies  in  the
    Appellant's account of how and when they met, where they lived, whether
    they lived together and how they communicated given  their  lack  of  a
    common language.  It  was  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to  explain  why,
    notwithstanding   those   inconsistencies   she   accepted   that   the
    relationship was genuine or to set out  the  evidence  to  resolve  the
    inconsistencies  on  which  the  Respondent  relied.   I  am  therefore
    satisfied that the Judge made an error of law  in  failing  to  provide
    adequate reasons for her finding that the relationship with  Rummel  in
    particular was genuine.

13. It is possible  that  the  Judge  has  relied  on  the  granting  of  a
    certificate of approval by the Respondent as  an  acceptance  that  the
    relationship  was  genuine  and  therefore  on  the  breakdown  of  the
    relationship thereafter as being the reason why the Respondent did  not
    now accept the account as credible.  If that is  so,  that  remains  an
    error as a certificate of approval does not confer leave to  remain  in
    the UK and as such was simply  a  permission  to  enter  into  a  civil
    partnership (as is clear from the face of the document).  Otherwise, it
    is clear on the face of  the  Respondent's  decision  letter  that  the
    inconsistencies  went  far  beyond  simply  the   breakdown   of   that
    relationship  before  the  Appellant  could  enter   into   the   civil
    partnership with Rummel.

14. Having found an error in  relation  to  the  finding  at  [32]  of  the
    Decision, I have considered whether it could be said that the error  is
    not material.  I have noted above that the Judge was entitled  to  make
    the finding at [31] that the Appellant had a sexual encounter with  his
    cousin and that the relationship with Joshim was genuine.   However,  I
    conclude that the error is material.  It is possible that, on the basis
    of the two relationships which the Judge found  genuine  at  [31],  she
    could go on to find that the Appellant is  a  homosexual  even  if  the
    relationship with Rummel was fabricated  or  the  inconsistencies  were
    satisfactorily resolved.  However, the converse is also true. I am  not
    satisfied that the same outcome would  be  reached  if  there  were  an
    adverse credibility finding about the relationship with Rummel as  this
    may well impact on the finding of credibility in relation to the  other
    two  relationships  and  therefore  the  whole  claim  based   on   the
    Appellant's sexuality.  I am  therefore  satisfied  that  the  Decision
    contains a material error of law and I set it aside.

15. The parties agreed that if I were to find a material error of law,  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for  a  re-hearing
    of the claim.  The parties agreed that the findings in relation to  the
    claim insofar as it is based on political opinion should be  preserved.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the Decision

I remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for re-hearing.  The  findings
in relation to the Appellant's claim based on political opinion  (dismissing
that part of the claim) are preserved.


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
