
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06609/2014
     AA/06610/2014
     AA/06611/2014
         AA/06612/2014
     AA/06613/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 November 2015                           |On 7 December 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     NS
                                     AK
                                     JK
                                     Gk
                                     DS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr I Ali instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the appellants who claims asylum and  some  of
    whom are children.  This order prohibits  the  disclosure  directly  or
    indirectly  (including  by  the  parties)  of  the  identity   of   the
    appellants.  Any disclosure and breach of this order may  amount  to  a
    contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless revoked  or
    varied by a Tribunal or court.


Background

 2. The appellants are a family consisting of husband and  wife  and  three
    children born respectively on 1 January 1979, 1 January  1982,  6  June
    2003, 30 August 2009 and 3 October 2012.

 3. They each claim to be citizens of Afghanistan and to be Sikhs.

 4. They entered United Kingdom clandestinely on 7 March 2014  and  claimed
    asylum.  The basis of their claim was that they came from Jalalabad  in
    Afghanistan and were followers of the Sikh faith.  They claimed to have
    been ill-treated by Muslim men in  Afghanistan.   In  March  2012,  the
    first appellant claimed that his brother was killed by Muslim  men  who
    came to the house demanding money and he and his  father  were  beaten.
    In the months thereafter, Muslim men would regularly come to the family
    shop demanding money and taking it from the first appellant's father by
    force.  In August 2012, the first appellant and his family were visited
    at home by Muslim men and threatened that they would be killed if  they
    did not pay money.  The first appellant's father  was  beaten  and  the
    first appellant's wife was raped by one of  the  assailants.   The  men
    threatened to kill the whole family if they did not pay money to  them.
    On 30 December 2013, the appellant's father closed the family shop  and
    the family decided to leave Afghanistan in January 2014.   They  traded
    their shop, their house and possessions in exchange for  an  agent  who
    arranged their passage to a safe country.

 5. On 14 February 2014 the first appellant, his  wife  and  children  left
    Afghanistan.  His parents remained but left  subsequently.   The  first
    appellant and his family passed through a number of European  countries
    before entering the UK in a lorry on 7 March  2014  when  they  claimed
    asylum.

 6. On 19  August  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  each  of  the
    appellants' claims for asylum and made  decisions  to  remove  them  as
    illegal entrants by way of directions under paras 8 - 10 of Schedule  2
    to the Immigration Act 1971.  The respondent did not  accept  that  the
    appellant's were from Afghanistan, were of the  Sikh  religion  or  had
    been attacked and threatened as they claimed by Muslim men.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellants appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 26 March 2015, Judge Barcello dismissed the  appellants'
    appeals.  Although he accepted that they were  adherents  to  the  Sikh
    faith, he did not accept that  they  were  Afghan  citizens  or,  as  a
    consequence, that the ill-treatment they claimed as  a  family  at  the
    hands of Muslim men had occurred in Afghanistan.

 8. As a consequence, he dismissed the appellants' appeals  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds and also under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds challenging the judge's adverse findings in  relation
    to their nationality and in rejecting their account of ill-treatment in
    Afghanistan.   The  dismissal  of  the  appeal  under  Art  8  was  not
    challenged.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but granted by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Lindsley) on 6 July 2015.

11. Thus, the appeals came before me.

Discussion

12. On behalf of the  appellant,  Mr  Ali  made  a  number  of  submissions
    challenging the judge's reasoning in para 43 of his determination based
    upon the appellant's grounds and Mr Ali's written skeleton argument.

13. First, Mr Ali raised a number of points in respect of para 43(v)  where
    the judge reached the conclusion that the appellants' National ID Cards
    (at  pages  42  -  52)  were  not  genuine  documents  supporting   the
    appellants' claims to be Afghan nationals.  Paragraph 43(v)  is in  the
    following terms:

         "(v) The Appellant produced within his bundle documents  purporting
             to  be  National  ID  Cards  (pgs.42-52(A))  produced  by  the
             Interior  Ministry.   I  have  approached  this  evidence   in
             accordance with the  principles  derived  from  Tanveer  Ahmed
             (Starred) 2002  UKIAT  00439.   Whilst  I  am  told  that  the
             documents were obtained in September 2014, the  originals  had
             not been produced until the morning of  the  hearing.   Having
             considered the documents very carefully, I have been driven to
             the conclusion that it is very clear that they are not genuine
             documents in the manner described by the Appellant.   I  reach
             this conclusion for 5 reasons.

             a.   The Appellant stated at Screening Interview that  he  had
             never had  a  national  identity  card,  which  the  documents
             clearly purport to be.  At no stage in the full interview  was
             reference made to these documents.  Had these existed  at  the
             time and  been  held  by  Gudwara  for  safe  keeping  as  the
             Appellant suggests, I would have expected  some  reference  to
             them at one of the interviews at  some  stage.   I  would  not
             expect  him  likely  to  forget  ownership  of  something   as
             important as an identity card which he claims to have obtained
             in person, legitimately in April 2013.

             b.   The Appellant claimed that he attended at a  building  to
             acquire all 4  documents  at  the  same  time.   There  is  no
             explanation as to why he might do so in April 2013 as  opposed
             to acquiring the documents as and when needs required over his
             lifetime.

             c.   The  Appellant  and  his  wife  each  told  me  that  the
             documents were acquired at a time when their youngest son  was
             6 months old, yet his age is given  as  2  years  old  on  the
             document.  Given  that  the  Appellant  claims  to  have  been
             present at the time the document was created  and  in  company
             with his family and a member of the  Gurdwara,  the  error  is
             inexplicable.

             d.   None of this family claim to speak Pushtu,  yet  each  of
             the documents states that that is their mother  tongue.   None
             of the documents make reference  to  their  ability  to  speak
             Punjabi, yet there is clearly a means by which to do so  under
             "Language: Foreign".

             e.   The original documents are  in  pristine  condition,  not
             having seemingly been folded or marked in any way.  This seems
             an unlikely feature  for  documents  which  have  the  history
             claimed by the Appellant."

14. Mr Ali initially submitted that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  in  para
    43(v)(a) to doubt the authenticity of the ID cards on  the  basis  that
    the first appellant had said at his screening  interview  that  he  had
    never been issued with one.  Mr Ali submitted that at question 2.2  (A3
    of the bundle) the first appellant had said that  he  had  "never  been
    issued a passport".  He had said nothing about an  ID  card.   However,
    when I drew Mr Ali's attention  to  the  first  appellant's  answer  to
    question 2.6 in his screening interview when he had been asked  whether
    he had ever owned a national ID card  and  had  replied  "no",  Mr  Ali
    accepted that he could no longer rely upon this point.

15. Mr Ali then submitted that the judge had been wrong in para 43(v)(d) to
    doubt the authenticity of the  ID  document  on  the  basis  that  they
    wrongly stated that Pushtu was the appellants' "mother tongue" when  in
    fact none of the family claimed to speak Pushtu.  Mr  Ali  relied  upon
    the Country  of  Origin  Report  (15  February  2013)  in  relation  to
    Afghanistan where it is stated:

         "...the relevant  authorities  are  negligent  and  inattentive  in
         recording applicants' data in  national  ID  cards  and  there  are
         mistakes when writing names, father's names, age, and other data of
         applicants on  cards.   This  will  cause  many  problems  for  the
         applicants in the future.  Authenticity and accuracy are  necessary
         in the issuance of national ID cards and the authorities should pay
         due attention to it."

16. Mr Ali submitted that the judge had  failed  to  take  this  background
    evidence  into  account  which  provided   an   explanation   for   the
    inconsistency in what is said to be the appellants' first language.

17. Mr Ali also submitted that the judge was wrong in para 43(v)(e) to take
    into account the "pristine condition" of the documents when  there  was
    no expert evidence before the judge as  to  how  the  documents  should
    look.  Mr Ali submitted that it was not right to  draw  the  conclusion
    that the judge did based on the state of the documents in  the  absence
    of expert evidence.

18. Mr Ali links those specific submissions with a more general  one  based
    upon fairness.  He submitted that the appellant had not been aware that
    the genuineness of these documents would be called into question at the
    hearing.  Had that been known, Mr Ali submitted, he would have been  in
    a position to  seek  an  adjournment  in  order  to  obtain  supporting
    evidence as to the document's authenticity including the possibility of
    obtaining expert evidence.  He referred me to pages  20  -  25  of  the
    appellants' supplementary bundle containing  a  birth  certificate  for
    each  of  the  appellants  showing  their  Afghan  nationality  and   a
    supporting letter from the Society of Afghan Residents in  South  Wales
    confirming that the first appellant is part of the Afghan community  in
    South Wales.

19. Dealing first with the issue of fairness, I see no basis upon which  it
    can be said that the  appellants,  who  where  legally  represented  by
    Counsel, were in any way taken by surprise  at  the  hearing  that  the
    authenticity or reliability of  the  documents  was  in  issue.   These
    documents were only produced, in their original form, on the day of the
    hearing.  Although, having consulted the judge's Record of  Proceedings
    and the note of the two representatives at the hearing, the  Presenting
    Officer does not appear to have made any or,  at  least,  any  detailed
    submissions on the authenticity or reliability of  the  documents,  the
    refusal letter clearly and unequivocally put in issue  the  appellants'
    credibility.  That, in effect, put  in  issue  the  reliability  and/or
    authenticity of the documents submitted by the appellant  to  establish
    the very case that the respondent had rejected in the  refusal  letter.
    Putting it shortly, it must have been  plain  and  obvious  unless  the
    Presenting Officer conceded they were genuine and reliable  that  their
    evidential value was both challenged and in issue before the judge.

20. The appellants had, in my judgment, ample opportunity to  provide  such
    evidence as they chose both to support the reliability of the documents
    but also their general case that they were Afghan nationals.   Although
    Mr Ali pointed to supporting documents provided  in  the  supplementary
    bundle since the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, there  was  no
    expert report in relation to the  ID  cards  and  the  other  documents
    related to the appellants' nationality but did not  speak  directly  to
    the reliability of the documents themselves.  Their nationality was, of
    course, always in issue.  It is not clear to me,  therefore,  precisely
    what  opportunity  to  produce  further  evidence  at  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's hearing relating directly to the reliability/authenticity of
    the ID cards it is said the appellants have in fact been denied.

21.  There  is  no  substance  in  Mr  Ali's  submission  which  sought  to
    distinguish between the reliability of  a  document,  applying  Tanveer
    Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439) and whether the documents were genuine.   The
    judge both refers to Tanveer Ahmed but also he is  not  satisfied  that
    the documents were genuine.  Whilst that is a potential confusion,  the
    upshot of the judge's reasoning is plain, namely he considered that the
    documents had no evidential value in respect of the appellants'  claims
    to be Afghan nationals.

22. Turning to the two specific points made by Mr Ali, it would undoubtedly
    have been better had the judge referred to the COI Report  as  part  of
    his reasoning in para 43(v)(d).  Even if it is correct to assume, and I
    am not wholly persuaded that it is, that the judge  did  not  have  the
    appellant's arguments including the reliance on the COI  in  mind  (see
    for example para 39 of the determination), this only formed  one  of  a
    number of reasons given by the judge for doubting the evidential  value
    of the ID cards.  Likewise, the judge was entitled  to  take  a  common
    sense approach to  the  state  of  the  original  documents  and  their
    "pristine condition" even in the absence of expert  evidence.   It  had
    been, as I have already pointed out, always open to  the  appellant  to
    produce supporting expert evidence in relation to the  authenticity  of
    the ID documents.  None was produced at the hearing and none  has  been
    produced since the hearing.  There was no obligation on the  respondent
    to verify the documents.

23. Consequently, I reject Mr Ali's submissions that the judge's  reasoning
    in para 43(v) in doubting the  evidential  value  of  the  ID  document
    disclosed any material error of law.

24. Secondly, Mr Ali challenged the judge's  reasoning  in  para  43(i)  in
    which the judge doubted the first appellant's  claimed  nationality  on
    the basis of the his lack of knowledge or vagueness about  Afghanistan.
    The judge said this:

         "43(i)   When he was interviewed though the appellant did answer  a
                number of questions accurately, he appeared to have  only  a
                vague and non-specific knowledge of  Jalalabad,  Afghanistan
                and ordinary incidences of life there.  He did not know  for
                example an idea of the population size of the country,  when
                the Russians left the country,  who  was  the  President  in
                1993, the name of any newspapers, the district  the  airport
                is in or an indication of the distance between the  hospital
                and university.  In other areas, he gave  wrong  answers  to
                questions relating to the  features  upon  the  100  Afghani
                note, who was in the running to be President,  the  same  of
                the lower house of the National  Assembly,  when  there  was
                large Earthquake in the country and the name of the  dam  in
                the north west of Jalalabad.  He sought to explain his  lack
                of knowledge by stating that he was  not  formally  educated
                and did not often leave the house.  This  however,  was  not
                consistent with claims to have been working with his  father
                in the shop and to have  attended  the  Gurdwara  regularly,
                where he was educated as a youngster and later  a  volunteer
                who attended for much of his days.  I would not  expect  him
                to  answer  each  and  every  question   asked   accurately.
                However, even accounting for his  claimed  circumstances,  I
                consider that  he has displayed a lack of knowledge  of  the
                area he claims to have lived, which is  not consistent  with
                is account to have been an Afghan national  who  was  raised
                and lived in Jalalabad for his entire life.  Taken  with  my
                other concerns as to his credibility,  I  am  not  satisfied
                that he is from Afghanistan."

25. That finding is to be contrasted  with  the  judge's  finding  in  para
    43(ii), in part based upon the first appellant's  religious  knowledge,
    that he and his family are of the Sikh faith.

26. Mr Ali submitted that the first appellant  had  answered  a  number  of
    questions correctly at question 78-113 of his asylum interview (at  B18
    - B22 of the respondent's bundle).  The Judge had  not  properly  taken
    that into account.

27. Whilst Mr Ali is undoubtedly correct that the first appellant  answered
    some question correctly, the judge was, in my view, fully  entitled  to
    take into account the first appellant's lack of knowledge in respect of
    a number of matters relating  to  Afghanistan.   The  judge  took  into
    account the first appellant's claim not to have been formally  educated
    or to leave the house often but noted that he worked  in  his  father's
    shop and attended the Gurdwara regularly.  I see no error of law in the
    judge's assessment of the first appellant's evidence and the reasons he
    gave in para 43(i) for doubting his claimed nationality based  upon  an
    obvious lack of knowledge in respect of a number of matters  which  the
    first appellant might well be expected to know given that he had  lived
    his entire life in Jalalabad in Afghanistan.

28. Consequently, I reject the appellant's challenge to para 43(i)  of  the
    judge's determination.

29. Thirdly, Mr Ali challenged the judge's  reasoning  in  para  43(iv)  in
    which, he submitted, the judge had wrongly failed to take into  account
    properly the supporting evidence  of  other  witnesses  supporting  the
    appellants' claimed nationality.  At para 43(iv), the judge said this:

         "(iv)    Within his appeal bundle, the Appellant produced a  number
                of documents, each of which I gave careful scrutiny.  In the
                subsequent  paragraphs  I  shall  outline   my   significant
                concerns in respect of two of them, however at this juncture
                I wish to consider specifically  a  number  of  letters  and
                statements from family members and  friends  supporting  the
                Appellant's claims.  There was a witness statement from  JSN
                who is said to be the Appellant's cousin and states that  he
                grew up in Afghanistan with the Appellant.  Annexed  to  the
                document is a copy of his British  passport.   Additionally,
                similar information is provided by GSN, who is  said  to  be
                the Appellant's uncle, KSN, HSN, Mr BSL and  another  (whose
                document is so poorly copied I cannot make  out  the  name).
                Each claims to have known the Appellant from time living  in
                Afghanistan.  Of the 6, none were called to  give  evidence.
                Whilst there was an explanation as  to  2  being  unable  to
                attend, the reality is that his evidence, which goes to  the
                heart  of  the  claim  could  not  be  challenged   by   the
                Respondent.  I have given this matter anxious  consideration
                and have reached the conclusion that in the circumstances  I
                can only give the  statement  and  letters  limited  weight.
                Having considered all of the  evidence  in  the  round,  the
                weight I could attribute to these  documents  was  not  such
                that the evidence contained within them, unchallenged as  it
                was, could  outweigh  my  overwhelming  concerns  about  the
                Appellant's credibility."

30. Mr Ali submitted that in relation to two of the witnesses there was  an
    explanation for their absence.  In particular, he referred  me  to  the
    evidence in respect of Mr N who was unable to  attend  because  he  was
    looking after his terminally ill uncle (see letter at page  12  of  the
    supplementary bundle).  Mr Ali pointed out that the witness' uncle  had
    subsequently  died  and  there  was  a   death   certificate   in   the
    supplementary bundle to support that.  Mr Ali submitted that the  judge
    had been wrong to discount the evidence of the witnesses given in their
    statements and also that they had produced ID  documents  showing  that
    they were, themselves, Afghan nationals.

31. What weight  is  properly  to  be  given  to  a  witness'  evidence  is
    quintessentially a matter for  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  the
    judge's conclusion on that will rarely be challengeable on the basis of
    error of  law  unless  the  weight  given  is  irrational.   Here,  the
    witnesses were not cross-examined.  Even though two  of  the  witnesses
    gave an explanation as to why they could not attend,  including  Mr  N,
    the fact  remained  that  their  evidence  was  not  tested  in  cross-
    examination.  Mr Ali did not suggest that he sought an  adjournment  in
    order that any of the witnesses could attend.   The  judge,  therefore,
    had to assess their evidence in written form only.   I  agree  with  Mr
    Richards' submission that in para 43(iv) the judge did not find against
    the first appellant simply because  his  uncle  did  not  come  to  the
    hearing in order to give evidence.  What the judge did was to  conclude
    that the written evidence could only be given limited weight given that
    it was in written form and not subject to  cross-examination.   In  any
    event, as the judge makes plain in the final sentence of  para  43(iv),
    he did take the evidence into account but, in the light  of  his  other
    reasons for doubting the appellant's credibility, did not consider that
    in themselves they led him to a different conclusion on the appellants'
    claim.  That reasoning was neither irrational  nor  in  any  other  way
    legally impermissible.  Consequently, I reject Mr Ali's  submission  in
    this regard also.

32. Standing back and looking at the judge's reasons at paras 37-44,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge carefully considered all the evidence and  his
    reasons were adequate and legally sustained his factual  findings  that
    the appellants had not established  their  Afghan  nationality  or  the
    basis of their claim for international protection.

Decision

33. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellants'  appeals  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decisions stand.

34.  Accordingly,  the  appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    dismissed.

Signed


A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
