


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
AA/06585/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 29 February 2016                       | On 30 March 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     AG
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:         Ms E King, Counsel instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer

Anonymity

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. On 25 March 2015 the respondent refused the appellant's application for
   asylum or humanitarian protection. It also determined that his removal
   from the United Kingdom would not contravene Article 8 ECHR. The
   appellant's ensuing appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge
   Nightingale who, in a decision promulgated on 8 December 2015, dismissed
   the appeal. The appellant now appeals that decision.


2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan. The respondent considers his
   date of birth to be 6 November 1994. He claims it is 6 November 1996. He
   left Afghanistan in November 2012 and arrived in the UK on 30 January
   2013. He claimed asylum on 6 February 2013.


3. The appellant's claim is that in around 2011 the Taliban dropped a
   letter at his family home stating that all young men should participate
   in the fight against foreign troops. In the summer of 2012 the Taliban's
   influence increased in the region. Ten days before he fled, the Taliban
   came to his home (whilst he was not there) to insist he join, and fight
   for, them. They searched his home. They saw his sister and insisted she
   should marry soon. The appellant, along with his sister and mother, hid
   at a friend's house for ten days whilst arrangements were made by an
   agent to take them out of Afghanistan. The appellant travelled for about
   two months to get to the UK, and en route was separated from his mother
   and sister. The appellant's father died in 2002. His brother came to the
   UK in 2000 and is now a British citizen.


4. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was of interest to the
   Taliban and concluded that there was sufficient protection available to
   him or that he could relocate internally in Afghanistan. The respondent
   also did not accept that the appellant had been truthful about this age.


5. The appellant's appeal was heard by FtT Judge Nightingale. The FtT did
   not find the appellant credible and was not satisfied that he had been at
   risk of forced recruitment to the Taliban or that he was forced to flee.
   Nor was it accepted that his mother and sister left Afghanistan with him.




6. In respect of the risk on return, the FtT stated that it could see no
   reason why the appellant would be targeted in an urban area such as Kabul
   where his sister in law's family reside. The FtT further found that the
   appellant's brother was in a position to provide him with financial
   support upon return.


7. At paragraphs [59] and [60] the FtT considered the appellant's claim for
   protection under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive
   (2011/95/EU). The FtT's treatment of this issue forms the basis of the
   appeal before me and therefore I set out below the relevant findings by
   the FtT:

         59."Whilst it was not pursued before me, I note that the grounds of
         appeal do raise Article 15(c). I have not found any risk to the
         appellant on an individual basis, and albeit the evidence before me
         does indicate a worrying increase in the number of civilian
         casualties in Afghanistan, I do not find that the totality of the
         background evidence before me leads to a finding that AK should not
         be followed in this particular appeal. I consider this to be
         applicable and relevant country guidance at the present time....


         60....I have not found the situation in Afghanistan to be such that
         AK should be revisited with regard to Article 15(c).


8. The grounds of appeal argue that the FtT erred in law by dismissing the
   appeal under Article 15(c). They submit that the FtT incorrectly stated,
   at paragraph [59], that this ground of appeal was not pursued at the
   hearing. It is further argued that the appeal should be stayed pending
   consideration of this issue in the Court of Appeal in R (on the
   application of Naziri and Others) IJR [2015] UKUT 00437.


9. In her submissions before me, Ms King reiterated that the Article 15(c)
   claim was actively pursued by the appellant, as evidenced by the skeleton
   argument. She argued that Naziri is not Country Guidance and is not
   binding and that it was for the FtT to examine carefully the objective
   country evidence, which it had failed to do. She also maintained that we
   should wait to see what the Court of Appeal in Naziri finds before
   dismissing the appellant's case in its entirety.


10. Mrs Sreeraman argued that it is clear from the decision that the judge
   was aware Article 15(c) was a live issue. At paragraph [17] the FtT
   identified it as an issue and at paragraphs [40] - [43] it discussed the
   relevant submissions by the appellant's counsel. At paragraph [59] the
   FtT then considered and made findings about Article 15(c).


Consideration


11. The most recent country guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal
   relating to Article 15(c) risk in Afghanistan is AK (Article 15(c)
   Afghanistan)[2012] UKUT 163. In that case, the Tribunal, whilst noting
   that there had been a deterioration in the general security conditions in
   Afghanistan, found that there was an insufficient degree of violence in
   Afghanistan as a whole to overcome the Article 15(c) threshold.


12. The appellant's bundle included a number of reports concerning the
   circumstances in Afghanistan post dating AK. These included, inter alia,
   the UK Home Office Country Information and Guidance dated August 2015, a
   2015 HRW report, a report by Amnesty International and a report by the US
   Department of State.


13. I do not accept Ms King's argument that the FtT failed to consider the
   objective country guidance that was before it. At paragraph [59] the FtT
   stated that "the evidence before me does indicate a worrying increase in
   the number of civilian casualties" but that it did "not find that the
   totality of the background evidence before me leads to a finding that AK
   should not be followed". It is evident from this passage that the FtT has
   engaged with and considered the content of the objective evidence before
   it - finding that it shows an increase in civilian casualties - and that
   it has then considered whether this evidence would justify a departure
   from the extant Country Guidance.


14. Nor do I accept that any significance should be placed on the FtT's
   comment, at the start of paragraph [59], that Article 15(c) was not
   pursued at the hearing. It is apparent that the appellant's primary case
   was under asylum law based on the threat to him from the Taliban and that
   the focus of the case pursued before the FtT concerned this part of his
   claim. In any event, irrespective of the FtT stating that Article 15(c)
   was not pursued, it is clear from paragraph [59] that the issue was
   considered in the decision.


15. I also do not accept that any error arises from a failure to stay the
   appeal pending the appeal of Naziri. The task for the FtT was to consider
   the objective country information before it and determine whether that
   information warranted a departure from AK. There was no requirement on
   the FtT to delay making a finding because of what the Court of Appeal
   might conclude in another case which in any event, as acknowledged by Ms
   King, is not a Country Guidance case.


16. The FtT has correctly identified the relevant Country Guidance, has
   considered the objective country evidence before it and has reached a
   conclusion that the objective evidence does not justify a departure from
   the Country Guidance. I am satisfied that this was the proper approach in
   this appeal and that the FtT has reached a finding in respect of Article
   15(c) that was open to it based on the objective evidence that was before
   it. Accordingly, I find that the FtT has not erred in law.




    Decision

    a. The appeal is dismissed.

    b. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of a material error of law and shall stand.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 11 March 2016                 |

