
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06508/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 November 2016                   |On 11 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    B S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar instructed by Virgo Consultancy Services
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  order  is
    made to protect the identity of the appellant as he seeks asylum.  This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.



Background

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iran born on 19 July 1990.   He
    claims that he left Iran in April 2012 and travelled to Greece with the
    help of an agent  where  he  lived  for  some  ten  or  eleven  months.
    Thereafter, he travelled to the United Kingdom, arriving on an  unknown
    date.  On 6 December 2013, he claimed asylum.  The basis of  his  claim
    was that he had smuggled goods across the Iran/Iraq  border  to  assist
    the PKK in Iraq and was wanted by the Iranian authorities.

 3. On 7 August 2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    application for asylum, humanitarian protection and on the basis of his
    human rights, in particular Art 8 of the ECHR.  On 8 August  2014,  the
    Secretary of State made a  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  as  an
    illegal entrant.

 4.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.   Following  a  hearing  on  9  March  2015,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 21  April  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal.  However, the  Secretary  of  State  appealed  that
    decision and, in a decision promulgated on  30  July  2015,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Poole)  allowed  the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  and
    remitted the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  re-
    hearing.

 5. That appeal came before Judge A D  Baker  on  6  January  2016.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 25 February 2016,  Judge  Baker  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  She made an adverse credibility  finding  and  did
    not accept the appellant's account including that  he  was  an  Iranian
    national and so at risk on return to Iran.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge Baker's decision  on  a
    number  of  grounds.   The  First-tier   Tribunal   initially   refused
    permission to appeal but, in a decision dated 18 April 2016, the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Coker) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 7. On 16 May 2016, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 response seeking
    to uphold Judge Baker's decision.

 8. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Appellant's Case

 9. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Puar adopted the grounds of appeal which
    he developed in  his  oral  submissions.   In  summary,  his  principal
    arguments were as follows.

10. First, he submitted that the judge had failed properly to  engage  with
    the evidence.  He submitted that the judge had been wrong to rely  upon
    the fact that the respondent had been unable to "verify" the names of a
    number of villages which the appellant claimed were in the vicinity  of
    where he was born and lived near Sardasht in Iran.  The judge, Mr  Puar
    submitted, had fallen into error by taking the respondent's position  -
    that they did not exist  -  as  her  starting  point  by  treating  the
    Secretary of State's evidence  as  reliable  and  in  concluding  that,
    therefore, the appellant's account was undermined.  In support of this,
    Mr Puar drew my attention to internet printouts,  one  from  the  Ekurd
    Daily dated 3 November 2013 and a blog dated 21  September  2011  which
    mentioned a village, referred to by  the  appellant  in  his  evidence,
    namely "Qalarash".  Neither were made available to the judge.

11. Secondly, Mr Puar submitted that the judge had fallen into  error  when
    taking into account, as inconsistent with the appellant's  claim,  that
    he travelled to a place called "Ashkana" on the Iran border each day to
    smuggle goods over the border to Iraq.  The judge  had  wrongly  relied
    upon the evidence submitted by the  respondent  that  "Ashkana"  was  a
    place in South Iran over twenty hours away from the appellant's claimed
    home such that it would not be possible, as the appellant  claimed,  to
    travel there each day to carry out the smuggling.   Mr  Puar  submitted
    that the judge's reasoning was based upon  a  misunderstanding  of  the
    appellant's evidence given in his asylum interview at question 75.   He
    submitted that the appellant's answer referred to a place  "Ashkana  on
    the border" but that was in Iraq and the place to which he smuggled the
    goods for the PKK.

12. Thirdly, Mr Puar submitted that the judge had been wrong to  rely  upon
    the Sprakab Report which identified the appellant as speaking a dialect
    of Kurdish Sorani originating from the Sulaymania area in Iraq  with  a
    "very high" degree of certainty.  Mr Puar submitted that the judge  had
    failed  to  take  into  account  the  appellant's  evidence  that   the
    interpreter, in the course of the Sprakab  interview,  had  shouted  at
    him.  The judge had wrongly understood the appellant's evidence on this
    to relate to the screening interview.

Discussion

13. I will take each  of  the  principal  points  made  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant in turn.

14. The first concerns the judge's treatment of the  respondent's  evidence
    that she had been unable to verify the villages in the area  where  the
    appellant claimed to live in Iran.  The judge dealt with this  evidence
    at paras 20-22 as follows:

         "20. .... He said he was born in Qalarash 30 minutes  by  car  from
             the closest city, Sardasht but he did not ever learn  to  read
             and write and was not literate.  He had not been  to  Sardasht
             many times,  gave  the  names  of  Sewasal,  Bewrah,  Suratow,
             Darmanawa at question 17 as the closest village to Qalarash.

         21.  The appellant in explanation of the statement a  paragraph  16
             of the refusal letter that the information given of the  names
             of villages by him near Qalarash could not be verified on  the
             public domain is, in summary why would  he  provide  names  of
             villages that did not exist and  asserts  that  they  do.   No
             evidence has been provided to identify those villages do exist
             near Qalarash.  I find that his claims to live in a place  all
             his life and  to  be  able  to  identify  villages  which  the
             respondent has not been able to verify and the  appellant,  in
             response to that challenge has not provided evidence of  their
             existence undermines his claims to have lived in that area.

         22.  I also note that Qalarash village could not be traced  on  the
             public domain as stated in paragraph 14.  The  consistency  of
             his answers has been undermined by  the  listed  resources  at
             paragraph 13 of the refusal  letter.   No  evidence  has  been
             supplied by him or on his behalf to undermine  the  statements
             which I regard therefore  as  reliable  from  the  respondent.
             Namely that the village he claims to come  from  in  Sardasht,
             about 30 minutes away from the city of Sardasht itself, but in
             the province of Sardasht or the area known as Sardasht  cannot
             be verified.  I also  conclude  that  the  named  villages  he
             clearly stated were near that village are not verifiable  also
             and so do not support his claims to be from Iran.   He  claims
             to be uneducated but he was able to identify these  places  by
             name.  It was open to him to say in interview that he did  not
             know of nearby villages but he did not do that.   He  said  at
             the end of the interview he had understood the  questions.   I
             conclude that that is a fundamental aspect of  his  claim  and
             that, whether  or  not  educated,  he  could  be  expected  to
             identify correctly by name and, given time,  provide  evidence
             of the existence of those villages in  proximate  distance  to
             his claimed village.  None of them have been verifiable.  This
             undermines his claim to be an Iranian from the area he says."

15. It is clear that the respondent had raised the issue as to whether  the
    named villages existed in the refusal letter.  At para 16,  having  set
    out a number of internet sources concerning information about Iran, the
    respondent  noted  that  the  appellant's  information  "could  not  be
    verified on the public domain".  One of the internet web pages referred
    to is Google Maps.   Of  course,  the  respondent's  evidence  did  not
    establish that the villages did not exist.  Nevertheless, the appellant
    was on notice that  the  respondent  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    claimed home area and an issue at the appeal hearing would  be  whether
    the appellant had established a fundamental part of his  claim,  namely
    that he came from Iran and the area near Sardasht as he claimed.

16. The appellant had ample opportunity to provide evidence to support  his
    claim to come from the area he identified.  For reasons which  are  not
    known, no supporting evidence was put before the judge.   There  is  no
    doubt that such evidence could be obtained as, indeed to an extent, was
    obtained by the hearing before me showing, at least, that  one  village
    namely "Qalarash" did exist  near  Sardasht.   The  judge  was,  in  my
    judgment, entitled to take into account that  no  documentary  evidence
    had been submitted  to  support  this  aspect  of  his  claim.   In  TK
    (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40, Thomas LJ (as he  then  was)  made
    the point at [21] as follows:

         "The circumstances  of  this  case  in  my  view  demonstrate  that
         independent supporting evidence which  is  available  from  persons
         subject to this jurisdiction be provided wherever possible and  the
         need for an Immigration Judge to adopt a cautious approach  to  the
         evidence of an appellant where independent supporting evidence,  as
         it was in this case, is readily available within this jurisdiction,
         but not provided.  It follows  that  where  a  Judge  in  assessing
         credibility relies  on  the  fact  that  there  is  no  independent
         supporting evidence where there should be supporting  evidence  and
         there is no credible account for its absence commits  no  error  of
         law when he relies on that fact for rejecting the  account  of  the
         appellant."

17. In my judgment, the judge did not fall into the error relied upon by Mr
    Paur.  She did not simply accept that the villages did not exist.   The
    evidence that was presented by  the  respondent  did  not  support  the
    existence of the villages.  She was entitled to take that into account.
     The recent documents demonstrate beyond a peradventure that (at  least
    some) independent supporting evidence could  have  been  provided  from
    within this jurisdiction but was not.  The approach  adopted  by  Judge
    Baker was, in my judgment, entirely consistent with  the  approach  set
    out by Thomas LJ.  It was not an error of law for Judge Baker  to  take
    into account, in assessing the appellant's credibility, that his  claim
    was not supported by any independent evidence.  Her reasoning in  paras
    20-22 of her determination reflect no more than that  approach  to  the
    evidence.

18. I should add for completeness that the new documents, submitted for the
    first time in the Upper Tribunal,  cannot,  in  themselves,  assist  to
    identify any error of law in Judge Baker's determination.  The evidence
    was not placed before Judge Baker and I see no basis  upon  which  they
    could be admissible  under  the  Ladd  v  Marshal  [1954]  1  WLR  1489
    principles.   Given  that  these  documents   could   with   reasonable
    diligence, in my judgment, have been  obtained  prior  to  the  hearing
    before Judge Baker (which was, after all, the second hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal), I see no conceivable basis upon which they can be
    prayed in aid to establish any material error of law in  Judge  Baker's
    decision.

19. A related  issue  concerns  the  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's
    failure to provide his identity card.  At para  19,  Judge  Baker  said
    this:

         "19.  The  appellant  has  been  challenged  since  2014   by   the
             respondent's refusal letter as to his nationality.  He  stated
             that his identity card  was  at  home  with  his  family.   He
             claimed his family were in Iran.  He  has  not  provided  that
             identity card on the basis he fears that to contact his family
             he  claims  will  bring  them  into  danger.   I  reject  that
             explanation.  At the core of the Home  Office  case  rejecting
             appellant's account is their belief that he comes  from  Iraq,
             not Iran.  He claims to have an  identity  card.   It  is  not
             credible that the appellant has made no attempt either through
             third parties or by writing himself to his family he claims to
             be in Iran to obtain that identity card to support his  claims
             to be from Iran having lived in the place he claims, he  says,
             all his life until he left in, variously 2012, 2013."

20. At para 26, Judge Baker dealt with the appellant's evidence  concerning
    his contact with his family and his failure to obtain his identity card
    through his family:

         "26. I also note that in the witness statement the appellant states
             he was called by telephone by his sister to be warned  of  the
             Pasdaran looking for him at his home where he lived  with  his
             family.  It is not credible that given that he had a telephone
             and she had a telephone they have not had any contact  on  his
             account at the hearing with his family or they would get  into
             trouble.  Similarly he claimed he had been in hiding with  his
             uncle and yet there is no evidence from him that he  has  made
             any attempt even for example with  his  uncle  to  obtain  the
             identity card he claims he has which would demonstrate he  was
             from Iran."

21. In his oral submissions, Mr Puar did not directly challenge the judge's
    reasoning in paras 19 and 26 but it is challenged  in  para  3  of  the
    grounds.  On the same basis that I have already identified, Judge Baker
    was properly entitled to take into account that the appellant  had  not
    produced his identity card which he  claimed  was  "at  home  with  his
    family".   Judge  Baker  in  paras  19-26  rejected   the   appellant's
    explanation that he had not been in contact with his family  and  that,
    therefore, it remained unexplained why he had not sought to obtain  his
    identity card from his family.  Given the evidence that  the  appellant
    had been in contact with his family, it was properly open to the  judge
    to reject the appellant's explanation as to why he had not  sought  his
    identity card from his family  where  he  claimed  it  was.   In  those
    circumstances, I am unable to see any error in the judge's approach  to
    the evidence: the absence of the identity card was a  matter  that  she
    could  properly  take  into  account  in  assessing   the   appellant's
    credibility, in particular that he came from Iran.

22. I now turn to the second point relied upon by Mr Puar.  This relates to
    the judge's approach to the evidence concerning the place identified by
    the  appellant  ("Ashkana")  as  a  place  central  to  his   smuggling
    activities across the Iran/Iraq border.  The judge dealt with  this  at
    para 25 of her determination:

         "25. The appellant does not address in his witness  statement  that
             he had claimed at asylum interview question  75  that  he  had
             travelled to Ashkana [other spelling found: Askanan] in  order
             to smuggle goods to Iraq.  The respondent's information, which
             I find is supported by background  information  and  evidence,
             shows that Askanan is located over twenty hours from  Sardasht
             where he claimed to have lived since birth.  He  also  claimed
             in the interview to have travelled on a daily basis  smuggling
             goods to Iraq.  The refusal  letter  sets  out  the  challenge
             paragraph C6 to 39 inclusive.  Askanan does not share  borders
             with Iraq it is claimed and yet he claims question 79-80  that
             he encountered the PKK on a daily basis  and  that  they  were
             charging him taxes, one day telling him to  supply  them  with
             food from other cities in Iran.  No evidence has been supplied
             by the appellant to undermine the assertions of the respondent
             as to the implausibility of his account of the  geography  and
             his  claimed  actions.   I  find  the  respondent's   evidence
             undermines  the  credibility  of  the  claims  made   by   the
             appellant.  This goes to the core of the  appellant's  account
             of his activity."

23. At question 75 of the appellant's asylum interview, he was asked:  "I'm
    looking for the name of the place you  went  to  in  order  to  smuggle
    goods?"  In answer to that the appellant said: "Ashkana on the border".



24. Mr Puar submitted that the judge had wrongly interpreted this answer as
    meaning that the appellant had smuggled the goods from a place in  Iran
    called Ashkana when, in fact, his answer reflected the place  in  Iraq,
    called Ashkana, to where he had smuggled the goods.  Mr Puar  submitted
    that, therefore, the judge was wrong to rely upon the evidence  of  the
    respondent showing that Ashkana was over twenty  hours  away  from  the
    appellant's  claimed  home  and  therefore  called  into  question  the
    veracity of the appellant's claim that he smuggled  goods  on  a  daily
    basis travelling from his home area.

25. It is, perhaps, worth considering the preceding question which, in  the
    context of a number of questions dealing with the  appellant's  claimed
    smuggling and activities,  was:  "Where  did  you  go  to?"  (Q74)  The
    appellant's answer was: "From the border we were taking  the  goods  to
    somewhere and from where it was taken to the city.  Because these goods
    are not allowed to pass the border legally so we bring  them  illegally
    and take them to the city."

26. The interviewer then asked at question 75, namely what was the name  of
    "the place you went to in order to smuggle goods" to which  the  answer
    was given "Ashkana on the border".

27. It is, however, important to note that the respondent relied  upon  the
    points, set out by the judge in para 25 of her determination, in  paras
    37-38 of the decision letter as follows:

         "37. The external information shows that Ashknan is located over 20
             hours from Sardasht[1], where you claim to  have  lived  since
             birth.  Furthermore, external information[2]  shows  that  "On
             the 1,458-kilometer (906-mile) Iraq-Iran border, the smuggling
             of weapons,  drugs  and  people  has  always  been  major  and
             unsolvable problem.  Most smuggling takes place in the  south:
             in Basra, Amarah - where there are large stretches of  marshes
             and swamps on  the  border  -  and  Wasit,  and  through  some
             smuggling routes in the north".

         39.  Therefore, your claim to travel to Ashknan in order to smuggle
             goods through the Iraqi  border  is  externally  inconsistent.
             Given that external information shows that  the  smuggling  of
             goods to the Iraqi border takes place in the  South  and  also
             through some smuggling routes in the North of  Iran  and  that
             the journey from Sardasht to Ashkanan  is  estimated  to  last
             over 20 hours, meaning that a round trip would last more  than
             40 hours, it is considered illogical and impossible  that  you
             would travel over 40 hours in one day, and on a  daily  basis,
             in order to smuggle goods to Iraq.  In addition to this, it is
             also noted that Ashkanan does not  share  borders  with  Iraq.
             The  inconsistency  of  your  accounts  cast  doubt   on   the
             legitimacy of your claims."

28. The appellant and his representatives were well  aware,  therefore,  at
    the hearing that the respondent's case, based upon the internet search,
    was that the place the appellant said  was  central  to  his  smuggling
    activities was Ashkana and was claimed to be on the Iranian side of the
    border and over twenty hours away from his home area.  Mr Puar, who did
    not represent the appellant at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,  was
    unable to assist on what, if any, questions  the  appellant  was  asked
    about this aspect of his claim.  I  consulted  the  judge's  Record  of
    Proceedings and Mr Richards consulted the Presenting  Officer's  Record
    of  the  Proceedings.   It  does  not  appear  that  the   matter   was
    specifically  raised  by  the  appellant's  (then)   Counsel   in   the
    appellant's evidence-in-chief despite  it  being  a  significant  point
    taken by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter to challenge  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim.  It is also not dealt with in the
    appellant's witness  statement  dated  20  October  2014  despite  that
    statement taking issue with a number of other matters  relied  upon  by
    the Secretary of State.  Despite having the opportunity, therefore, the
    appellant led no evidence that the Secretary of  State's  understanding
    of the appellant's answer to question 75 in the  asylum  interview  was
    incorrect and that the relevant  place,  to  which  the  appellant  was
    alluding called Ashkana, was not the one  identified  by  the  internet
    search on the Iranian side of the border.

29. In the light of this, even if  there  was  an  ambiguity  in  what  the
    appellant was saying in answer to question 75, it was  in  my  judgment
    open to Judge Baker properly to consider that the respondent's position
    was not effectively challenged in the evidence and,  in  assessing  the
    veracity  of  the  appellant's  claim,  to  juxtapose  the  appellant's
    evidence concerning Ashkana with the documentary evidence and  to  find
    that the appellant's claim was inconsistent with the geography of Iran.

30. By way of footnote only, I note that there still has not been submitted
    any evidence that a place called Ashkana exists on the  Iraqi  side  of
    the border and was, in fact, the  place  to  which  the  appellant  was
    referring in his answer in interview.

31. Turning now to the third point relied  upon  by  Mr  Puar,  namely  the
    judge's consideration of the Sprakab linguistic analysis report.

32. The judge dealt with that report at paras 28-36.   In  particular,  the
    report concluded that there was a "very high" degree of certainty  that
    the appellant's spoken Sorani was that of a person from the  Sulaymania
    area in Iraq rather than of a person who claimed  to  come  from  Iran.
    The judge said this:

         "28. A Sprakab Report dated 28 March 2014 concludes at 1.3 that the
             appellant who stated he came from Sardasht  in  Iran  did  not
             speak any variety of  Sorani  found  in  Iran.   "He  spoke  a
             variety of Sorani found in the Sulaymania area in  Iraq".   It
             was assessed that it was "very unlikely" that  his  linguistic
             background is Sardasht in Iran.   That  was  against  criteria
             running from very unlikely, unlikely, even chance, likely  and
             very likely.  The specific headings of assessment are set  out
             as including phonology and  prosody;  morphology  and  syntax;
             lexica; concluding that the appellant pronounced  words  in  a
             manner typical of Sorani spoken in the Sulaymania area in Iraq
             and used grammatical constructions typical of Sorani spoken in
             Iraq and used words typical of Sorani spoken in Iraq.  In each
             of  the  above  cases  at  2.2  to  2.4   inclusive   specific
             comparators were given the same phrases or words used in Iran.

         29.  The submissions  for  the  appellant  are,  in  summary,  this
             Sprakab Report cannot be relied upon having regard to  SSHD  v
             MN and KY (Scotland) [2014] UKSC 30;  and  M.AB.N.  &  Anor  v
             Advocate General for Scotland Representing  the  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department & Anor [2013] Scot CS  CSIH  68.
             I note also that particular care should be had to the strength
             of the  reasoning  and  the  expertise  used  to  support  the
             conclusion and to the need for consideration of how the  basis
             for the geographical attribution  of  particular  dialects  or
             usages can be better explained, not left implicit, so as to be
             satisfied as to the date by reference to which  analysts  make
             judgements on the geographical range of a  particular  dialect
             or usage.

         30.  The appellant submits  that  neither  of  the  analysts  is  a
             qualified linguist; neither has a degree in linguistics and it
             is submitted neither has any knowledge  or  qualifications  in
             the  languages  or  dialects   spoken   in   Iran   or   Iraq.
             Fundamentally,  it  is  also  said  it  was  not  possible  to
             understand how there could be useful collaboration between the
             analyst and  the  linguist  or  how  they  could  have  worked
             together to ascertain  that  degree  of  certainty,  when  the
             linguist had no knowledge of the languages  or  dialect  under
             consideration.

         31.  It is submitted that since the appellant claimed to have lived
             all his life prior to leaving Iran in  Qalarash  village  near
             Sardasht the town, West Azerbaijan province  in Iran, near  he
             Iraqi border, and regularly smuggled goods across  the  border
             into Iraq, given that Sulaymania (Iraq) is approximately three
             hours' drive away  (177.5  km)  from  Sardasht  there  was  no
             explanation as to why the  Kurdish  Sorani  dialect  would  be
             different in those two locations, geographically submitted  to
             be so near to each other.

         32.  Furthermore no consideration of the fact that having regularly
             crossed the border smuggling goods  a  person  may  very  well
             encounter and pick up different phrases, phraseology, etc. and
             it was submitted may usefully need to speak the local  dialect
             to assist with smuggling activities.  Similarly  it  was  also
             submitted that under the "knowledge assessment" not  addressed
             above by me, the individuals did not claim  expertise  in  the
             assessment of a person's knowledge of country and culture  and
             that the analyst and the linguist had failed to demonstrate  a
             suitable or sufficient level of expertise.  I reject this.  No
             evidence to undermine the reasoned conclusions of the  authors
             of  the  report  has  been   provided   by   the   appellant's
             representatives.

         33.  I note that on page 2 of the Sprakab Report  did  not  include
             "language analyst - regional and local  linguistic  features".
             It did include  the  "knowledge  assessment  -  the  speaker's
             displayed knowledge of stated  area  of  origin"  and  "direct
             analysis - analysis of a recorded conversation between Sprakab
             and the speaker."  The appellant's linguistic  background  was
             assessed to be the Sulaymania area in Iraq with  a  degree  of
             certainty of "very high".

         34.  Contrary to the case for the appellant and points made on  his
             behalf I find there are numerous reasons and evidence set out,
             in the report, which fully  support  the  reliability  of  the
             conclusions they have reached.  I note that each has certified
             independence and that they are aware that the material will be
             used or may be used by the Tribunal.  I am satisfied from  the
             detailed content of the comparison between  the  pronunciation
             in Iran and in Iraq that the conclusions of the Sprakab Report
             does not support the appellant's claim to be from Iran.

         35.  I find that the reasons advanced are based on  the  comparison
             of differences between Sorani as spoken in Iran.  For example,
             the use of the word in Iraq could  be  different  to  that  in
             Iranian in respect of "uneducated; refrigerator,  information,
             animal  handling  and  agriculture."    There   are   striking
             differences between these words as recorded.  In  addition  in
             respect of phonology and prosody,  the  pronunciation  of  the
             words  of  "minute;  like  that;  how  much,  Azerbaijan   and
             mountainous" are clearly demonstrated  in  the  report  to  be
             different.  Further as  to  the  morphology  and  syntax,  the
             phrases "it is located in a mountainous area; I have also told
             it in what its name; and I don't know exactly" which they  are
             specifically identified as typical of Sorani  spoken  in  Iraq
             spoken in, the Sulaymania area of Iraq.

         36.  I find that the Sprakab Report is reliable.  It undermines the
             appellant's claims to be an Iranian national.  It supports the
             conclusion by the Respondent he is from Iraq an Iraqi.  It  is
             not, however, in my view conclusive.   It  is  a  matter  that
             needs to be considered in the round with all other evidence."

33. The grounds of appeal argue that in para 32 the judge failed to provide
    adequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's argument  regarding  the
    reliability of the report.  Mr Puar, in his  oral  submissions,  relied
    upon that point but also that the judge had failed to take into account
    in assessing the report's reliability the appellant's  claim  that  the
    interviewer  had  shouted  at  him  in  the  course  of  the  telephone
    interview.  This was dealt  with  by  the  judge  at  para  27  of  her
    determination as follows:

         "27. I reject his account that he  was  being  shouted  at  by  the
             interviewer in a telephone interview.  It  was  clear  in  his
             oral evidence that whilst the screening interview was not gone
             through with him specifically he did not have the  benefit  of
             advice from representatives after the  substantive  interview.
             Were it the case that there had been misconduct on the part of
             the Home Office interviewer or interpreter there was  no  such
             allegation made on his behalf by  representatives  acting  for
             him.  I reject his assertions.  I find his assertions are made
             as an attempt to justify answers which; correctly recorded and
             signed, fatally undermine his claims to be from Iran."

34. As regards the first point, neither the grounds  nor  Mr  Puar  in  his
    submissions elaborated on why the judge's  reasons  for  accepting  the
    reliability of the Sprakab Report were inadequate.  The judge noted the
    submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  appellant.   The  analysts  had
    expertise and experience in analysing the Sorani language which is,  of
    course, the language spoken by the appellant.  Their experience  ranged
    across, for example, Iraq and Iran.  Whilst the two  linguists  do  not
    state, in the report,  that  they  have  qualifications  or  linguistic
    ability in the language of Sorani and its dialects, I  see  nothing  in
    their stated respective skill sets which should have led the  judge  to
    conclude that the clear findings in section 1 that there  was  a  "very
    high" certainty that the appellant's  linguistic  background  was  from
    Sulaymania in Iraq and that it was "very unlikely" that his  linguistic
    background was from  Sardasht  in  Iran  was  not  properly  and  fully
    supported by the analysis in section 2 of the report under the headings
    "phonology and prosody", "morphology and  syntax"  and  "lexica".   The
    judge did not rely upon the "knowledge assessment" in section 3.

35. As regards the second point, and the one relied upon most forcefully by
    Mr Puar in his submissions, does  not,  in  my  judgment,  lead  me  to
    conclude that the judge's reliance on the report was not justified.  It
    may well be that the judge could have expressed herself a  little  more
    clearly in para 27 of her determination.  However, she clearly  had  in
    mind the appellant's challenge  to  a  "telephone  interview".   It  is
    inconceivable that this experienced judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    could have understood that challenge to be to anything other  than  the
    Sprakab Report.  Mr Puar's suggestion that she wrongly had in mind that
    the appellant's challenge was to the  screening  interview  could  only
    stand up if it is assumed that the  judge  believed  that  a  screening
    interview was a "telephone interview".  It  is  clearly  not:  that  is
    conducted face-to-face.  I am in no doubt that in para 27 the judge was
    considering whether there was any substance in  the  appellant's  claim
    that the Sprakab Report was unreliable.

36. Even if the judge were (wrongly) considering  the  reliability  of  the
    screening interview, the point that she makes (and reasoning)  in  para
    27 is equally apposite as a reason for not accepting that  the  Sprakab
    Report is unreliable because of the conduct  of  the  interviewer.   No
    objection  was  made  to  the  Sprakab  interview  by  the  appellant's
    representatives prior to the appeal proceedings.  Indeed, although  the
    point was pursued before Judge Baker, her reasoning in para 27 on  this
    matter was not challenged in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  It was first raised by  Mr  Puar  in  his  oral
    submissions.  In my judgment,  neither  this  point  (nor  the  reasons
    challenge) succeeds in establishing that the judge was not entitled  to
    rely upon the Sprakab Report as being inconsistent with the appellant's
    claim.  Judge Baker approached the Sprakab report in  a  manner  wholly
    consistent with the Supreme Court's decision in SSHD v MN and KY [2014]
    UKSC 30.  Importantly, Judge Baker did not rely on any points taken  in
    the report about the appellant's 'country or  cultural'  knowledge  and
    she did not treat the Sprakab Report as determinative but rather as one
    aspect of the entirety of the evidence which had to  be  considered  in
    the round (see paras 36 and 37 of the determination).

37. In my judgment, the judge gave adequate  and  sustainable  reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's account including that he was a  national  of
    Iran and for dismissing his appeal on all grounds.

Decision

38. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds did not  involve  the  making  of  an
    error of law.  That decision stands.

39. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                     -----------------------

[1]
https://maps.google.co.uk/maps?saddr=Sardasht,+West+Azeraijan,+Iran&daddr=As
hkanan,+iran&HL=en&sll=31.689757,49.545192&sspn=10.274491,14.040527&geocode+
FY6vJwld6fO1Aimz6jRJuH0BQDFuM7pXr-
Fybg%3BFe97nwEdjf8xAylVIJQKBxFRPjFcO1mb4cYdsw&mra=pr&t=m&z=6


[2] http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2013/10/smugglers-easily-
cross-iraqi-border.html


