
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06059/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke,                  |Decision Promulgated       |
|on 9th August 2016                              |On 31st August 2016        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                     mcs
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk, of Counsel, instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. On 25th February 2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Reid  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Evans in which he dismissed the appeal  on  all
    grounds against the  decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse  asylum,
    humanitarian and human rights protection to the appellant, a male adult
    citizen of Guinea.

 2. In granting permission Judge Reid noted that the grounds contended that
    credibility findings of the First-tier Judge were  unsafe  because  the
    Medical Foundation Report which, although disclosed late, was  rejected
    by the judge without arguably giving adequate  reasons.   Additionally,
    it was argued that the judge had failed to make findings in relation to
    the appellant's claimed government employment  and  dismissal  and  the
    claim that his father and a son had died in a suspected arson attack.

 3. Whilst Judge Reid thought that the  First-tier  Judge  had  dealt  with
    credibility issues  regarding  employment  it  was  arguable  that  the
    judge's  conclusions  on  credibility  in  the  light  of  the  Medical
    Foundation Report (now known as Freedom from Torture) were  lacking  in
    reasoning.

 4. At the hearing Mr Schwenk argued that the medical report had  not  been
    considered adequately.  Although there had been late disclosure of  the
    appellant's claimed detentions and sexual assault, this matter had been
    dealt with in the report (pages 47  and  48)  and  the  possibility  of
    fabrication of the claims.  However, the report had concluded that  the
    scarring borne by the appellant was consistent with his claims.

 5. Mr Schwenk also submitted that the negative conclusions of the judge in
    paragraphs 46 and 47 were contradictory bearing in mind that the  judge
    had found the appellant to be a Peuhl which group had  often  been  the
    target of the state's security forces and that, at some  point  in  the
    past, the appellant had  suffered  significant  trauma  and,  possibly,
    mistreatment.

 6. Mr Bates relied upon the response of  10th  March  2016  which  briefly
    asserts that the judge did not  misdirect  himself  and  made  adequate
    findings of fact.  In particular, the judge gave adequate consideration
    of the medical report in paragraphs 44 and  46  of  the  decision.   He
    emphasised that the report had only found the appellant's  injuries  to
    be consistent with the claimed cause so was not conclusive.  Thus,  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant had  suffered  trauma
    but not as claimed.

Conclusions

 7. At the end of the hearing and after I had considered the matter  for  a
    few moments, I indicated that I was satisfied that the decision of  the
    First-tier Judge showed errors on points of law such that it should  be
    set aside and re-made before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  now  give  my
    reasons for that conclusion.

 8. In paragraphs 44 and 45 the judge refers to the medical  report  by  Dr
    Nadim noting that five lesions on the appellant's body were  consistent
    with his claimed torture and that post-traumatic  stress  disorder  had
    been diagnosed.  Further, in paragraph 45 the judge indicates  that  Dr
    Nadim's report has been carefully prepared and  "clearly"  some  weight
    should be given to it.  However, the judge gives no reasons at all  for
    rejecting the medical evidence  in  reaching  findings  on  credibility
    which are, apparently, based solely  on  inconsistencies  in  evidence.
    Bearing in mind that the medical report reaches conclusions  about  the
    cause of the appellant's injuries and also considers the possibility of
    fabrication of evidence as well as diagnosing mental  illness,  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to  give  cogent  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    expert medical opinion. The Upper Tribunal so found in FS (Treatment of
    expert evidence) Somalia [2009] UKAIT 00004.

 9. Additionally, the judge's failure to give adequate consideration to the
    medical evidence highlights the inconsistency in paragraphs 46  and  47
    of the decision where the  judge  finds  that,  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence including the medical report, the appellant is a member of  an
    ethnic group often targeted by the state's  security  forces  but  then
    rejects the credibility of the appellant's claims on the basis of other
    inconsistencies in the evidence which had not been viewed in the  light
    of the medical report.

10. The errors are such that the full appeal will need to be reheard by the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This conclusion is consistent with  the  Practice
    Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals of 25th  September  2012
    at paragraph 7.2 bearing in mind that the  evidence  will  need  to  be
    heard afresh.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008):

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant.  This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.

DIRECTIONS

11. The appeal will be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
    Manchester.

12. The remitted appeal should not be heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Evans.

13. A French interpreter will be required for the hearing.

14. The time estimate for the hearing is two and a half hours.

15. The hearing will take place on a date to be specified by  the  Resident
    Judge.


Signed                              Date 30 Aug 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
