
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06235/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 April 2015                             |On 21 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                        mr pakeerathan shanmuganatman
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 5 May 1983.  He  claims
    to have arrived in the United Kingdom on 25 March 2014 and applied  for
    asylum on 26 March of the same year.  The respondent decided to  refuse
    his claim for asylum on 15 August 2014 and a  notice  of  decision  was
    sent to the appellant  which  contained  a  proposal  to  make  removal
    directions.

 2. The appellant faced persecution  from  the  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka
    consequent upon his former association with the LTTE and his  perceived
    continuing support for the LTTE.  His claim for Humanitarian Protection
    is based on like fears.  He also maintains that  removal  would  engage
    Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention.  Alongside fear of harm
    from the authorities the appellant also relies upon his  mental  health
    condition

 3. He appealed against the respondent's decision and his appeal was  heard
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew, sitting in Birmingham on 29
    September 2014.  She dismissed the appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    eventually granted by the Upper Tribunal on 11  February  2015.   Upper
    Tribunal Judge Eshun gave the following reasons for so granting:-

         "I accept the explanation for the delay in supporting the  previous
         application and extend time in the interests of justice.

         The grounds disclosed an arguable  error  of  law  in  the  judge's
         rejection of the credibility of the appellant's claim to have  been
         arrested and detained in September 2013; consideration  of  whether
         the appellant is at risk of persecution on return to Sri Lanka; and
         her failure to consider whether in light of the appellant's  mental
         health there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  he  will
         face treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR.  As to whether the judge
         erred in law in her consideration of  Article  8,  will  very  much
         depend on the recent Court of Appeal decision in GS  (India)  2015]
         EWCA Civ 40."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me on 16 April  2015.   The  appellant  was
    present but was not required to give oral evidence.  No interpreter had
    been booked to facilitate this and  in  any  event  he  had  not  given
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  by  reason  of  mental  health
    concerns.  I heard submissions from both parties in regard to the issue
    of error of law.

 5. Ms Bayati relied on her grounds to the Upper Tribunal  submitting  that
    the judge materially erred in three specific areas.

 6. Firstly, failing to take account of witness statements filed on  behalf
    of the appellant in both his  application  and  appeal.   Additionally,
    misdirected herself in law in concluding that the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim to have been arrested and detained in September  2013
    was  severely  undermined  as  a  result  of  his  failure  to  provide
    corroborative evidence and failed to take account,  in  coming  to  her
    conclusions, that the appellant had provided evidence as to  why  there
    was  no  contact  with  his  parents  by  reason  of  the  intelligence
    operations of the authorities.

 7. Secondly, that the judge erred in  her  consideration  of  whether  the
    appellant is at risk of persecution on return to his country of  origin
    on the basis of her own findings of fact and in so  doing  erred  in  a
    complete failure to address or apply paragraph 339K of the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 (as amended).  Beyond that the judge also failed  to  take
    into account material facts when determining whether the appellant  had
    a well-founded fear of persecution.

 8. Finally, it was submitted that the judge erred in failing  to  consider
    whether in light of the appellant's mental health there are substantial
    grounds for believing he will face treatment contrary to Articles 3  or
    8 and in so doing failed to  engage  with  relevant  case  law  and  in
    particular  the  authority  of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]  UKUT  319  at
    paragraphs 450 to 456.

 9. Mr Tufan resisted all the arguments on behalf  of  the  appellant.   He
    submitted that in the absence of a  finding  that  the  second  of  the
    appellant's claimed detentions occurred there was  no  reason  for  the
    judge to move on to give consideration to paragraph 339K at  all.   The
    judge has clearly said that she can only rely on what the appellant has
    had to say and cannot be criticised for the absence  of  evidence  from
    other sources.  He accepted, as  did  Ms  Bayati,  that  there  was  no
    requirement for corroboration but urged me to accept  that  the  reason
    why the judge could put weight on the absence of evidence from  someone
    who it was reasonable to expect might attend the  Tribunal  hearing  to
    give it.  He maintained that this is clearly a case where the appellant
    is not credible.  As to Articles 3 and 8  and  the  appellant's  mental
    health he referred me  to  the  authority  of  JL  (Medical  reports  -
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 IAC and argued that little  weight
    could be attached to the medical evidence within this appeal by  reason
    of it being no more than a function of the appellant's own evidence.

10. The first thing to say is that on reading the judge's  decision  it  is
    not apparent that the witness statements provided by the  appellant  in
    relation to both his application and appeal have been considered and/or
    engaged  with.   Secondly  there  is   no   requirement   within   this
    jurisdiction for corroborative evidence.  However, the judge appears to
    have failed to take account of the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  no
    direct contact with  his  parents  precisely  because  he  feared  that
    telephones were tapped (this is dealt within his application statement)
    and that he would be traced and this would create problems for his  own
    family.   This  is  evidence  consistent  with   background   material.
    Moreover, the appellant's position is that no official documentation of
    his second  detention  was  provided  to  him  and  therefore  no  such
    corroboration  of  that  kind  could  be  provided  to  the   Tribunal.
    Therefore the judge could only have been referring to material from his
    parents and family.  The appellant's position is not inconsistent  with
    the background evidence as he was someone  subject  to  rehabilitation,
    weekly reporting requirements and a condition that he  must  not  leave
    his area.

11. This is also a case where the judge has erred in failing to address  or
    apply paragraph 339K of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended).
    This had application to not simply the detention in  dispute  but  also
    the accepted initial detention of this  individual  appellant.   Beyond
    that  there  is  a  failure  to  engage  with  Articles  3  and  8  and
    particularly so in relation to the appellant's mental health.  There is
    also an absence of engagement with country guidance in relation to such
    matters as asserted by Ms Bayati within her grounds.

12. For all these reasons I find the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains errors of law and has to be set aside in  its  entirety.   All
    parties were agreed that in the circumstances it  was  appropriate  for
    the appeal to be considered and all matters determined  afresh  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal  Codes  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7.2(b) before any other judge aside from Judge Andrew.

An anonymity order is not made.



Signed        Date 20 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard




DIRECTIONS

 1. This appeal is to be listed at Taylor House  on  10  November  2015  at
    10am.

 2. The time estimate is 3 hours.

 3. Any additional evidence of either party is to be filed  and  served  no
    later than 21 days prior to that hearing.

 4. The Tribunal to provide a Tamil interpreter.



Signed        Date 20 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

