
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 23rd May 2016                              |On 5th July 2016               |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                            harbans kaur khaneja
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tettey of Counsel instructed by CAB (Bolton)
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. On 1st May 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Symes,  gave  permission  to  the
    appellant to appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Gladstone in  which  she  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent to refuse  asylum,  humanitarian  and  human
    rights protection to the appellant, a  female  citizen  of  Afghanistan
    born on 1st January 1942.

 2. An application for leave to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  was  not
    been admitted on the basis  that  the  application  was  out  of  time.
    However, in granting permission Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Symes  extended
    time.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Symes noted that the grounds  contended  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was not entitled to come to the factual conclusions
    reached but thought that, in general, the arguments  made  amounted  to
    disputes with the reasoned findings of  fact  without  identifying  any
    error of principle in the determination.  However, there was seen to be
    one exception to this arising from paragraph 6 of  the  grounds,  which
    challenged the First-tier Judge's treatment of the appellant's  claimed
    lack of education and memory loss, particularly the conclusions set out
    in paragraph 129, criticising the report  of  a  general  practitioner.
    Judge Symes observed that, in paragraph 131, the judge had acknowledged
    that the appellant had repeatedly sought to raise her difficulties with
    memory and also referred to the matter at asylum  interview.   Further,
    she thought the judge had not made a finding on whether she accepted or
    rejected the appellant's evidence as to lack of  education,  illiteracy
    and memory  loss  as  an  explanation  for  difficulties  in  giving  a
    consistent  account.   She  considered   the  fact  that  the   general
    practitioner had referred the appellant's case for specialist treatment
    gave some corroboration to the appellant's claims.   It  was  therefore
    arguable that the judge had failed to take into consideration  relevant
    considerations when reaching credibility findings.

The Hearing

 4.  At  the  hearing  Mr  Tettey  relied  upon   the   grounds,   although
    concentrating upon the allegation that the judge  had  failed  to  take
    into consideration the appellant's claimed  memory  loss  and  lack  of
    education.  He submitted that there was no evidence to allow the  judge
    to reject the medical view set out  in  the  letter  from  the  general
    practitioner, Dr Ahsan, having regard to the  authority  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision in JL (Medical reports -  credibility)  China  [2013]
    UKUT 00145 (IAC).  If the judge had wanted to go behind  the  diagnosis
    in that letter further detail was required in the decision.  Mr  Tettey
    also argued that the judge had not  explained  how  he  had  approached
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence, particularly in the  light
    of the expert report by Dr Giustozzi notably in paragraphs 134 and 135.
     All the credibility findings could have been affected by memory  loss.
    Mr Tettey also submitted  that  evidence  given  by  the  appellant  in
    screening interview should not have been relied upon.

 5. Ms Johnstone reminded me of the response of 20th May 2015, which points
    out that in the "very detailed and thorough determination",  the  judge
    gave numerous and sustainable reasons (paragraph 129) for  finding  the
    medical evidence of  no  assistance  and  the  grounds  were  merely  a
    disagreement with the adverse outcome of the appeal.  She also  pointed
    out that credibility was also dependent upon evidence of the witnesses,
    notably the appellant's son and  daughter-in-law  which  also  revealed
    discrepancies.  Paragraph 153 of the decision confirmed that the  judge
    had found credibility to be an issue  for  both  the  appellant  and/or
    witnesses.

 6. In conclusion Mr Tettey argued that the appeal should  be  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for hearing  afresh  in  view  of  the  judge's
    erroneous decision to reject the substantial amounts  of  evidence  put
    forward.

Conclusions

 7. The decision of the First-tier Judge is careful, detailed and  cogently
    reasoned.  It deals extensively with the evidence of the appellant  and
    her  witnesses  and  carefully  analyses  the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Giustozzi.  The latter  evidence  is  not  rejected  but  referred  to,
    notably in paragraph 138, on the basis that its conclusions can form  a
    basis for finding the appellant's claims incredible.  Significantly the
    appellant claimed that risk was from the Taliban in the three incidents
    claimed and yet that was not supported by Dr Giustozzi's report.

 8. The fully reasoned conclusions of the  judge  run  to  over  ten  pages
    following  a  careful  analysis  of  the  evidence  and   prefaced   by
    consideration of the appellant's claim to have memory  issues.   Strong
    reliance was placed by the  appellant  on  the  general  practitioner's
    letter but this  simply stated:

         "I am writing to confirm this lady has  significant  memory  issues
         and she has been referred to hospital for further investigation."

 9. That is clearly not a full medical report of the kind envisaged by  the
    Upper Tribunal in JL.  It gives no reasons for stating that  there  are
    "significant memory issues" nor  does  it  state  a  diagnosis  of  any
    particular illness or prognosis.  The judge gives  copious  reasons  in
    paragraph 129 for finding that the letter is  unhelpful.   That  was  a
    conclusion he was entitled to make.  In noting the  reasons  given  for
    the appellant's inability to fund a  full  medical  report,  the  judge
    acknowledges, in paragraph 131, that the appellant referred to problems
    of memory, education and illiteracy when  giving  her  evidence.   When
    faced with unreliable medical  evidence  and  mere  assertions  by  the
    appellant, the judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  consideration  the
    significant inconsistencies present  in  evidence  given  by  both  the
    appellant and her witnesses, to reach the conclusion that she  had  not
    given a credible account of her reasons for  leaving  Afghanistan.   In
    that respect  the  judge  does  not  reject  the  expert  evidence  but
    carefully considers it pointing  out  further  inconsistencies  between
    such evidence and the appellant's claims.  The judge was not  wrong  to
    refer to the appellant's screening interview record for  an  indication
    of her state of health as opposed  to  any  material  elements  of  her
    asylum claim.  Nevertheless, in reaching  her  conclusions,  the  judge
    acknowledged that the appellant had made claims of memory loss  at  the
    time of her asylum interview but was entitled to  find,  by  inference,
    that such claims had not been substantiated.

10. The judge's consideration of the evidence is balanced  and  fair.   The
    issue of memory loss is not ignored, seen against the background of  an
    absence of reasoned diagnosis and significant  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's and witnesses claims even  taking  into  consideration  the
    expert evidence





Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction  nor  was  one
requested before me.







Signed                              Date: 5th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

