
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06891/2012



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 June 2013                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                MAHMUT YILMAZ
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the appellant:      Mr D Nelson-Iye, Legal Representative
For the respondent:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This appeal comes before me  following  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy  on  10  April
    2013 in respect of the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-
    Stewart promulgated on 13 February  2013.

2.    The appellant is a Turkish national born on 25 May 1972. He claims  to
    have arrived here illegally on 17 October 2011 and claimed asylum on 19
    October. He is of Kurdish ethnicity from Genc in Bingol. He lived  with
    his family and completed his military service  in  1995.  The  area  in
    which he lived was a mountainous area in a strategic location  for  the
    PKK and the authorities. The appellant's family  resisted  pressure  to
    become informers and as a result the appellant  claimed  to  have  been
    persecuted. His application was rejected by the respondent  on  9  July
    2012 and directions for his removal were given.

3.    The appellant's complaint is that the judge did not  give  due  weight
    to the report from the Medical Foundation which detailed  his  scarring
    and diagnosed PTSD, that she did not refer at  all  to  the  background
    material  and  that  she  gave  inadequate  reasons  for  her   adverse
    credibility findings.

4.    The appellant attended the hearing  and  was  legally  represented.  I
    heard submissions from Mr Nelson-Iye who expanded upon the grounds  and
    from Mr  Tarlow  who  submitted  that  the  judge's  determination  was
    sustainable.   At  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  I   reserved   my
    determination which I now give.

5.     Having  considered  the  appellant's  challenge,  the  grounds,   the
    submissions, the determination and the medical report, I agree with  Mr
    Nelson-Iye that  the  judge  erred  in  her  approach  to  the  medical
    evidence. Whilst it is a matter for the judge as to the weight a  piece
    of evidence  should  be  given,  in  view  of  the  extensive  scarring
    documented I would have expected the judge to have  engaged  more  with
    the report before rejecting its conclusion that  the  appellant  was  a
    victim  of  torture.  I  accept  that  the  judge   did   address   the
    discrepancies arising from the report as regards certain dates  however
    as submitted by Mr Nelson-Iye, that still  leaves  the  matter  of  the
    scarring and the diagnosis of PTSD. The judge was also  criticised  for
    failing to make findings in the context of the background  material.  I
    note that the background evidence is listed at paragraph 3 but there is
    no assessment of how that evidence  assists  or  does  not  assist  the
    appellant or how it affects the analysis of his claim. That too, is  an
    error of law. The final ground is a reasons challenge.  The  judge  did
    provide some reasons  for  her  adverse  findings  and  had  the  other
    difficulties with the determination not arisen, her reasoning may  have
    been adequate. In the circumstances,  however,  and  where  an  earlier
    determination (made by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul)  had  been  set
    aside, I would have hoped for particularly careful consideration of all
    the evidence.

6.    For all these reasons I find that the judge made  errors  of  law  and
    the determination is set aside.  The  decision  will  be  remade  at  a
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on all grounds. No findings  are
    to be preserved.

Decision

7.     The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  errors  of   law   such   that   the
    determination is set aside. The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing on all issues.



Directions

8.    The appellant is directed to serve on the Tribunal and the  respondent
    a paginated and indexed bundle of all documents relied upon  served  no
    later than 7 working days prior to the next hearing.


Signed:



Dr R Keki?
Upper Tribunal Judge
13 June 2013


