
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06299/2012
     AA/06301/2012
     AA/06302/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6th September 2013                           |On 19th September 2013     |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                     ASHFAQ AHMAD BUTT - FIRST APPELLANT
                     USMAN AHMAD BUTT - SECOND APPELLANT
                     NOUMAN AHMAD BUTT - THIRD APPELLANT
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Hussain of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are  the  Appellants'  appeals  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    Hemingway made following a hearing at Bradford on 31st July 2012.

Background

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan and  are  all  Ahmadi  Muslims.
    They lived in  Rawalpindi  in  Pakistan  and  their  history  has  been
    accepted by the Secretary of  State.   On  5th  March  2011  the  first
    Appellant's eldest son and the  second  Appellant  were  attacked  when
    returning home from an Ahmadi Muslim meeting by members of  the  Khatme
    Nabuwat.  The police declined to assist them.  On 14th August 2011  the
    second and third Appellants were abducted at gunpoint by members of the
    same organisation but were  released.   Again  the  police  refused  to
    assist.  The first Appellant's wife was then attacked on 19th  or  20th
    August 2011 after she was returning home from a  meeting.   The  family
    left the area and went to stay in Taxila and then  in  Islamabad  where
    they stayed until they left Pakistan.

 3. The judge recorded that it was accepted that the three  Appellants  had
    given a truthful account with respect to the problems that they had had
    in their home area in  Pakistan.   The  central  issues  were  internal
    flight and whether the Appellants would need to  hide  their  faith  in
    order to avoid persecution. He accepted that if the Appellants returned
    to Rawalpindi they would be at risk.  It was the Respondent's case that
    they could reasonably go to Taxila or Islamabad because  they  had  not
    encountered problems there, or alternatively to other Pakistani  cities
    such as Karachi or Faisalabad.

 4. The judge considered the background information which had  been  placed
    before him and the applicable case law, at that time MJ and ZM Pakistan
    CG [2008] UKAIT 33.  He accepted that the material, which he quoted  in
    detail, suggested that matters had worsened since the case was  decided
    but was not persuaded that they had deteriorated to such an extent that
    the country guidance determination should no longer  be  followed.   It
    did not suggest, as was argued, a  situation  where  Ahmadis  who  were
    simply open about their faith  would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm throughout Pakistan.

 5. The judge considered the HJ argument,  namely  whether  the  Appellants
    would  have  to  hide  their  faith  upon  return  in  order  to  avoid
    persecution.  He said that none of the  Appellants  nor  the  witnesses
    gave any examples of their preaching or positively seeking  to  convert
    anyone.  However they did indicate that if  someone  asked  them  about
    their Ahmadi faith they would talk about it.  They would not deny  that
    they were Ahmadis and would continue to go to their own Ahmadi mosques.
     That was, he said, sufficient to cause them to encounter  problems  in
    their home area but does not of itself mean that they  would  encounter
    the same difficulties elsewhere.

 6.  The  judge  rejected  Mr  Hussain's  submission  that  they  would  be
    persecuted in other cities such as Karachi, Islamabad or Faisalabad  or
    would be forced into modifying their behaviour specifically in order to
    avoid persecution.  He considered whether internal relocation would  be
    reasonable.  He noted that the family were educated and that the  first
    Appellant had run a  business  in  the  past  and  his  wife  had  some
    experience of working  as  a  general  secretary  for  a  local  Ahmadi
    organisation.  There were no significant  health  problems  within  the
    family.  They would be able to give moral support  to  each  other  and
    there was nothing to suggest that at least some of them  would  not  be
    able to obtain some employment.  He concluded  that  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh to require them to relocate  and  on  that
    basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the First-
    tier Tribunal had accepted that there had  been  past  persecution  and
    that the Appellants would disclose  their  faith  if  asked.   Internal
    relocation could only be reasonable if it was likely there would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection to deter future attacks. No  particular  area
    was put forward by the Respondent as an area which might  be  suitable.
    The judge  ought  to  have  dealt  with  the  accepted  fact  that  the
    Appellants would not hide or conceal their faith when asked.  There was
    a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  they  would  face  similar
    persecution in the future;  the  previous  persecution  did  not  arise
    because of preaching activities.

 8. Secondly it was argued that the judge failed to record the  submissions
    of the Respondent in full and the concession that upon  relocation,  at
    best, they would suffer  only  extreme  discrimination  which  did  not
    amount  to  persecution.   It  was  clearly   arguable   that   extreme
    discrimination rendered internal flight unreasonable.

 9. Thirdly, the judge erred by failing to place the Appellant's account of
    persecution within the  context  of  supplied  background  evidence  on
    discrimination, violence and persecution perpetrated against Ahmadis in
    Pakistan. He had not explained why the material did not show  that  the
    Appellants would not continue to face persecution.

10. Finally, the judge had not asked  whether  the  Appellants  would  live
    discreetly on return and why they had lived in  the  manner  that  they
    did.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  Deputy  Judge  McWilliam
    but granted upon renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  who  stated
    that the comprehensive country guidance in MN  and  Others  (Ahmadis  -
    country  conditions  -  risk)  Pakistan  CG  [2012]  UKUT   00389   was
    promulgated after the determination but he was persuaded  that  it  was
    appropriate to grant permission.

12. On 4th December 2012 the Respondent served a reply opposing the appeals
    in the following terms.  The Appellants were not preachers nor inclined
    to do so and  not  fettered  by  discretion  to  avoid  problems.   The
    Respondent cited MN and Others and contended that, as these  Appellants
    have not and do not seek to engage in behaviour which would  contravene
    behaviour set out in the summary. It has however long been possible  in
    general for Ahmadis to practise  their  faith  on  a  restricted  basis
    either in  private  or  in  a  community  with  other  Ahmadis  without
    infringing domestic Pakistan law.  The Respondent contended that  these
    Appellants have not and do not seek to engage in behaviour which  would
    contravene the above and could return without risk to a different area.



Submissions

13. Mr Hussain relied on his grounds.  He said that the judge had erred  in
    not recording the  Respondent's  concession,  made  by  the  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing, that  the  Appellants  would  suffer  ""extreme
    discrimination" on return. He also said that he had made submissions on
    the reasonableness of internal relocation which were  not  recorded  in
    the determination. He submitted that the judge's findings were perverse
    in the light of the accepted facts, and, on the basis of the  case  law
    as it was at the time relocation was not reasonable.

14. Mrs Pettersen adopted her response.  She said that at paragraphs 17 and
    18 of the determination the judge  recorded  the  Appellants'  evidence
    about how they said they would behave on return to  Pakistan.   It  was
    clear that he was well aware of the case law cited in the grounds.

15. At paragraphs 29 and 30 the judge recorded  the  submissions,  and  she
    provided the Presenting Officer's note. He then went on  to  deal  with
    the HJ point and  the  question  of  internal  relocation.   The  first
    Appellant was approaching 60 and it is likely that if  he  intended  to
    preach in the future he would have done so in the past.  Pakistan was a
    large country and it was not a part of the Appellant's  case  that  the
    authorities were seeking to find them.  It was open  to  the  judge  to
    find that they could safely relocate.

16. Mr Hussain repeated that if the Appellants refused  to  hide  the  fact
    that they were Ahmadi they would be recognised as such and would be  at
    risk.  They had been persecuted in the past which was good evidence  of
    future persecution.  He said that the judge recorded his submissions as
    referring to discrimination and it was unlikely that he would have done
    so had it not been flagged up by the Presenting Officer.  The judge had
    also referred to a concession made  by  him  in  paragraph  31  of  the
    determination.

Findings and Conclusions

17. There is no error of law in this determination.

18. In Mr Hussain's grounds he refers to a failure of the judge to record a
    submission of the Presenting Officer that,

         "Upon  relocation  at  best  they   would   suffer   only   extreme
         discrimination."

19. That submission is unsupported by the  Presenting  Officer's  note,  in
    which he writes,

         "Social  boycott  -  not  persecution/discrimination.   Nobody   is
         looking for them"

    Mr Hussain said that he had no notes of  the  hearing.   He  sought  to
    support the submission by quoting paragraph 31, where the judge writes,

         "The Respondent has accepted that the three Appellants have given a
         truthful account with respect to the  problems  they  have  had  in
         their home area in Pakistan.  I accept Mr Malarkey's concession."

20. It is clear however that the judge was referring to the  concession  in
    relation to the history of the Appellants and not to anything else.  Mr
    Hussain is recorded  as  saying  that  the  treatment  the  Appellant's
    received  should  properly  be  regarded  as  persecution  rather  than
    discrimination but that is  not  evidence  of  any  concession  by  the
    Respondent.

21. Mr Hussain also sought to argue that the judge had erred by not  taking
    into account all of his submissions.  Not only was that not pleaded  in
    the original grounds but  Mr  Hussain  was  very  unclear  as  to  what
    submissions he said that he made which had not been considered.  In any
    event it is not an error of law for the judge to fail  to  record  each
    and every submission.

22. Mr Hussain had some difficulty in distinguishing between a  re-argument
    of the  Appellants'  case,  which  he  did  at  some  length,  and  the
    identification of an error of law in the decision.  The  judge  clearly
    addressed the objective evidence relied upon by the Appellants in  some
    detail, finding that there was no evidence  to  suggest  that,  if  the
    Appellants did return to Pakistan to a  place  other  than  Rawalpindi,
    there would be any means of the Khatme Nabuwat  discovering  that  they
    had returned.  He then considered whether they would  face  persecution
    throughout Pakistan otherwise than at the hands of local members of the
    Khatme Nabuwat. The judge took into account  the  Appellant's  personal
    circumstances and gave reasons for finding that relocation would not be
    unreasonable.

23. He reviewed the country guidance case law and, whilst he accepted  that
    matters had worsened since 2008, he was not satisfied that Ahmadis  who
    are simply open about their faith would be at risk throughout Pakistan.
     That was a conclusion perfectly open to him.

24. The judge also  considered  the  HJ  argument  again  in  detail.   The
    evidence before him was that the first Appellant  did  talk  to  others
    about his faith but he was not a preacher.

25. Nothing in the case law as it was before  Judge  Hemingway  could  have
    supported the submission, which seems  to  have  been  made,  that  any
    Ahmadi who suffered local persecution  could  not  reasonably  relocate
    because of discrimination by the state and  non-state  actors.  Clearly
    there has been some change in the legal landscape since the judge  made
    his decision.  It is a matter for the Appellant  and  his  advisers  to
    decide whether on  the  basis  of  the  most  recent  case  law  a  re-
    application would be appropriate.

Decision

The grounds  disclose  no  error  in  this  determination.  The  Appellants'
appeals are dismissed.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
