

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
aa/06409/2015

                                                    AA/06565/2015

                                                    AA/06566/2015

                                                    AA/06567/2015

                                                    AA/06568/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11th October 2017                      | On 18th October 2017             |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    MR SM
                                   MRS AM
                                  MASTER AM
                                   MISS AM
                                  MASTER AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms R Moffatt, Counsel instructed by Simman
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants,  nationals  of  Albania,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse their
    application for asylum in the  UK.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kaler
    dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 20th March 2017.  The
    Appellants now appeal to this  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  permission
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett on 14th August 2017.

 2. The first Appellant is a male citizen of Albania, the second  Appellant
    is his wife and the other three Appellants are  their  children.   They
    all claimed asylum on entry to the UK on 25th February 2013. A  request
    to return the Appellants to  Italy  under  the  Dublin  Convention  was
    accepted by the Italian authorities but following although they were to
    be removed to Italy under the  Dublin  Convention  and  the  Appellants
    applications for asylum  were  refused  on  these  grounds  of  appeal.
    However,  following  an  application  for  Judicial  Review  the  first
    Appellant was interviewed and  the  Respondent  made  the  decision  to
    refuse the applications on 24th March 2015.

 3. The basis of the first Appellant's claim is that there is a blood  feud
    between his family and another family and that he is at risk in Albania
    as the result of this blood feud.   The  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    accept that the Appellant or his father is involved in a  land  dispute
    with the family of MM as claimed.  In any event the Secretary of  State
    accepted that there is a sufficiency of protection in Albania and  that
    internal relocation remained a viable option because it is  not  unduly
    harsh for the Appellant to relocate within Albania.

 4.  In  her  decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   considered   the
    documentary evidence submitted in  relation  to  court  proceedings  in
    Albania and concluded that she was satisfied  that  there  was  a  land
    dispute between the Appellant's father and MM's  family  and  that  the
    Appellant is now acting as  a  plaintiff  in  respect  of  land  he  is
    claiming from MM [52].  Because of inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's
    evidence the judge did not accept that the Appellant  received  a  text
    message causing him to leave his home.  The judge accepted  that  there
    were some threats made to the Appellant which related  to  the  dispute
    between the families  [54].   The  judge  accepted  that  there  was  a
    protracted land dispute saying that the threats were at most an attempt
    to stop the Appellant from pursuing his claim for land [54].  The judge
    noted that it appeared from the documents that the courts have ruled in
    favour of MM's family so that there is little for them to gain from any
    ongoing threats.  The Appellant has decided not to pursue his claim and
    the judge noted that, while courts are open to  bribes,  there  was  no
    evidence before her to show that MM's family is influential.  She noted
    that the courts appear to have considered the matter fully and  it  did
    not follow that the judge had been  bribed.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge said that the robbery and arson at the home  of  the  Appellant's
    parents may have been to do with the land dispute or it may  have  been
    due to other people who have nothing to do with the dispute  and  noted
    that it seemed astonishing that if these events  occurred  the  parents
    did not contact the police, instead contacting only the Appellant after
    the fire [55].  The judge did not accept that the  Appellant  left  his
    home area without his parents because of threats or fear  of  violence.
    The judge accepted that  what  starts  as  a  dispute  about  land  can
    escalate into a blood feud [56] and went on to consider whether that is
    what actually occurred in this case.  The judge found that there was no
    connection between the land dispute and the murder of  the  son  of  MM
    noting that another man was prosecuted and sentenced for the  death  of
    MM's son and that if there is a blood feud it is more  likely  that  it
    exists between MM and the family of the man  who  was  sentenced.   The
    judge accepted that there was a feud between the Appellant's family and
    that of MM but it was not a blood feud noting that no blood  was  spilt
    that involved this Appellant and did not conclude that MM believed this
    Appellant was involved after the conviction of the other man [56].

 5. The judge considered the country guidance  case  of  EH  (blood  feuds)
    Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348.  The judge noted at paragraph 59 that the
    only evidence that there may be a  threat  to  the  Appellant  and  his
    family  now  comes  by  way  of  the  reports  from  Albania  from  the
    Appellant's mother but noted that there was  no  direct  evidence  from
    her. The judge noted that, although there was a statement from  another
    witness who is in the UK and claims to have spoken to  the  Appellant's
    mother, she was not tendered for evidence so her evidence could not  be
    tested.  The judge concluded with  her  omnibus  findings  of  fact  at
    paragraph 60 finding that the Appellant owns some land in  Albania  and
    that another family laid claim to the land and went through the  courts
    to establish their rights  and  won.   The  judge  found  that  it  was
    credible that there were  threats  made  during  the  course  of  those
    proceedings but it was not established that those  making  the  threats
    were responsible for any arson or robbery.  The son of MM was  murdered
    in 2007 and the murderer was imprisoned.  The judge did not  find  that
    any threats made to the Appellant or his family relate to  that  murder
    but were in relation to the land dispute.  The  judge  did  not  accept
    that the Appellant's brothers have fled or are in hiding because of any
    threats.  There was no evidence of any threats made to  them  and  they
    were not interested in the land dispute.  The Appellant's mother is not
    in hiding, she was located by the Appellant's mother-in-law.  There  is
    or was a land dispute in the judge's findings but no blood feud.

 6. In terms of the sufficiency of protection the judge found at  paragraph
    62 that the authorities act in relation to threats  and  offending  and
    investigate complaints noting that they decided in one case not to  act
    as they found the complaint related to a land dispute.  The  judge  was
    not persuaded on the evidence that the  police  would  not  investigate
    matters because of any influence exerted upon them as they successfully
    prosecuted the murder of MM's son.

Grounds of appeal

 7. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal contend that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in failing to consider the expert  country  report
    of Antonia Young  saying  at  paragraph  59  that  the  expert  country
    evidence is only relevant if she made a finding that there was a  blood
    feud.  However it is submitted that the country report was relevant  to
    the question of credibility in that it addressed  the  plausibility  of
    the Appellant's account and the question of the existence  of  a  blood
    feud.  It is contended that the expert evidence was relevant  in  terms
    of  the  plausibility  and  external  consistency  of  the  Appellant's
    account. It is contended that in failing to  take  this  evidence  into
    account the judge failed to consider credibility in the round and erred
    materially.

 8. The second ground contends that in finding  that  the  authorities  are
    able to offer protection the judge failed to give reasons as to why the
    expert's evidence to the contrary was rejected.

 9. In the third ground it is contended that the  judge  made  inconsistent
    findings in that she found that the first  Appellant  received  threats
    from the aggressor family and that the robbery and arson took place  as
    claimed but also found that he received no threats in relation  to  the
    murder of MM's son and that the robbery and arson were not  perpetrated
    by the aggressor family.  It is contended that the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to give proper reasons for distinguishing between the  two
    factual findings.

10. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it is arguable  that
    the judge erred in failing to consider the expert report only after she
    had concluded that there was no blood feud as it dealt  with  how  such
    feuds arise.

Discussion and conclusions

11. The first ground contends that the judge erred in failing  to  consider
    the expert's report. At paragraph 59 the judge said;

         "59. The Appellant has not established that he was potential target
         of a blood feud. His family was not involved with the  killing.  If
         the family of the  deceased  wanted  blood  from  this  Appellant's
         family, they had ample opportunity to seek it. It is only if I find
         that there was blood feud that the report of Antonia  Young  is  of
         relevance"

12. In her submissions Ms Moffatt highlighted that the judge  had  accepted
    that there was a land dispute, court proceedings and  that  there  were
    threats against the Appellant's family and that arson and robbery  took
    place but she did not accept that these events were linked to  a  blood
    feud.  Ms Moffatt referred to paragraph 6.1 where  Ms  Young  indicates
    that "a blood feud refers to the social obligation to commit murder  in
    order to salvage honour  questioned  by  an  earlier  murder  or  moral
    humiliation".  She also referred to paragraph 6.5 which  refers  to  "a
    blood feud involving violations of honour which entitles a  man  deeply
    affronted by it to take revenge by spilling out the blood  of  the  man
    who insults  his  honour".  In  her  submission  therefore  it  is  not
    necessary to establish a murder in order to establish a blood feud.  In
    her submission the final sentences of paragraphs  56  where  the  judge
    refers to the fact that "no blood was spilt" indicates that  the  judge
    was requiring the spilling of blood".

13. Ms Willocks-Briscoe pointed out that the definition of a blood feud  at
    paragraph 6.1 of the expert's report  is  from  Wikipedia  and  is  not
    sourced and is no indication as to whether that definition is reliable.
    She submitted that  there  was  nothing  in  the  judge's  decision  to
    contradict the view at 6.5 of the expert's report that a blood feud can
    also arise from a violation of honour.  She pointed out that the  judge
    considered the threats against the Appellant's family in  the  decision
    and dealt with  the  submission  that  the  Appellant  would  still  be
    considered to be involved but rejected that.   In  her  submission  the
    judge does not suggest that murder is required, just notes at paragraph
    56 that no blood has been spent involving this Appellant.

14. In my view it is clear  from  the  decision  that  the  judge  did  not
    consider it necessary to show that there was a death to establish  that
    there is a blood feud. The judge accepted that there was  a  protracted
    land dispute and gave  reasons  for  her  finding  that  this  did  not
    escalate into a  blood  feud.  These  included  her  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's claim that he received threats from MM by text; her finding
    that any threats received were related to the land  dispute;  the  fact
    that the courts have ruled in  favour  of  the  other  family  and  the
    Appellant has decided not to pursue any further claim; her finding that
    it had not been established that the robbery and arson at the  home  of
    the first Appellant's parents was related to the land dispute  and  the
    fact that the Appellant's parents did not report this  to  the  police;
    the fact that there was no link between the murder of MM's son and  the
    land dispute; the fact that another  man  had  been  convicted  of  the
    murder; the lack of evidence of threats to the Appellant's  family  now
    [59]; the lack of threats to the Appellant's brothers and the fact that
    they are not in hiding; and the fact that the Appellant's mother is not
    in hiding. These findings show that the judge  relied  on  all  of  the
    evidence and did not base her finding that there is no  blood  feud  on
    the lack of a death related to the feud.

15. Ms Moffatt submitted that the expert's  evidence  is  relevant  to  the
    assessment as to whether there is a blood feud. In her  submission  the
    expert deals with this case at paragraph  6.24  where  she  says:  "the
    development of the feud is consistent with numerous  other  such  feuds
    over property" and later in the same paragraph

         "To date although there has been no killing, [the first  Appellant]
         and  his  parents  have  suffered  multiple  threats,  attacks  and
         attempted  attacks  in  revenge  for  their  claiming   back   land
         originally legally apportioned to the [Appellant's] family, and due
         by inheritance to [the Appellant]."

16. She referred also to paragraph 7.1 where in conclusion the expert said:

          "I confirm that I consider it plausible  for  [the  Appellant]  to
         fear for his life as well as that of his son, and for harm to  come
         to his wife and daughter.  I find his descriptions  of  the  family
         feud, and thus his fear of attack, and potential murder if returned
         to Albania also plausible.  I would argue  that  as  a  blood  feud
         target, he would be at risk from  those  of  the  opposing  feuding
         family, and that he and his family would not have any assurance  of
         protection from any source even were he to  relocate  elsewhere  in
         Albania."

17. In Ms Moffatt's submission the expert's conclusion was relevant to  the
    existence of a blood feud.  Whilst accepting that the  expert's  report
    is general Ms Moffatt highlighted the issues relevant to this appeal in
    section 6 of the report.  She submitted  that  paragraph  6.24  of  the
    expert's report was relevant to the  assessment  of  credibility.   She
    submitted  that,  given  that  the  expert's  expertise  had  not  been
    impugned, her evidence should have been taken into account in  relation
    to plausibility and external consistency of the Appellant's  claim  and
    characterisation of the dispute between the  Appellant  and  the  other
    family as a blood feud.

18. Ms Willocks-Briscoe on the other hand submitted that  the  decision  of
    the judge has to be looked at holistically and that the judge made  the
    correct assessment of the case.  From paragraph 52 on  the  judge  sets
    out her reasons for not accepting that there  was  a  blood  feud.   At
    paragraph 54 the judge accepts that there was a protracted land dispute
    and a ruling in favour of the other  side,  therefore  there  would  be
    little for them to gain from threats.  Their lack of influence was also
    dealt with by the judge.  In her submission it is clear at paragraph 56
    that the judge accepts  that  she  is  aware  that  land  disputes  can
    escalate but went on then to look at what  actually  happened  in  this
    case.  She pointed out that the judge considered the  country  guidance
    at paragraph 57 and at paragraph 58 she looked at the  actions  of  the
    other party and at paragraph 59 set out her findings that there was  no
    direct evidence in relation to the threats and attached  no  weight  to
    the witness statement of the Appellant's mother-in-law because she  had
    not been tendered for examination.  In her submission, having looked at
    all of the different sources, the judge's conclusions at  paragraph  60
    were open to her on the evidence.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that
    the expert cannot make credibility findings and the expert  report  can
    only deal with the Appellant's credibility at its highest.

19. As highlighted by Ms Moffatt the nub of the complaint in this  case  is
    that the judge failed to give  adequate  consideration  to  the  expert
    report before her.  I accept that the only explicit  reference  to  the
    expert report is at paragraph 58 where the judge said that the expert's
    report was only of relevance if she found that there was a blood feud.

20. I accept that on the face of it this may appear as if the judge  failed
    to take into account a relevant expert report for the purposes  of  her
    assessment of this appeal.  However, it  is  apparent  on  reading  the
    expert report as a whole that much of  the  expert  report  is  general
    information in relation to  the  background  of  blood  feuds,  general
    information in relation to blood feuds  and  the  law  in  Albania  and
    reconciliation organisations in Albania.  It is only at section 6  that
    the judge engages with the specifics of this appeal.  Even at that much
    of section 6 contains general information about  blood  feuds  and  the
    definition of a blood feud.  There is little analysis  of  the  account
    put forward by the Appellant as to whether the  scenario  described  by
    the Appellant amounts to a blood feud rather than a land dispute.

21. There is some engagement with  this  case  at  paragraph  6.16  of  the
    expert's report but that is in the context of an  assumption  that  the
    Appellant is in fact involved in a blood  feud.   At  6.24  the  expert
    says, "the development of the feud is consistent  with  numerous  other
    such feuds over property" and says later on in that paragraph that  the
    Appellant and his parents "have suffered multiple threats, attacks  and
    attempted attacks in revenge for their claiming  back  land  originally
    legally apportioned" to the Appellant's family.  In the  conclusion  at
    7.1 Ms Young said that she considered it plausible that  the  Appellant
    would fear for his life and that his descriptions of  the  family  feud
    and fear of attack and potential murder is also plausible.

22. In my view these few conclusions specific to this case fail  to  engage
    with the evidence and the facts of the case as put forward.  Of  course
    the expert cannot make assessments of credibility. However  she  failed
    to engage with the factual scenario instead gave opinions  as  to  risk
    based on the assumption that there is a blood  feud  without  analysing
    whether in this particular case the circumstances are such as to amount
    to a blood feud.

23. In  these  circumstances  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  judge's
    assessment at paragraph 58 that is only if she found that there  was  a
    blood feud that the expert's report became relevant.  In fact,  looking
    at the decision as a whole, it is clear that the judge engaged with all
    of  the  evidence  put  forward  by  the  Appellant  and  all  of   the
    circumstances put forward by the Appellant  in  assessing  whether  the
    land dispute which was accepted had escalated into a  blood  feud.  The
    judge properly applied the guidance in  EH  (blood  feuds)  Albania  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00348 which gives guidance at paragraph 6 of the head note,
    as set out in the judge's decision, on the factors to be considered  in
    determining whether a blood feud exists.  The  judge  considered  those
    factors. The judge gave adequate reasons which were completely open  to
    her on the evidence before her as to why she found that it had not.

24. I find no material error in the judge's decision at paragraph  58  that
    she did not need to engage with the detail of the  expert's  report  in
    light of her finding that there was no blood feud.

25. In relation to Ground 2,  Ms  Moffatt  submitted  that,  as  the  judge
    accepted that there were threats although she did not accept they  were
    attributable to the land dispute, she was required  to  assess  whether
    returning to Albania would breach the Appellant's rights under Articles
    2 and 3.  She submitted that in considering this issue the judge failed
    to engage with the expert's report which contained relevant information
    in relation to sufficiency of protection,  for  example  at  paragraphs
    4.10 and 6.11 where the expert discusses the lack of  protection.   She
    submitted that this was a material omission.

26. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that section 4  of  the  expert's  report
    deals with sufficiency of protection and internal relocation  but  that
    these issues are also dealt with in  the  reasons  for  refusal  letter
    where the Secretary of State sets out her views  in  relation  to  this
    issue.  She submitted that any police  force  cannot  provide  24  hour
    protection.  The judge deals with this at paragraph  61  onwards  where
    she finds that the police have not failed to  investigate  due  to  the
    influence of the aggressor's family.  The  judge  recognises  that  the
    police can only go by the evidence and has turned her mind to issues of
    protection.  The judge noted that the authorities have  already  acted.
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe relied on the  case  of  The  Claimant  R  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2017]
    EWHC 639 (Admin) and in particular paragraph 57 where the judge said:

         "This does not, in my judgment, fulfil the  requirements  indicated
         by the guidance on authorities.  While, as the claimant submits,  a
         blood feud may not require a death to be initiated (though the case
         would seem to suggest at least one death  or  other  serious  crime
         will be the hallmark) some evidence of real risk of  harm  must  be
         needed to clear the hurdle of establishing an act  of  blood  feud.
         The claimant's case comes close to saying any allegation  of  blood
         feud must result in asylum status.  This is plainly  not  justified
         by the authorities."

    Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the judge dealt with this issue head
    on in her decision and found that the hurdle of establishing that there
    was a real risk of harm has not been cleared by the Appellant  in  this
    case.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe referred to other aspects  of  the  judicial
    review decision where it is noted that there is a difference between  a
    threat and an active blood feud [47].

27. In her submission whilst  the  judge  did  not  reference  the  various
    paragraphs in the expert report it is clear that  she  has  turned  her
    mind to all relevant factors and reached reasonable conclusions  as  to
    why she did not accept there was a blood feud and why,  notwithstanding
    corruption, there is a sufficiency of protection.

28. In response Ms Moffatt submitted that the nub of the challenge here  is
    that the judge did not take the expert report into account  at  all  in
    relation to her assessment of any of the  issues.   In  her  submission
    this failure was material.  The report is relevant to the assessment of
    credibility and to the issue of sufficiency of protection.  In terms of
    internal relocation she submitted that there was  no  evidence  of  the
    face of the judgment that the judge took into account what  the  expert
    said about this and in these circumstances the judge should  have  done
    more than she did at paragraphs 62  to  63.   She  submitted  that  the
    expert report does provide  evidence  in  relation  to  sufficiency  of
    protection which is more broad than just in relation to blood feuds.

29. Ms Moffatt relied on section 4 of the expert's report which deals  with
    sufficiency of protection but I note that almost all of section 4 deals
    with  sufficiency  of  protection  in  the  context  of  blood   feuds.
    Accordingly, the evidence of this section is of limited, if  any  value
    to the judge in assessing sufficiency of protection in this case.  What
    is of more relevance and what the judge did assess at paragraph 62  and
    63 is what actually happened to this Appellant and his  family  in  the
    context of the land dispute.  The judge found that the authorities  had
    acted in some of the cases and that other matters had not been reported
    to them and was satisfied that no undue influence had been exerted upon
    the police.  The judge also referred to the successful  prosecution  in
    relation to the  murder  which  again  was  more  relevant  significant
    evidence as to the actions of the police in relation to the issues  put
    forward by the Appellant.

30. I therefore accept  that  the  conclusions  reached  by  the  judge  at
    paragraphs 62 and 63 in relation to sufficiency of protection  in  this
    case were open to her on the evidence before her. The second ground has
    not been made out. Ms Moffatt made no submissions on the third  ground.
    In any event I find that this ground has not been made out.  I  see  no
    conflict between the judge's properly reasoned findings that there were
    threats but that it had not been established that the robbery and arson
    were perpetrated by the aggressor family.

31. In conclusion it is my view that the judge made no  material  error  of
    law in her approach to the expert report in relation to the  assessment
    of the Appellant's credibility or the sufficiency of protection  issue.



Notice of Decision

32. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make a material error of law.

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 17 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid so there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 17 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
