
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06465/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 5 January 2016                    |14 January 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MOHAMED IBRAHIM OSMAN SHELLY
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Drummond
                    Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Libya,  born  on  19  October  1996.   No
    anonymity direction has been requested or made.

 3. The respondent refused  the  appellant's  claim  to  recognition  as  a
    refugee for reasons explained in a letter dated 31 March 2015.   First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  Kempton  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 29 September 2015.

 4. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal on grounds  headlined  that  the
    judge "makes contradictory findings and fails to resolve a conflict  of
    evidence relating to the same."  The particular  grounds  are  that  Dr
    George (an expert on Libya whose report was produced for the appellant)
    was unable to find evidence that the appellant's  grandfather  was  (as
    the appellant claimed) Head of Intelligence Services under the  Gaddafi
    regime, or in charge of suppressing the  rebellion  in  Bani  Walid  in
    2011.  Dr George could  not  understand  why  the  appellant  might  be
    targeted rather than other family members.  The judge had not found the
    appellant wholly credible and characterised [part of] his  claim  as  a
    "cock and bull story".  The judge's finding that the appellant's family
    were close supporters of Gaddafi, bringing him  within  the  protection
    category identified in headnote (6) of AT and  Others  CG  [2014]  UKUT
    318, was therefore contradictory and unsupported.

 5. It is convenient here to cite the relevant part of the headnote in AT:

         "Former regime members and associates

         ...

         (3)      Having regard to the generally hostile attitude of society
             to the former regime, the following are, in general,  at  real
             risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment  on  return  to
             Libya: -

             (a) former high  ranking  officials  within  the  intelligence
                  services of that regime;

             (b) others with an  association  at  senior  level  with  that
                  regime.

         (4)      As a general matter, the closer an individual was  to  the
             centre of power within the former regime, the more likely that
             the individual will be able to establish a risk of persecution
             or Article 3 ill-treatment on return.

         (5)      The majority of the population of Libya either worked for,
             had some association with, or has a member of the  family  who
             worked for or had an association with the Qadhafi regime. Such
             employment or association alone is not sufficient to establish
             a risk of persecution or Article 3 ill-treatment on return.

         (6)      In general, family members of those described in  (3)  and
             (4) above are not at risk of persecution or a breach of  their
             protected rights on return. It is possible, however,  that  an
             individual will be able to establish such a risk but this will
             need to be demonstrated by specific evidence relating  to  the
             individual's  circumstances.  Mere  assertion   of   risk   by
             association as a family member would not be sufficient without
             fact-specific evidence of the risk to that  particular  family
             member."

 6. Mr Matthews submitted that AT was replete with references to  the  need
    for fact specific assessment of a case of this nature, for  example  at
    paragraphs 80, 101 and 141-146.  Paragraph 146 states:

         "We do not rule out the possibility that an individual will be able
         to demonstrate such a risk but that would have to  be  demonstrated
         by  a  highly  specific  individual  assessment  of  that  person's
         circumstances.  Mere assertion of risk by association as  a  family
         member would not be sufficient without fact  specific  evidence  of
         the risk to that particular family member.  The clear  evidence  is
         that risk arises because of actual or  perceived  support  for  the
         previous regime.  A family member may be able to establish risk  on
         this basis, but the mere fact of being a family member would not in
         our judgment be sufficient."

 7. Mr Matthews  argued  that  the  appellant's  case  was  based  only  on
    assertion of risk through his  maternal  grandfather.   The  supporting
    evidence was simply not there.  The judge misunderstood the  report  by
    Dr George, who had been unable to confirm the family  relationship,  or
    that  the  individual  referred  to  had  the  profile  claimed.    Any
    conclusion by Dr George which tended  in  the  appellant's  favour  was
    based on the appellant's account being established, a finding not  made
    by Dr George or by the judge.  It was notable that Libya  is  a  highly
    patrilineal society, and there was no explanation as to why risk should
    arise to this appellant through a  link  on  his  mother's  side.   The
    appellant said that the individual claimed to be  his  grandfather  was
    involved in suppression in Bani Walid in 2011, but there  was  evidence
    of such activity only in 1993.  There had been no such fact finding  as
    might justify the judge's conclusion, and the case therefore required a
    fresh hearing.

 8. Mr Winter submitted that read in a common sense way and  in  full,  the
    determination did not reach contradictory findings.  Dr George had been
    able to establish that the person to whom the  appellant  referred  did
    exist, and was a senior figure in the regime, even if he  had  not  the
    Head of Intelligence Services or in charge of the repression  in  2011.
    While the judge had her doubts about the appellant's account,  and  did
    not accept it in its entirety,  she  did  accept  that  the  individual
    identified in Dr George's report is the appellant's grandfather.   That
    was the only sensible interpretation of paragraph 27 and of  the  final
    outcome of the case.

 9. I indicated that the SSHD's challenge would not be upheld.

10. The judge might have been more specific in stating her conclusion  that
    the appellant failed to establish that his grandfather was either  Head
    of Intelligence Services or involved in the repression  of  2011.   She
    might also have been more specific about accepting that this individual
    nevertheless was a senior member of the regime.  The evidence  to  that
    effect produced by the appellant and confirmed in Dr George's report is
    clear.

11. The only  sensible  reading  of  paragraph  27  and  the  rest  of  the
    determination is that the judge found the appellant's family connection
    to that individual was established.  There was a good deal of evidence,
    including photographic evidence, to show the link.

12. The judge had good reason to doubt the full extent of  the  appellant's
    claims; but it is significant to note that the particular finding of  a
    "cock and bull story" goes to the allegation  of  being  known  as  his
    grandfather's favourite (paragraph 29), not to everything he says.  The
    judge  also  thought  that  the  appellant's   understanding   of   his
    grandfather's role might have been an  exaggeration  in  his  own  mind
    rather than a pure invention (paragraph 30).

13. The judge finds that the  appellant's  grandfather's  support  for  the
    regime  up  to  2011  is  established,  although  not  his  exact  role
    (paragraph 31).  She goes on to deduce a real risk to the appellant  as
    a young person with little experience of living  independently,  unsure
    of his family's current whereabouts and unable to return  to  his  home
    area or elsewhere.  She correctly links her conclusions to the guidance
    in AT (paragraph 37).

14. The findings reached by the judge are not contradictory, on a full  and
    fair reading of the decision.

15. The case may have only just reached the level of  specificity  required
    to succeed in terms of AT but I do not think the  respondent's  grounds
    and submission succeed in showing that the judge's "logic and decision"
    to be "with respect,  perverse  or  irrational"  (paragraph  9  of  the
    grounds).

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           13 January 2016
