
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06665/2014
                                                               AA/06513/2014
                                                               AA/06666/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6th March 2015                    |On 15th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                     MRS ARIFA SHAHEEN (fIRST aPPELLANT)
              Miss Ayesha Qudsiya Saeed Khan (second appellant)
                  mISS FALAK IRTIZA KHAN (third APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Currie of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 21st May  1961,  17th  September  1994  and  1st
    January 1998 respectively are all citizens of Pakistan.  The Appellants
    had arrived in the United Kingdom on 19th October 2013 and made a claim
    for asylum on  20th  March  2014.   The  Respondent  had  refused  that
    application on 15th August 2014.

 2. The Appellants had appealed that decision and the appeal was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior on 22nd October 2014 sitting at  Hatton
    Cross.  The judge had dismissed the appeals on all grounds.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was made  on  8th  December  2014.
    Lengthy Grounds of Appeal were  attached.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Designated Judge Coates on 14th January 2015.  It  was  said
    there was an arguable error of law in that clear findings had not  been
    made in support of adverse credibility findings and it was said  to  be
    somewhat difficult to follow  the  decision.   Directions  were  issued
    directing the Upper Tribunal to firstly  consider  whether  or  not  an
    error of law was made by the First-tier Tribunal  in  this  case.   The
    matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellants

 4. Miss Currie referred me to the lengthy Grounds of Appeal and  submitted
    that the judge had failed to reach clear findings of fact.  It was also
    said there had been a failure  to  make  findings  in  respect  of  the
    evidence of the Appellants' sister.   It  was  further  submitted  that
    there had been a failure to consider the risk on return and  finally  a
    failure to have a fair  hearing  in  that  the  judge  should,  on  his
    volition, have adjourned the  matter  for  the  production  of  medical
    documents.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. The Respondent opposed the application and submitted that the judge had
    dealt with all matters and had made clear findings if the determination
    was read as a whole.

 6. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the  evidence  and
    submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The judge had had regard to the documents in this  case  both  in  that
    which he states at paragraph 7 and a reading of the decision as  whole.
    Whilst a first reading of the narrative may  appear  a  little  unclear
    (not helped by  lengthy  paragraphs)  the  reality  is  the  judge  was
    attempting to summarise "highly inconsistent and particular incoherent"
    evidence as he so stated at paragraph 23.   However  it  is  clear  the
    judge was fully appraised of the evidence in the account provided.   He
    did deal specifically with the sister's evidence at paragraphs  23,  28
    and 30.

 8. The judge had concluded  at  paragraph  31  "Since  I  could  place  no
    reliance upon the evidence before me as it  related  to  all  contested
    issues in the appeal I could not be satisfied  as  to  the  social  and
    family circumstances of the Appellants as they might prevail upon their
    return to Pakistan".  He was entitled to reach  that  conclusion  based
    upon the inconsistencies and credibility features he dealt with  within
    the body of the decision.

 9. It was submitted the judge should, of his own volition, have  adjourned
    this case to obtain medical reports on the Appellants  as  a  "Robinson
    obvious" point.  I find no merit in that submission.  Firstly if it was
    so "Robinson obvious" why did the Appellants' solicitors not obtain the
    evidence?  There was no application for an adjournment on behalf of the
    Appellants at any stage as recorded.  Although the  Appellants'  sister
    at the error of law hearing passed a note  to  Miss  Currie  suggesting
    such was made, I find no record of that within the papers and I note at
    the CMR hearing the solicitors made no request for  an  adjournment  or
    indicated they were awaiting medical reports.

10. Further there were medical documents in the  Appellants'  bundle.   The
    judge referred at paragraph 32 to the absence of fully reasoned medical
    or psychiatric reports but there were medical documents  as  such.   He
    also noted that the medical evidence referred to  the  adult  Appellant
    having a single heart attack in Pakistan in 2014, whilst  her  evidence
    was that she had two heart attacks in 2011 and 2012.  Accordingly  even
    on what might be presumed  uncontentious  matters  there  was  a  clear
    inconsistency; the hallmark of the Appellants' evidence as described by
    the judge.  The criticism therefore that  there  was  no  fair  hearing
    because the judge failed to adjourn  for  medical  reports  is  without
    merit.

11. The Respondent had accepted that  the  second  Appellant  had  given  a
    speech concerning Shia/Sunni relations and as a result  unknown  people
    had gathered outside the family home.  The Respondent further  accepted
    the likelihood the uncle had been murdered  but  it  was  not  accepted
    there was a link between those two matters.  Essentially the judge  had
    rejected all  other  claims  given  the  levels  of  inconsistency  and
    incoherence/credibility within the evidence of  the  Appellants'  case.
    In respect of those two features accepted by the Respondent  the  judge
    had noted at paragraph 23 that "beyond the events of 25th October  2014
    there was no evidence of any continuing threat to the Appellant".   The
    judge had noted the inconsistencies in the evidence  that  the  alleged
    threat came from either the  neighbours,  local  Sunni  community,  Pir
    Deval Sharif Group or indeed who or what constituted that group.

12. In those circumstances the judge was entitled to conclude at  paragraph
    34 that there was no risk on return and that the Appellants had  failed
    to discharge the appropriate burden and standard of proof applicable in
    these cases.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law made by the First-tier Tribunal  in  this
case and I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 15th April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


