
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06998/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 14 April 2015                             |On 11 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     AAA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Neale instructed by Greater Manchester
Immigration
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  Neither party invited  me
    to rescind the order and I continue it  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 5 October 1988.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 April 2014 and the following day he
    made a claim for asylum.  He claimed  to  be  an  Iranian  national  of
    Kurdish ethnicity who was at risk on return  to  Iran  because  of  his
    involvement with the opposition political  party,  the  Kurdistan  Free
    Life Party (PJAK).  On 26 August 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused
    the appellant's claim for asylum and humanitarian protection and  under
    Art 8 of the ECHR.  The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was Iranian or that he had been involved with the PJAK as  he
    claimed.  On 3 September 2014, the Secretary of State made  a  decision
    to remove the appellant as an illegal entrant by way of  directions  to
    Iran or Iraq.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 16  December  2014,  Judge  A  Cresswell  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  challenging  the  judge's
    adverse  credibility  finding.   On  13  January  2015  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Lambert) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Judge's Decision

 6. Judge Cresswell accepted that the appellant was from Iran.  He accepted
    the evidence of an expert that the appellant was from Iran over that of
    a Sprakab Report.

 7. Nevertheless at paras 21(ix) - (xix), Judge Cresswell  did  not  accept
    the appellant's account, including that his brother had  been  arrested
    because of his activities with the PJAK  and  that  the  appellant  had
    himself been involved in putting up PJAK posters and  was  at  risk  on
    return  as  a  result.   Having  dealt  with  the  linguistic  evidence
    concerning the appellant's nationality, at para 21(x), Judge  Cresswell
    stated:

         "There  are,  however,  significant  issues  with  the  appellant's
         evidence which lead me, when I consider all factors in  the  round,
         to conclude that he has failed to establish his case to  the  lower
         standard required of him, as I will explain.  The fact that he  may
         be from Iran rather than Iraq, as the Sprakab Report had suggested,
         does not lead in any way to a logical conclusion that his claim  is
         a truthful one".

 8. Judge Cresswell continued:

         "...he was a poor witness, who appeared to make  things  up  as  he
         went along.  I appreciate he may have been nervous, but  this  does
         not explain his behaviour in relation to specific points".

 9. Judge Cresswell then went on to  deal  with  the  appellant's  evidence
    concerning where he lived in Iran at paras 21(x) - (xiv) as follows:

         "(x) .... He had  the  greatest  difficulty  telling  me  where  he
                actually lived in Iran, which an  honest  person  would  not
                struggle with.  In his  screening  interview,  he  gave  his
                permanent  address  as  Saqqez  (Saghez);  in   his   asylum
                interview, he said that his last address was in  Kariza  (or
                Kariyaza) and that he had moved there from Saqqez at the age
                of 5 and spent most of his time there, but some time also in
                Saqqez when a porter's job was available or to rest.

         (xi) In his witness statement, the Appellant says "I  was  born  in
                Saqqez and lived in Kariyaza when I was about 5  years  old.
                My family moved because  my  father  was  a  farmer  and  he
                returned to work on the farm."

         (xii)    In oral evidence, he told me that Saqqez was  a  city  and
                told me initially that he lived  in  Saqquez  and  that  his
                uncle lived in the same town, some 7 to 8 minutes walk away.

         (xiii)   Later, the Appellant told me first  that  he  would  spent
                most of the time in Kariza and then changed this so that  he
                would spend one week in Saqqez and the next week in  Kariza.
                In relation to the latter statement, he said that  he  would
                go alternate weeks to Kariza to tend  his  father's  animals
                and that he had done this all of his life.

         (xiv)    Apart from the confused evidence as to where  he  actually
                spent his time, there was also the curiosity  that  he  said
                that the homes in Kariza and Saqqez were only 5 miles apart,
                which begs the question as to why he would need 2 homes  and
                why he would need to  live  at  each  for  alternate  weeks.
                Whilst it does not matter to any real extent whether he  had
                2 homes or 1, it was the fact that he did not appear  to  be
                giving a truthful account about his home, which was  a  part
                of the evidential whole in a case which depended  very  much
                upon his credibility".

The Submissions

10. Mr Neale, who represented the  appellant  submitted  that  the  judge's
    reasoning was inadequate and he had failed to  take  into  account  the
    explanation given by the appellant in his evidence as to why his family
    had two homes.

11. As regards the appellant's evidence about  where  he  lived,  Mr  Neale
    submitted that the appellant had specifically disclosed in  his  asylum
    interview that he had two homes.  At question 7 he had  said:  "we  had
    both placed  the  village  in  the  town".   Mr  Neale  relied  on  the
    appellant's answer at question 8 that he had two homes.   In  his  oral
    evidence he had said that his family had two homes, one  in  Saqiz  and
    one in Kariyaza and that he "lived between them both".  Similarly,  the
    appellant had stated at question 9 of his interview that he  had  moved
    to Kariza when he was 5  years  old.   Mr  Neale  submitted  that  this
    evidence was consistent with what the appellant had said in his witness
    statement at para 15: "my family moved because my father was  a  farmer
    and he returned to work on his farm".   Mr  Neale  submitted  that  the
    appellant's account was consistent that the family had  two  homes  and
    they lived part-time at one and part-time at the other.  The judge  had
    no basis for reaching his view that the  appellant  had  the  "greatest
    difficulty telling me where he actually lived in Iran".

12. Mr Neale submitted that in para 21(xiv) the judge had  counted  against
    the appellant's credibility that it was "curious" that he had two homes
    only five miles apart.  However, Mr Neale submitted that the judge  had
    failed to consider the appellant's evidence given orally why his family
    had two homes.  At para 12 of his skeleton, Mr Neale set out this point
    as follows:

         "He stated that his family had a house in Saqiz.  His brother never
         lived with them, they had some other relatives.  The appellant  was
         asked why he would live in one house one week  and  the  other  the
         next week.  The appellant stated that when his father was  fit  and
         young, he was working on the farm and would take the  family  there
         to help him.  Later his father was  weaker,  not  fit,  and  had  a
         problem.  His father had a problem with his leg  and  wasn't  doing
         any job, he accompanied  them  to  the  village  but  wasn't  doing
         anything.   The  judge  asked  if  the  family  had  animals.   The
         appellant confirmed that they had sheep.  In a subsequent  response
         the appellant also explained that they moved back and forth between
         Saqiz and Kariyaza because 'if you've got some relatives you should
         have a place for relatives to visit you.'  In the village they  did
         not have enough space".

13. Mr Neale submitted that the judge had failed to take  this  explanation
    into account.  He accepted that the judge was not bound to  accept  the
    appellant's explanation but he had, at least, to engage with it and his
    failure to do so amounted to an error of law.  Mr Neale pointed out  in
    his reply that Mr Richards had not disputed what the appellant said  in
    his evidence at the hearing.

14. Mr Neale submitted that although the judge had given a number of  other
    reasons at paras 21(xv) - (xix),  it  could  not  be  said  that  those
    reasons were so strong that I could be confident that the  judge  would
    have reached the same conclusion if he had not taken into  account  the
    matters set out at para 21(x) - (xiv).  The error was material.

15. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the  judge  had
    not made any material error of law.  He had assessed the  evidence  and
    his credibility finding was properly open to him on the evidence.   The
    issue in relation to the appellant having  two  homes  was  not  a  key
    finding but was only one of a number of points made including,  as  the
    judge said in para 21(x), that the appellant was a "poor witness".   Mr
    Richards submitted that what was crucial to the appellant's  claim  was
    his own political involvement and the judge had found  at  para  21(xv)
    onwards that he did not accept that part of  the  appellant's  account.
    The judge had also referred, as he was  entitled  to,  to  s.8  of  the
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 in  that
    the appellant had not claimed asylum in a number of safe countries.

Discussion

16. In relation to para 21(x) - (xiv), I accept Mr Neale's submission  that
    the judge fell into error.  In particular, in para 21(xiv), the judge's
    view that the appellant's evidence about having  two  homes  only  five
    miles  apart  was  a  "curiosity"  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's explanation, given in oral evidence, why his family had two
    homes.  Whilst the judge  was  not  bound  to  accept  the  appellant's
    explanation, that explanation is not so obviously incredulous  that  it
    was bound to be rejected by the judge.  In  failing  to  take  it  into
    account, the judge clearly, in my view, fell into error.

17. Further, the judge's treatment of the appellant's evidence about  where
    he lived does not, in my  judgment,  stand  up  to  scrutiny  when  the
    appellant's evidence is considered as a whole.   As  Mr  Neale  pointed
    out, the appellant gave consistent evidence about  his  two  homes  and
    that he had moved to Kariza (or Kariyaza) when he was 5.  That was  his
    evidence both in his asylum interview and in his  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal in his witness statement and oral evidence.  It was not, in my
    judgment, sufficient in itself to doubt the appellant's  evidence  that
    in his screening interview (about which care must necessarily be  taken
    in relying upon detail given the nature of such an interview) that  his
    permanent address was Saqiz which throughout his evidence he claimed to
    have left to move to Kariza when he was 5.  Mr Richards relied upon the
    judge's view that the appellant was a "poor witness" who  "appeared  to
    make things up as he went along".  The difficulty with that is that the
    only apparent example of that relied on by the judge is the  change  in
    evidence about his last address.  There may  have  been  other  matters
    that the judge had in mind but he does not rely upon them and therefore
    it is wholly unclear from the determination upon what basis he came  to
    the view that the appellant was a "poor witness".

18. In my judgment, for these reasons, the judge erred in law  in  reaching
    his adverse credibility finding.

19. Mr Richards focused upon the materiality of any such error in the light
    of the judge's reasoning at para 21(xv) - (xix).  That reasoning is  as
    follows:

         "(xv)    A further factor about the geography detailed is that  the
                Appellant said that the authorities knew that his uncle  was
                his uncle and he told me that his uncle lived only  7  to  8
                minutes walk from his own home.   His  suggestion  that  the
                Iranian authorities would arrest his brother, would  have  a
                recording of his own involvement in  PJAK  poster  placement
                and that he would be undisturbed by the authorities  3  days
                later in his own home and 2 days after that in  his  uncle's
                home, damages his credibility; he is the one asserting  that
                he would be killed by the authorities  if  he  was  returned
                because of the seriousness of his situation.

         (xvi)    There is a conflict here  too  with  his  claim  that  his
                brother got information to  him that there was  a  recording
                of him putting up posters; if his brother was arrested as he
                claims, it is hardly likely that the authorities would  take
                no steps to arrest him too if they  were  in  possession  of
                such a recording.

         (xvii)   Whilst I accept the objective  evidence  that  PJAK  would
                have low level sympathisers, who would  not  understand  its
                aims (just like any other political party),  that  does  not
                explain why the Appellant was unable to explain PJAK's  aims
                in the question following his own statement:  "Yes  when  my
                brother would talk about the aims of the political parties I
                would understand".  Nor does it explain  why  the  Appellant
                would take of the USA, the UK and ISIS and  the  borders  of
                Syria and Iraq when this disparity was  put  to  him  by  Mr
                Arkless.

         (xviii)  I accept that, whilst compulsory,  education  may  not  be
                enforced in "many remote regions of Iran"  especially  among
                ethnic minorities  as  Professor  Matras  records,  but  the
                Appellant said  in  oral  evidence  that  education  is  not
                compulsory and told me that he lived in the city  of  Saqqez
                for some of his time.

         (xix)    I have been mindful throughout of the benefit of the doubt
                requirements, but have concluded upon an overall  assessment
                that this Appellant has not given a consistent  account  and
                has  given  evidence  which  damages  his   credibility   in
                circumstances where his case relies in very large part  upon
                the reliability of his account".

20. Then at para 22 the judge dealt with s.8 of the 2004 Act as follows:

         "22. I also took into account the provisions of section  8  of  the
                Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004
                in assessing the Appellant's credibility.  I noted that  the
                Appellant must have  travelled  through  a  number  of  safe
                countries and refers to changing lorries, but accept that he
                may have been under  the  influence  of  an  agent.   I  was
                mindful that section 8 was not itself a starting point for a
                decision on credibility and the evidence as a whole  had  to
                be considered".

21. Dealing with para 22 first, it is not entirely clear to me whether  the
    judge took into account that the appellant had not claimed asylum in  a
    number of safe countries or he did not do so because the appellant "may
    have been under the influence of an agent".  That, in itself,  presents
    a difficulty in taking that matter into  account  as  one  which  might
    sustain, taken together with others, the  judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding despite the error that I have already identified.

22. Both in his skeleton argument and oral submissions, Mr  Neale  directed
    some criticism at the  judge's  reasoning  in  paras  21(xv)  -  (xix).
    However, he also accepted that there  were  no  "freestanding"  errors.
    Instead, he submitted that none of the reasons were so  strong  that  I
    could be confident the judge would have reached  the  same  conclusion.
    Mr Richards submitted, in effect, that the reasons were sufficient.

23. At para 21(xiv), the judge made clear that he  took  into  account  the
    points he made about the appellant's evidence of  where  he  lived  and
    whether he had two homes in assessing the appellant's credibility.   As
    the judge said:

         "it was the fact that he did not appear to  be  giving  a  truthful
         account about his home, which was part of the evidential whole in a
         case which depended very much upon his credibility".

24. Despite the reasons given in para 21(xv) - (xix), I  am  not  confident
    that had the judge not fallen into the errors which I have  identified,
    he would necessarily have reached the same adverse  conclusion  on  the
    appellant's credibility.  In SSHD v AJ (Angola) and Another [2014] EWCA
    Civ 1636, Sales LJ at [49] identified the category  of  case  where  an
    error was not material as one where: "it is clear that on the materials
    before the Tribunal any rational Tribunal must have come  to  the  same
    conclusion".  In my judgment, it cannot be  said  that,  applying  that
    test, the judge's error was "immaterial".  I am not persuaded that  any
    rational Tribunal must have come to  the  same  conclusion,  namely  an
    adverse credibility finding or,  indeed,  that  Judge  Cresswell  would
    necessarily have come to that conclusion in the absence of the errors I
    have identified.



Decision

25. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

26. Given the nature of the error and the need to consider  again  all  the
    evidence and make a credibility  finding,  applying  para  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Directions, this is an appropriate case  to
    remit to the First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision de novo.

27. Thus, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a judge other than Judge A Cresswell to remake the decision de novo.



                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal











