

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06682/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 1st September 2016               |On 13th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AFA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, Counsel instructed by the Immigration
                    Advice Service
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male national of Libya date of  birth  9th  November
    1969. He seeks international  protection  on  grounds  of  his  imputed
    political opinion, and in the alternative, humanitarian protection.


 2. The basis of the Appellant's claim for asylum, made on the 12th  August
    2014, was that he had come to the  adverse  attention  of  an  Islamist
    militia operating in Libya, known as Ansar al-Sharia. He had been using
    social media to criticise their conduct, just as he had previously been
    critical of the Gaddafi regime. This group had  visited  his  brother's
    home in Tripoli on the 30th July 2014 and had informed his brother than
    they knew about the Appellant's "offensive" posts and  that  he  should
    stop calling them terrorists.   The  Appellant  was  aware  that  other
    internet activists had been kidnapped by Islamists, and fearing for his
    safety had claimed asylum.

 3.  The  Respondent  and  First-tier  Tribunal  had  both   rejected   the
    Appellant's claim  on  the  basis  that  no  objective  risk  had  been
    established. In a decision dated the 18th May 2016 I set  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal aside with the consent  of  the  Respondent.
    The Respondent had at an earlier hearing  been  represented  by  Senior
    Presenting Officer McVeety who  had  accepted  that  the  decision  was
    legally flawed for want of  clear  findings  on  material  matters.  In
    particular it was not clear whether the Tribunal had accepted that  the
    visit from Ansar al-Sharia had taken place, or if it  did,  whether  it
    constituted a threat.   A copy  of  my  'error  of  law'  findings  are
    attached.  The parties agreed that the decision  in  the  appeal  would
    need to be re-made, but that some of the findings could  be  preserved.
    The findings expressly preserved were:

               . The Appellant was found to be "generally" credible
               . Ansar al-Sharia are a "shadowy network  of  Salafi-Jihadist
                 militias" who are engaged in violent activities
               . The Appellant has posted  comment  on  Facebook  which  are
                 critical  of  the   conduct   and   beliefs   of   Islamist
                 organisations and militia groups in Libya
               . At  date  of  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing  that  Facebook
                 account had 3067 'friends' following the Appellant's posts
               . His political views (ie opposition to the Islamist  agenda,
                 commitment to secular democracy) are genuinely held

     Other matters not in issue are that the Appellant has lived largely in
    the United Kingdom for approximately 9 years (having been granted
    successive periods of leave as a student), and that he is originally
    from Tripoli.






    The Evidence


    The Appellant's Evidence

 4. The Appellant adopted his witness statements dated 6th  July  2015  and
    25th August 2016.  He confirmed the account he had given previously, as
    summarised at [2] above. He believed that he had come to the  attention
    of the Islamist group because he ran a well-known blog. It had  started
    as an anti-Gaddafi website before the revolution and at  one  time  was
    read by in excess of  5000  'friends'.  The  Appellant  explained  that
    before the revolution the opposition movement had not been  divided  in
    the way it is now, and so the people who have now threatened him  might
    easily have followed his blog once upon a time. The difficulty  now  is
    that the movement has fragmented and there is in effect  all  out  war.
    The men who paid the visit to his brother are serious people. They keep
    track of who they perceive to be 'on their side' or otherwise.


 5. The Facebook account that gave rise to  these  problems  is  no  longer
    active. After his asylum claim was refused the Appellant  fell  into  a
    depression. He was anxious about his  future  and  worried  about  what
    might happen to him if he returned to Libya so he deleted all his posts
    and has not put anything else up there. He only uses the account now to
    follow the news of other friends.

 6. Mr Harrison asked the Appellant if Ansar al- Sharia had  been  back  to
    the family home. As far as the Appellant is aware, they have not.  That
    visit in July 2014 was the only one, but, he reasons, it  is  the  only
    one they need make. They made their point clear,  and  the  Appellant's
    brother informed them that he was living in Europe. They got what  they
    wanted out of that situation because the  Appellant  was  indeed  cowed
    into taking down his posts and he stopped criticising them online. That
    did not mean, however, that he would be safe if he  returned  to  Libya
    today. That is because he has already been identified as  an  opponent.
    They keep records. If the Appellant was stopped at a checkpoint  manned
    by Ansar al-Sharia or any of their allies, he  could  be  in  immediate
    danger.  If he returned to his family home in Tripoli  their  spies  in
    the neighbourhood would be immediately aware.

 7. In respect of his mental health  the  Appellant  said  that  the  whole
    situation has been difficult for him.  He  does  not  believe  in  ant-
    depressants so he is trying to treat himself by walking for at least  2
    hours every day. Walking helps  him  to  relax,  and  he  is  generally
    feeling better than he was a couple of years ago.



    Country Background Material


 8. The extant country guidance  remains  AT  &  Ors  (Article  15(c)  Risk
    Categories) Libya CG [2014]  UKUT  318  (IAC).  In  that  decision  the
    Tribunal concluded that the security situation in Libya did not  engage
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive, and that  for  a  healthy
    young man, internal  flight  was  available.   In  her  latest  Country
    Information and Guidance document  (Libya:  Security  and  Humanitarian
    Situation June 2016)  the  Respondent  however  acknowledges  that  the
    situation has deteriorated since  that  decision  was  promulgated  [at
    2.3.14-2.3.16].   I was invited by both parties to  review  the  latest
    country information available.


 9. The general conclusions of the June 2016 CIG are that the situation  in
    Libya is markedly worse than it was in late 2013  when  AT  &  Ors  was
    heard.  A flavour of the conclusions  of  various  reporting  agencies,
    including UNHCR, the UN, the  FCO,  US  State  Department  and  Amnesty
    International is found at 9.1.1  where  the  2016  Human  Rights  Watch
    report is cited:


         'Amid tenuous United Nations-led peace talks, Libya's political and
         security crisis deepened as two rival governments competed for
         legitimacy, control of vital institutions, and international
         support. Despite some factions signing a political deal in
         December, there was no end in sight to the crisis. As armed clashes
         continued, the country edged towards a humanitarian crisis, with
         almost 400,000 people internally displaced and increasing
         disruption to basic services, such as power and fuel supplies.


         'Forces engaged in the conflict continued with impunity to
         arbitrarily detain, torture, unlawfully kill, indiscriminately
         attack, abduct and disappear, and forcefully displace people from
         their homes. The domestic criminal justice system collapsed in most
         parts of the country, exacerbating the human rights crisis. Armed
         groups that pledged allegiance to the extremist group Islamic State
         (also known as ISIS) continued to commit serious human rights
         abuses, including unlawful killings and summary executions, and
         succeeded in expanding and gaining control over towns in the centre
         of the country, including Sirte.

10. And at 7.1.2:
         A report published in September 2015 by the United Nations Office
         for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) also noted
         the fragmented nature of the conflict:
         'The two main Libyan political factions that emerged post-
         revolution, the GNC and the HoR, are often described as "Islamists"
         and "liberals" respectively. The former is largely represented
         today by the so-called Tripoli Government, based in the west of the
         country, while the latter is largely represented by the
         internationally recognized Tobruk Government led by the HoR, based
         in the east. The conflict is mainly between two fighting blocs: the
         GNC-aligned Libya Dawn and the HoR-aligned Dignity. However, much
         of the conflict, and Libya itself, is fragmented into localized
         battles and power dynamics, driven by loyalties along often-
         overlapping ideological, regional, local, tribal and ethnic lines.
         'An estimated 1,700 armed groups and militias are active in  Libya,
         some of which were formed as brigades  during  the  2011  uprising,
         while others were formed in the later stages or  aftermath  of  the
         2011 conflict. This fragmentation challenges  the  formation  of  a
         national consensus or shared vision among Libyans on how to address
         the legacy of their history, manage the transition or  share  power
         thereafter. Chaos across the  country  has  also  provided  fertile
         ground for the development of the Islamic State  in  Iraq  and  the
         Levant (ISIL) and affiliated groups. ISIL's  territorial  influence
         has grown considerably in 2015.'15


11. The June 2016 CIG report confirms [at 7.5] that Ansar al-Sharia  remain
    active, as does the Human Rights Watch report dated 27th  January  2016
    which  describes  them  as  part  of  an  Islamist  coalition  fighting
    alongside  ISIS  against  the  recognised  government.  These  "warring
    factions indiscriminately shelled civilian  areas,  arbitrarily  seized
    people, tortured and looted, burned and otherwise civilian property  in
    attacks that in some cases amounted to war crimes" [at 32 A's  bundle].










12. In respect of the possibility of internal flight the CIG reports:
         2.4.1 Travel within Libya is restricted by violence and conflict
         between various armed militias and pro-government troops in most of
         the populated parts of the country. This is further compounded by
         road blocks and control points manned by conflicting militias,
         including Islamic State/Daesh and other terrorist groups. The south
         of the country is subject to checkpoints and roadblocks operated by
         the Government and by militias. Large parts of the country are
         primarily desert areas with few towns or inhabitants. There is a
         lack of infrastructure and supplies, including fuel and transport.
         Most airports are closed, or in the control of armed militias.
         There is a risk of landmines and unexploded ordinance in many
         areas.

         2.4.2 Return to an area that is not the person's home may be
         reasonable in some cases. Decision makers must give careful
         consideration to the relevance and reasonableness of internal
         relocation on a case-by-case basis taking full account of the
         individual circumstances of the particular person, including where
         they originate from in Libya and where they will be returning to,
         and the latest available country information.


    The CIG specifically identifies  Ansar  al-Sharia  as  an  organisation
    imposing roadblocks with the purpose of impeding regional  movement  by
    civilians [at 11.1.3].


13. The danger of travel, in which civilians are required to  pass  through
    roadblocks operated by armed factions is also  highlighted  by  the  US
    State Department: "various  militias  have  supplanted  the  police  in
    maintaining internal  security.  Militia  members  operate  checkpoints
    within and  between  major  cities.  Militia  groups  sometimes  detain
    travellers for arbitrary or unclear reasons".


14. As to the  humanitarian  situation,  particularly  for  the  internally
    displaced, the June 2016 CIG urges caution. Whilst some  parts  of  the
    country remain relatively quiet  for  now  (the  east  is  particularly
    violent, Tripoli "less so") [2.3.17], the impact of past fighting,  and
    the spectre of future instability, has had a clear impact on the  lives
    of the civilian population:

         2.3.5 Humanitarian conditions in Libya have deteriorated since the
         fall of former president Gaddafi. There has been extensive damage
         to civilian homes and public infrastructures, including health,
         education, roads and administrative facilities, disrupting basic
         services.

         2.3.6 Conflict has impacted all the major towns and cities, with
         the majority of the population affected to some degree by lack of
         essential resources, including medical care. The healthcare system
         has deteriorated, leading to an increase in serious illness and
         disease. 1.9 million people in Libya require humanitarian aid to
         meet their basic healthcare needs, with particular concern in
         Benghazi, Tripoli, Derna, Sirte, Al Jifarah, Al Kufra,Wadi Al Hayat
         and Ghat (see Humanitarian situation).

         2.3.7 There are approximately 435,000 internally displaced people
         in Libya. Living conditions for many internally displaced persons
         (IDPs) families remained poor and in some instances unsafe. Members
         of particular IDP communities remain vulnerable to abductions and
         torture on account of their origin, perceived allegiances during
         the 2011 conflict, and the current political divide (see
         Humanitarian situation).

         2.3.8 There are estimated to be 1.28 million people at risk of food
         insecurity, of which 210,000 are in immediate need of food
         assistance. The most severe cases are reported in Benghazi and in
         the south. Almost half the population (which is approximately six
         and a half million) are in need of humanitarian assistance. In
         January 2016 an estimated 21% of Libyan children aged between 6 and
         59 months were suffering from chronic malnutrition (see
         Humanitarian situation).

         2.3.9 Vulnerable groups include the displaced (particularly
         children, the elderly, women and those with low economic means)
         female headed households, persons with disabilities and the
         chronically ill. The most severe needs in terms of geographic areas
         are those in the east and south of the country.

         2.3.10 In general conditions across the country are not so poor
         that removal would be a breach of Article 2 or 3, however, the
         situation in parts of the country, including Benghazi and some
         areas in the east and south are likely to do so, particularly for
         members of vulnerable groups. Decision makers should consider the
         individual personal circumstances of each person, taking into
         account the latest country information (see Humanitarian
         situation).








    My Findings


    Asylum


15. The Appellant is from Tripoli and the starting point is whether or  not
    he has established a real risk of serious harm in his home area. I find
    that on the lower standard of proof that risk has been  made  out.  The
    First-tier Tribunal has accepted that the  Appellant  was  a  generally
    credible witness, and that is a  finding  that  I  endorse.  I  had  an
    opportunity to hear evidence from the Appellant myself and I found  him
    to be a consistent and thoughtful witness. He did not seek in  any  way
    to exaggerate his claim. His responses to Mr Harrison's questions  were
    candid: the militia have only ever visited his family on one  occasion,
    the Appellant is in regular contact with his family and he would expect
    to know if the militiamen had been back. It would have been  very  easy
    for the Appellant to seek to inflate the evidence and  it  was  to  his
    credit that he did not do this. Similarly, he has  actively  sought  to
    minimise the risk to himself by deleting all the posts on his  Facebook
    page and to step back from his online campaigning. Those  are  not  the
    actions of a cynic, they are the actions of someone  who  is  genuinely
    concerned about his fate should he return home.  I  see  no  reason  to
    reject the Appellant's claims that in  July  2014  persons  identifying
    themselves as Ansar al-Sharia visited his brother at  the  family  home
    and Tripoli and complained about the Appellant's  online  behaviour.  I
    accept that as a result the Appellant himself has a genuine  subjective
    fear about the consequences for him should he come  into  contact  with
    this group or any of its allies.  On the basis of the  evidence  before
    me I find that fear to be objectively well-founded.   There is no doubt
    in my mind that the purpose of the  visit  in  2014  was  to  stop  the
    Appellant from campaigning against them. He believes  that  if  he  had
    been there he would  have  been  abducted  and  possibly  killed.   The
    country background material indicates that this was reasonably  likely.
    Whilst Mr Harrison makes the good point that the militia has  not  been
    back to the family home in two  years,  the  fact  is  that  they  have
    identified the Appellant  as  an  opponent,  and  as  someone  who  was
    prepared to speak out against them. I accept that  if  he  returned  to
    Tripoli, and resumed his life at home, or even contact with his family,
    word would likely get back to the militia. There is a real risk of harm
    in Tripoli.


16. Mr Harrison submitted that the Appellant could relocate  within  Libya,
    for instance living in safety in Tobruk. Tobruk is under control of the
    HoR internationally recognised government  and  is,  according  to  the
    Respondent's CIG,  "less" violent than,  for  instance,   Benghazi  [at
    2.3.15].   Two problems arise for the Respondent in positing Tobruk  as
    an alternative place of safety. The first is that I must  be  satisfied
    that relocation there would provide a safe and durable solution for the
    Appellant. The  description  that  the  city  is  "less"  violent  than
    Benghazi or Siirte is not a comparison that is terribly helpful  to  me
    in determining whether it could be described as either.   It is  not  a
    positive endorsement that it is a place of safety.  The second  problem
    is that in order to get to Tobruk (or  indeed  Tripoli)  the  Appellant
    would presently need to travel overland. In AT  &  Ors  the  Respondent
    identified Tripoli and Benghazi international  airports  as  points  of
    entry for returnees. Both are now largely destroyed, or are at any rate
    not open for flights.  The only other way in, on  the  evidence  before
    me, would be by flying to a neighbouring country, for instance  Tunisia
    or Egypt, and travelling by road. As the information in the  CIG  makes
    clear, that route would be fraught with danger [see 12  above].  Whilst
    an ordinary Libyan, with no  declared  or  perceived  affiliation  with
    either side, may be able  to  navigate  his  way  through  the  various
    checkpoints  and  roadblocks,  I  find  that  the  process   would   be
    substantially more dangerous for a person who has  been  living  abroad
    for nigh on a decade and who has been  specifically  identified  as  an
    opponent of the Islamist militias.  Even if he were able  to  talk  his
    way through one checkpoint, the 'wrong  answer',  or  a  check  on  his
    identify, would give rise to serious harm at the next.  I am  satisfied
    that the Appellant would face  a  real  risk  of  serious  harm  if  he
    attempted to make that journey.




    Humanitarian Protection


17. If I am wrong and the Appellant is not at a direct risk  of  harm  from
    the Islamist militia that he has angered (or any of its affiliates),  I
    am  satisfied  that  the  humanitarian  and  situation  in  Libya   has
    deteriorated to the extent that  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive[1]  is engaged. The information  in  the  June  2016  can  be
    summarised as follows:


    a) the humanitarian and security situation  has  demonstrably  worsened
       since AT & Ors;


    b) the country is politically divided by two warring factions, but that
       on the ground those two broad coalitions -  the  Islamist  GNC/Libya
       Dawn and the 'liberal' HoR/Dignity - splinter into as many  as  1700
       armed groups all vying for territory, resources and influence;

    c) civilians across the country have borne the brunt of  the  fighting,
       with  indiscriminate  bombing,   abductions,   killings,   arbitrary
       detention and torture widely reported;

    d) the ability of the  state  to  protect  its  civilians  is  severely
       compromised by the collapse of the judicial system, the  lack  of  a
       functioning police service and the fact that the  'government'  have
       now withdrawn to Tobruk where they retain nominal control over  only
       part of the country;

    e) at present half  of  the  population  is  in  need  of  humanitarian
       assistance and over 20% of children are suffering from malnutrition;

    f) the ability for civilians to travel across the country is  dependent
       on their ability to safely pass through  regular  checkpoints  which
       are manned  by  various  and  competing  armed  militias  (including
       'Islamic' State) and to avoid the many areas which  are  compromised
       by land mines and unexploded ordinance.


18. As I note above in the context of asylum, the  Appellant's  ability  to
    navigate his way safely across that unstable  and  dangerous  landscape
    depends largely on his ability to  give  the  'right'  answers  at  the
    numerous checkpoints that he would have to pass  through  in  order  to
    reach a place of relatively safety in which he  could  live.  The  fact
    that he has been out of the country for many years  means  that  he  is
    unlikely to be familiar with the shifting  alliances  'on  the  ground'
    that might enable a more savvy local to be able to pass  through  these
    roadblocks unhindered. That he has recently returned  from  Europe  may
    mean that he is more likely to be targeted  for  questioning  (with  an
    attendant risk of ill-treatment), extortion, or worse.  He will not  be
    familiar with the various groups, nor will he be aware of  which  areas
    would be unsafe due to bombing or mines.  Overall I am  satisfied  that
    the evidence  demonstrates  that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that the Appellant would, solely on account of  his  presence
    in Libya, face a real risk of being subject to serious  threat  to  his
    life or person.




    Decisions

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    was set aside.


20. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.


    The appeal is allowed in the alternative on grounds that the  Appellant
    requires humanitarian protection".

21. Having regard to the nature  of  the  evidence  I  make  the  following
    direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
        Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
        contempt of court proceedings".










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   7th
                               September 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum standards for
the qualification and status of third country nationals or stateless
persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international
protection and the content of the protection granted

