
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06866/2013

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|on 24th February 2014                         |on 7th  July 2014            |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LB
                         (Anonymity order in force)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Melvin - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Miss S Harrison of Halliday Reeves Law Firm

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. On the 22nd April 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  set  aside  the
        determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Birkby  promulgated  on
        the 4th October 2012 in which she dismissed the appeal against  the
        removal direction to Guinea which accompanied the refusal  of  LB's
        claim for asylum or any other form of international protection.


     2. There are a number of preserved findings as follows:


     a.   LB is a citizen of Guinea born in 1986 from Dongo, Conakry.


     b.   LB is of Fula ethnicity and a Muslim.


     c.   LB is the fourth wife of AWB who in 2012 was 56 years of age.


     d.   LB underwent Type II Female Genital Mutilation (FGM) as a child.


     e.   LB has not attended school in Guinea.


     f.   LB was not involved in  organising  anti  FGM  meetings  in  Dongo
   from her hairdressing salon.


     3. A specific direction was issued by  Judge  Coker  relating  to  the
        preparation  of  an  expert  report  on  issues  relating  to   the
        prevalence of secondary FGM in Guinea  (also  referred  to  by  the
        expert as FGC); the societal and familial  consequences  for  women
        who are not the first wife in a polygamous marriage; the prevalence
        of domestic violence and spousal rape in Guinea.


     4. In November 2013 the Upper Tribunal confirmed this is not a country
        guidance case and at the hearing I advised the parties  it  is  not
        going to be submitted to the Reporting Committee either as it turns
        very much on its facts. The issues are complex  and  have  required
        careful consideration and deliberation of all relevant issues which
        has been more time consuming than usual.



Preliminary issues.


     5. On the 8th January 2014 Judge  Coker,  in  consultation  with  Miss
        Harrison gave further directions giving leave  to  LB  to  file  an
        updated expert report  by  Professor  Dr.  Knorr  and  Professor  H
        Crawley by 24th January 2014 and for questions to  be  put  to  the
        experts by the Respondent by 4th February  2014,  with  replies  by
        11th February 2014. A specific direction was made that  "A  failure
        by  the  Respondent  to  comply  with  these  directions  will   be
        considered by the Upper Tribunal to mean that the  Respondent  does
        not challenge the content of the reports".

     6. No report has been filed by Professor  Crawly  and  the  report  of
        Professor Knorr was received on the 24th January 2014.  There  have
        been no questions put by the Respondent but  in  the  interests  of
        justice the Tribunal does not consider it appropriate to prevent Mr
        Melvin from challenging the conclusions of  the  report  as  to  do
        otherwise, in the circumstances of this case, may be  construed  as
        preventing the Respondent from having a fair hearing.


     7. The application to adjourn set out  in  the  skeleton  argument  to
        allow the Respondent to prepare a response to Professor  Knorr  was
        refused. The basis of the application  was  that  as  a  result  of
        internal administrative failures the report was not linked  to  the
        file but this is not a satisfactory reason for putting  the  matter
        off and it has not been shown the interests of justice or  fairness
        are infringed in refusing the application. It was also  clear  from
        the questioning and submissions made during  the  hearing  that  Mr
        Melvin had had adequate time to prepare and was fully appraised  of
        the relevant facts, in any event. The Respondent was aware  of  the
        issues from the directions made earlier in the  case  and  has  had
        ample time to obtain rebuttal evidence  if  this  is  what  is  now
        sought. The fact the Respondent may operate on  a  reactive  rather
        than proactive basis is no reason to adjourn, without more. I  also
        approach the issue of the expert evidence from the standpoint  that
        failure by the Respondent to adduce her own expert evidence  cannot
        imbue Professor Knorr's evidence with any  greater  value  than  it
        merits when considered alongside the rest of the evidence.


     8. Mr Melvin also challenges the credentials of Professor Knorr  as  a
        country expert. In paragraphs 35-41 of  his  skeleton  argument  he
        sets out his case. In K v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1627  the  Court  of
        Appeal said that if the Tribunal had reservations about an expert's
        qualifications it ought to explain why.  The Court also  said  that
        expert evidence should not be discounted simply because the  expert
        had not been  to  the  country  of  which  he  writes,  if  he  has
        information which will be of use to the Tribunal.


     9. An expert  witness  is  a  witness  who  by  virtue  of  education,
        training, skill or experience is believed  to  have  expertise  and
        specialised knowledge in a particular subject beyond  that  of  the
        average person, sufficient that others may officially  and  legally
        rely upon the witness's expert opinion to assist the  fact  finding
        process.


    10. Professor Knorr has provided a copy of her C.V and  summarises  her
        experience in her letter dated 8th January 2014  in  the  following
        terms:


              I am an anthropologist, working as Head of the Research  Group
   "Integration and             Conflict along the Upper  Guinea  Coast/West
   Africa" at the Max Planck Institute           for social Anthropology and
   as an Extraordinary Professor for Social                     Anthropology
   at  the  Martin   Luther   University   in   Hall/Saale,   Germany.    My
   report is based upon first-hand knowledge,  i.e.  on  empirical  findings
   from many           years of field research and on reading  most  of  the
   relevant literature on the                themes it concerns.  I  conduct
   comparative  research  across  the  Upper   Guinea             Coast   in
   particular and West Africa more  generally.  I  was  brought  up  in  the
   region as well.  Thus, my expertise results from scientific research  and
   personal            experience."


    11. Having considered the CV and details of her experience I reject the
        submission that Professor Knorr cannot be heard as a country expert
        although the grounds relied upon by Mr Melvin in relation  to  this
        issue may be relevant to the weight I am invited  to  give  to  her
        report.



The credibility of the claim



    12. Mr Melvin submitted that the Tribunal has not been given the  whole
        picture in relation to events in  Guinea  which  I  find  to  be  a
        sustainable argument.  There was reference to the  fact  no  up-to-
        date statements have been  provided  in  relation  to  the  current
        family situation or the reaction of LB' family or  husband  to  her
        actions, and that the only witness statements are those dated  13th
        August 2012 and the reply to the Respondents refusal  letter  dated
        the same date. LB also failed to attend the hearing.


    13. It is for a party to decide the nature of the evidence they seek to
        rely upon and it may  be  the  case  that  additional  material  is
        available. All the Tribunal can do is to make a decision based upon
        the available evidence when  considering  whether  LB  has  adduced
        sufficient evidence to substantiate her claim  to  be  at  risk  on
        return.


    14. The core of the account being relied upon by LB is that if  she  is
        returned to Guinea her father will kill her because she has let the
        family down and that her husband will force her to undergo FGM  for
        a second time. She also alleges her husband will force her to sleep
        with him and if she refuses she will be  beaten.  LB  also  alleges
        that she is unable to relocate within Guinea as her father will  be
        able to find her. He is a businessman with  the  ability  to  bribe
        others to help him find her and that  it  is  not  possible  for  a
        single person to live alone. LB also alleges that if she  does  not
        have a husband it will be said she had been abandoned or  that  she
        is a prostitute, making it difficult in practice  for  a  woman  to
        live alone.


    15. In her initial witness statement LB states she underwent FGM before
        the age of ten. From 2005-2006 she trained  as  a  hairdresser  and
        owned her own salon from 2007. She married in 2008 and  became  the
        fourth wife of her husband. LB alleged she held  regular  anti  FGM
        meetings at the salon from the end of  2007  but  when  her  father
        discovered the meetings he warned her three times to stop but  that
        when he realised she had not stopped he married her off to an older
        man.


    16. LB alleges she attempted to leave  her  husband  in  2010  but  was
        returned to the marital home after one day. She was beaten  by  her
        father as a result of which LB claims to have scars on her  elbows,
        knees and legs. LB alleges her husband shouted at her  and  stopped
        her going to the salon which effectively closed down the  business;
        although LB claims she would sneak out and plan further meetings or
        speak to others on the telephone.


    17. LB also claims her husband told her that when she returns to Guinea
        she will have further cutting (FGM/C) as the  first  time  did  not
        work which is why she did not have children. It is said her husband
        discussed  this  matter  with  her  father  three  years  into  the
        marriage.


    18. It can be seen that the core of LB's claim relies upon a  chain  of
        events the origin of which  is  the  fact  she  held  meetings  and
        discussions with others relating to FGM which her father discovered
        and, as a result of her refusal to stop, forced her  to  marry  her
        husband. Such a claim has been undermined, however, by the  finding
        of the First-tier Tribunal, which is preserved for the purposes  of
        this hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  that  no  such  events
        occurred. If LB did not hold the meetings she claims to  have,  the
        claim she was forced to marry her husband by her father as a result
        of her refusal to stop such meetings is not substantiated either.


    19. If the claim to have married by force has not  been  proved  to  be
        true it must be the case that the marriage was  undertaken  without
        the element of duress LB relies upon in this claim.


    20. The finding no such meeting occurred also undermines the  claim  to
        have been prevented from returning to her hairdressing business  by
        her husband as the basis for alleging he did so has not been  shown
        to be true. This therefore undermines the claim that as a result of
        her inability to attend the salon the business failed and the claim
        she made  contact  and  attended  meetings  without  her  husband's
        knowledge.


    21. Mr Melvin also  produced  copies  of  two  visa  application  forms
        relating to applications for visit visas made by LB and her husband
        to come to the UK. Applications for such visas from Guinea are made
        on-line followed by an attendance in person at the High  Commission
        in Freetown, Sierra Leone.  The forms show the on-line  application
        was made on the 12th December 2011 with the  submission  in  person
        thereafter at which biometric details would  have  been  taken.  LB
        confirms that fingerprints were taken in relation to the visit visa
        application in reply to question 2.9  of  her  screening  interview
        [R's bundle, page A5].


    22. The application form states LB and her husband have  lived  at  the
        same address for four years which raises a minor credibility  issue
        as, if this is so and the application was made at the end of  2011,
        the four year period must have commenced in 2007 yet it is  claimed
        elsewhere the marriage took place in April 2008 with no mention  of
        any intervening co-habitation.


    23. I also note in LB's application form a reference to her  occupation
        as a self  employed  "Coiffeuse"  and  a  stated  income  from  the
        business of $750 per month gross. This indicates the  business  was
        not closed or lost as alleged but continued and  was  producing  an
        income for LB at that time. The evidence  of  Professor  Knorr  was
        that the patriarchal society in Guinea and the subservient role and
        status of women is such that LB would not have been able  to  apply
        for a passport or have such a business without the support  of  her
        father before marriage and her husband after marriage.


    24. Medical evidence in relation to the FGM issue has been provided but
        insufficient evidence to corroborate the  claim  to  have  suffered
        injury at the hands of her father. There are some photographs of  a
        person sticking dressings/plasters on LB's legs etc but no pictures
        of the actual injury site  and  insufficient  medical  evidence  to
        support the presence of scarring or in relation to causation - such
        limited material does not substantiate this  element  of  claim  in
        relation to causation in particular, especially  in  light  of  the
        fact other material elements of the case relating to  her  father's
        alleged conduct have not been shown to be true.  There  is  an  un-
        translated medical certificate - [A's appeal bundle page 496] which
        does not materially assist.


    25. It is clear from the material set out above that  there  are  clear
        examples of LB claiming she is at risk for reasons which  have  not
        been found to be true. The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who
        heard LB give oral evidence recorded a number of  concerns  and  in
        fact found LB had undermined her credibility in relation to all she
        had stated  with  regard  to  her  father  and  husband  which  was
        rejected.  Her account was found to have been fabricated  in  order
        to sustain a claim for asylum [determination  of  First-tier  Judge
        Birkby, para 38].  In granting permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal, on a  renewed  application,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane
        stated:


              The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge  is  clear  and
   detailed  and  I  grant  permission   only            with   considerable
   hesitation.  It does, however, appear to  me  to  be  arguable  that  the
   judge has not properly addressed the evidence of the expert reports as to
   risk to the             appellant of  further  FGM,  notwithstanding  his
   adverse credibility findings regarding her             alleged account of
   her past experiences.  The grounds also  make  the  arguable  point  that
     the appellants lack  of  knowledge  regarding  her  husbands  wives  is
   explicable by reference               to cultural norms and the fact  she
   lives separately from those women.



The expert evidence


    26. A report has  been  provided  by  a  Dr  H  E  Sykes  following  an
        examination of LB on 17th August 2012. The report is not challenged
        before me and concludes:


              19. [LB] presents as an intelligent but poorly educated  young
   woman who was                subjected to FGM as a young child.  She  did
   not experience any problems               as a result of this and  it  is
   unlikely that her infertility was caused by it.
              20. The type of FGM that LB was subjected to, like  all  other
   types; has                   no medical purpose and carries the  risk  of
   infection, haemorrhage,                       disability and, in  extreme
   cases, death has occurred.  There are world-wide                campaigns
   to  encourage  all  countries  to  make  this   procedure   illegal   but
   despite the recent WHO declaration (copy enclosed),  this  is  not  being
              enacted universally as yet.


              21. [LB] is understandably anxious about her situation and the
   threat of being                  returned to  a  country  where  she  has
   little independence and has to comply                  with her  husbands
   wishes.   She  feels  she   will   not   be   able   to   resist   having
   whatever cutting  her  husband  may  have  arranged  for  her;  a  second
          procedure is  not  unusual  but  I  have  not  been  aware  of  it
   previously of it                 being threatened by a husband whose wife
   has failed to conceive.  I  have                no  reason  to  doubt  my
   findings  in  relation   to   her   history,   but   I   am   unable   to
   comment on the possibility of her being  subjected  to  another  possible
   life-               threatening assault.


    27. Professor Knorr has produced two reports,  the  most  recent  being
        that dated 8th January 2014, [LB's bundle, pages 15 -32], in  which
        she comments upon the Fula specificities which she considers to  be
        particularly relevant to the case. Professor Knorr states:


              "They have often been labelled the "Jews of West Africa". As a
   result of their              being dispersed and suffering discrimination
   in many parts of West Africa, they            depend on intraethnic  ties
   and support even more than  other  ethnic  groups  and               have
   maintained a high  degree  of  intraethnic  cohesion  and  coherence  (in
   Guinea)             as well).  Even  in  larger  settlements  and  towns,
   where there  is  a  great  amount  of               interethnic  contact,
   marriage,   etc,   the   Fula   are   known   to    favour    interethnic
   marriages.


    28. Of relevance to the opinion of Professor  Knorr  is  her  statement
        that the maintenance of ethnic identity and cohesion also  involves
        strict rules concerning proper social conduct, called 'Pulaku'  and
        that offending such rules is considered  to  have  severe  negative
        effects on both the individual offender as well as on  his  or  her
        social environment as offences of Pulaku are said to  cause  death,
        disease, infertility, miscarriages, conflict etc. It is  said  that
        as a Fula woman LB will already  be  regarded  as  having  severely
        violated such social, ethnic and religious norms and values due  to
        the fact that she has deserted/fled her husband, (b) lived  in  the
        UK with another man not her  husband,  (c)  refused  to  return  to
        Guinea and to her husband, and (d) having been involved in anti-FGM
        campaigning. As a result  her  father  will  be  expected  to  take
        measures of punishment,  which  could  include  physical  violence,
        social neglect or expulsion. It is also Professor  Knorr's  opinion
        that to reintegrate her into the family LB is likely to  be  forced
        to return to her husband and to undergo FGM or, if he did not  want
        her back, her family may force her to marry another man as a  third
        or fourth wife.


    29. If LB were unable to find a husband she will be forced to live as a
        single woman  and  if  she  is  found  to  have  severely  violated
        traditional norms and  values  and  not  having  met  her  family's
        expectations, this will  leave  her  without  family  support  [A's
        bundle page 502, para 7].


    30. In relation to the plight of single women in Guinea Professor Knorr
        writes:


              In  Guinea,  single  women  (whether  unmarried,  divorced  or
   widowed) without              family  support  have  an  inferior  social
   status and reputation and find themselves              socially  isolated
   and  therefore  in  an   extremely   vulnerable   position.    They   are
   particularly vulnerable in terms of having  to  endure  violence,  suffer
   social                  discrimination and public humiliation.  They find
   it very difficult to live a               relatively descent  and  secure
   life in Guinea.  Not being a member of  a  supportive              family
   and social  network,  unaccompanied  women  find  it  very  difficult  to
     provide for their own safety and  needs.   Not  having  a  husband  and
   family makes            women easy targets and likely victims  of  sexual
   violence as well [A's bundle,             page 503, para 8]


    31. In relation to the risk of further FGM, Professor Knorr writes:


              9.  Female genital cutting in Guinea (and in most parts of the
   Upper Guinea                 coast region) is part  of  a  cross-cultural
   and cross-religious ritual of                      initiation into female
   adulthood.      It     is     deeply     rooted     in     socio-cultural
   norms, and upheld by traditional and religious leaders, circumcisers, and
                   elders,  who  wield  power  and  authority   from   their
   engagement in the                     practice at the local level.


              10. Although female  cutting  is  often  associated  with  the
   religion of Islam, it is                  not primarily a religious,  but
   social practice, that predates Islam and is                 spread  among
   different  religions  (cp.  Johnson  2000).   The   practice   has   been
   illegal in Guinea since 2000 but continues to be practised everywhere  in
   the                 country at all levels of socio-economic  development.
   Perpetrators of FGM                   are not prosecuted.


              11. Female circumcision covers three main types all  of  which
   are practiced in                 Guinea (with deviations):


                    i.     Sunna   (from   Arabic,   meaning    "tradition")
   circumcision: removal of                      the prepuce and/or the  tip
   of the clitoris.  In Guinea, however, this                      procedure
   of  removing  only  a  part   of   the   clitoris   is   not   considered
   "proper" Sunna - it is  called  n'dekhabara  which  means  "to  remove  a
          part."


                  ii.  Clitoridectomy/Exision: in Guinea,  this  variety  is
   rather radical in                     that it involves the removal of the
   entire clitoris  and  the  removal  of                      the  adjacent
   labia.   Only   then    is    excision    considered    "proper    Sunna"
   (called akaba iya fiche, meaning "to remove or render clean").  It is the
                       most common form of FGM in Guinea (GIZ 2011).


                  iii. Infibulation (pharaonic circumcision):  most  radical
   form consist of the                       removal of  the  clitoris,  the
   adjacent labia and the joining of  the                            scraped
   sides  of  the  vulva  across  the  vagina,  where   they   are   secured
     with thorns or sewn with thread.  A small  opening  is  kept  to  allow
              the passage of urine  and  menstrual  blood.   An  infibulated
   woman                   must be cut open  to  allow  intercourse  on  the
   wedding night.


              12. Besides, there are a number of other harmful procedures of
   cutting,                      perforating,   piercing,   corroding,   and
   puncturing female genitals, which are                  sometimes referred
   to as a fourth form of FGM.  There are efforts being                 made
   by some NGO's to find less harmful practices.


              13. Among the Fula (the ethnic group  LB  belongs  to)  mainly
   excision and                 infibulation  are  practiced  and  all  Fula
   girls/women are obliged to the                practice as part  of  their
   initiation into adult  womanhood:  "the  results  of                 both
   studies  [DHS,  UNICEF]  indicates  that  FGM  is  nearly  universal   in
     Guinea. The DHS [Demographic and  Health  Survey]  survey  showed  that
          nearly  all  girls  (99%)  go  through  female  circumcision.  The
   formative study                  found that among Sosso,  Fulani  [Fula],
   and  Mandinka,  all  girls  were                        expected  to   be
   circumcised"    (Yoder    and    Mahy    2001:    9;     cp.     Bonhour,
   Hechavarria, Kaplan and Martin 2011, GIZ 2011).


              14. I would like to  point  out  that  contrary  to  the  Home
   Office's assumption (20                   -- 22) it is not at all unusual
   that people in Guinea do not know about FGC                 being illegal
   according to state law.


              15. State law is not perceived as being in charge  of  matters
   relating to culture                   and tradition, state  law.  Rather,
   it is customary and religious  law  which  is                   concerned
   with  issues  which  concern  the  family,   the   relationship   between
   men, women and children, religious and cultural obligations etc.


              16. As  well  as  that  the  practice  of  FGC  has  continued
   irrespective of it being                  illegal according to state law.
   State authorities, including  the  police,  do  not                  take
   measures to prevent the practice. Whether FGC  is  illegal  according  to
          state law  or  not  has  so  far  had  little  relevance  for  the
   continuation of the                   practice.


              17. I have met many Guineans opposed to FGC who did  not  know
   that the                practice is illegal. Others did  know,  but  like
   all activists engaged in the                  battle  against  FGC,  they
   were   aware   of   the   fact   that   stage   law   in    Guinea    has
   little influence  where  traditions  is  deeply  rooted  in  the  social,
   religious and                a ritual life as the  practice  of  FGC  are
   concerned.


              18. I would also like  to  point  out  that  most  local  NGOs
   activities related to                 FGC (mentioned in the Home Office's
   refusal letter/ 21) deal with the                  practice as  a  health
   issue, trying to improve hygienic standards. This has                 led
   to a medicalisation (rather than eradication) of  FGC  where  people  can
          afford it.


    32. Professor Knorr also notes that  although  according  to  tradition
        girls should ideally undergo initiation  before  or  upon  entering
        puberty this age varies and if a girl has been cut incompletely  in
        childhood and youth, she may have to undergo  another  more  severe
        form of cutting later on [19].


    33. It is reported that  repeated  FGM  often  takes  place  before  or
        shortly after marriage when girls/women are examined  genitally  by
        circumciser to assess whether they are  "clean".   LB's  degree  of
        genital cutting is not likely to be considered "proper Sunna",  but
        as incomplete, leaving her "unclean". In connection  with  her  not
        having conceived and having failed morally, the lack of cleanliness
        would likely be perceived as being particularly severe and in  need
        of "repair" [20].


    34. It is noted that incomplete cutting  may  well  be  thought  to  be
        responsible for a woman failing to conceive and that  repeated  FGM
        is not uncommon in cases in which women are proved to be  infertile
        or to have delivered a stillborn  child.   Professor  Knorr  states
        that contrary to the Home Office's assumption (28-29) a clear  link
        is made between incomplete genital cutting and infertility. One  of
        the major reasons for genital inspection upon marriage is  to  make
        sure that a woman is clean and will be able to conceive [21].


    35.  It  is  noted  that  Guinea  has  a  particularly  bad  reputation
        concerning women's rights and protection against violence and  that
        many women are victims of domestic and sexual  violence  and  abuse
        and that even though according to Guinean law women may  seek  help
        from  the  police,  should  they  suffer  domestic/family/community
        violence,  the  police  rarely  intervene.  Marital  rape  is   not
        considered a crime and so a  husband  could  continue  raping  her,
        hence seriously violating her physically and emotionally and if  it
        was found she had severely offended  Pulaku  LB  would  be  at  her
        husband's mercy even more and could not  expect  any  support  from
        members of the family or community .


    36. Professor Knorr also notes that the cases in which sexual  violence
        is considered a (relatively) serious offence in Guinean society are
        when it involves minors, virgins and married women. Rape and sexual
        violence are considered a rather trivial offence on the part of men
        and are not considered worth prosecution. Victims  of  violence  do
        not receive support in prosecuting those who raped them  -and  even
        less so when perpetrated by the state and the army [31].


    37. It is said there are no state authorities who will  be  willing  or
        able to provide protection  for  LB  from  either  further  genital
        cutting or being forcibly returned to her husband or remarriage  to
        another man or from other forms of violence.  People  in  authority
        largely share the values of the society  in  which  they  live  and
        share the view that LB must  be  returned  to  her  husband  and/or
        father and punished.  It is the experts opinion that the  few  NGOs
        engaged in improving all women's living conditions  in  Guinea  are
        not in a position to protect women  from  FGC  or  other  forms  of
        violence [38-45] and that as  a  single  Fula  woman  LB  would  be
        unlikely to be able to provide for even her most basic needs and to
        build a safe living environment irrespective of where she  went  to
        reside in Guinea [46 -50]


    38. In conclusion Professor Knorr writes:


              56. As a result of  what  will  be  perceived  by  her  father
   /husband /community                   as severe violations of Muslim  and
   Fula rules (Pulaku) of proper (female)                 conduct [LB]  will
   in    all    likelihood    suffer    severe     neglect,     humiliation,
   discrimination and violence upon her return to Guinea.  She may be forced
                  back into marriage with her husband who will expect her to
   undergo                      further FGC and will most likely continue to
   rape her as previously.  She                  may also be rejected by her
   husband and expelled from her family which                  will  subject
   her to  a  life  as  a  lone  and  destitute,  highly  vulnerable  single
     Fula woman likely  to  be  forced  into  prostitution  to  provide  for
   herself. She                 will also face a severe danger  of  being  a
   victim of trafficking, and of                      suffering  sexual  and
   other    forms    of    subjugation,    exploitation    and     violence.
   Neither the State authorities nor NGOs will be  able  and/or  willing  to
              protect LB from the dangers described and  to  enable  her  to
   live an                 independent  and  relatively  secure  and  decent
   life.


    39. Other country material in  LB's  bundle  supports  the  Professors'
        opinion.




Discussion



    40. There are a number of potential triggers of real risk identified in
        the expert evidence and  the  key  question  to  be  considered  is
        whether LB has substantiated her claim to face such a risk in light
        of the adverse credibility findings and the  established  facts  of
        this case.


    41. Professor Knorr identifies four possible reasons  why  LB  will  be
        perceived as having  breached  the  social,  ethnic  and  religious
        values which are set out above. In these the reference  in  (b)  to
        living in the UK with a man who is not her husband is  taken  as  a
        reference to the fact LB claimed that having  lost  her  money  and
        passport she met a man who spoke her language outside the hotel and
        stayed  with  him  at  his  house.  There  is  no  suggestion   the
        relationship was improper and in fact LB  is  recorded  as  telling
        this person that her husband was expected to be coming  to  the  UK
        very soon. For this to be considered as a potential cause  of  risk
        LB will have to substantiate a claim that  her  husband  or  father
        will be aware of this fact which  has  to  be  established  on  the
        evidence, and which I find has not been.   Option (c) is a claim LB
        has refused to return to Guinea and her husband but there  is  also
        no evidence that the fact she has refused to return will  be  known
        or, if it is, the reason.  Option  (d)  has  been  proved  to  lack
        credibility and so the only remaining reasons is (a) with LB  being
        regarded as  having  severely  violated  such  social,  ethnic  and
        religious  norms  and  values  due  to  the  fact  that   she   has
        deserted/fled her husband.


    42. Professor Knorr was asked at the hearing whether in  light  of  the
        fact three of the four issues she identifies  have  fallen  by  the
        wayside her overall conclusions remain as  stated  in  the  report,
        which she confirmed was the case.


    43. LB gave an account of events in Guinea which has been found not  to
        be true. She also claims she was able to recover her passport and a
        substantial sum of money,  3,850  Euros,  which  is  equivalent  to
        around 37,240,000 Guinea Francs from her husband's car.  There  may
        be an issue regarding whether it is plausible that such a large sum
        of money would have been kept in a  car  in  a  country  where  its
        people are among the poorest in West Africa in which  most  of  its
        people live on less than $1 (6,959.53 GF) a day. This  sum  equates
        to 14.66 years of such a level of income.


    44. I accept that even though she would ordinarily be under the control
        of her husband, if she had a valid  travel  document  and  visa  LB
        would have been permitted to leave the  country  as  per  the  oral
        evidence of Professor Knorr.


    45. If, as appears to be the case by the making of  joint  applications
        for visas to enter  the  United  Kingdom,  LB's  journey  here  was
        approved and supported by her husband who may have wished to travel
        to Canada to see his children or who proposed  to  meet  her  at  a
        later date, it cannot be found that she has substantiated her  case
        to have disobeyed her husband by stealing money and fleeing.


    46. The core of her account regarding events in Guinea has  been  found
        not to be true but one element on which no  adverse  findings  have
        been made,  and  in  relation  to  which  LB  has  been  internally
        consistent, is that she has failed to conceive.  It is also alleged
        that it is believed that this has occurred as a result of her first
        circumcision not being "done properly". It was on this basis  Upper
        Tribunal Judge Lane granted permission to appeal.


    47. If this element of LB's case is to be found to give rise to risk on
        return it is necessary to assess what  her  husband's  reaction  is
        likely to be.  The parties were three years into their marriage  in
        2011 and yet her husband had not done anything on the  evidence  up
        to the time she left for the UK to force  her  to  undergo  further
        cutting; although I accept this does not mean there is no  risk  of
        such events occurring if returned.


    48. It is not disputed before me that LB has no  children,  and  indeed
        she did not claim that they had any children of their  marriage  in
        the visa  application  form.  Those  children  that  are  mentioned
        appeared in LB's husband's visa application  who  are  said  to  be
        living with their mother in Montr�al in Canada. In  LB's  own  visa
        application form, in reply to questions appearing in part four, she
        states that she has no dependent children.


    49. It is an accepted fact that LB is a Muslim of Fula  ethnicity  from
        Guinea who is the fourth wife of her husband whom  she  married  in
        April 2008, a man 30 years her  senior.  He  has  children  from  a
        previous relationship but no children from this marriage  which  is
        said to be contrary to  the  expectation  in  Guinean  society  and
        appears to be contrary to her husband's wishes, on LB's evidence.


    50. The evidence relating to LB's employment situation  and  activities
        has in part been found to lack credibility but it is  not  disputed
        that she has suffered FGM/C in the past which the expert  indicates
        may not be considered to have  been  done  "properly"  leaving  her
        "unclean"  and  providing  an  explanation  for  her  inability  to
        conceive.


    51. The expert evidence indicates there is no state or other  effective
        protection  available  and  that  ingrained  societal   views   and
        expectations will require such process  to  be  undertaken  without
        effective protection from within her  family,  notwithstanding  the
        fact that evidence obtained in the United  Kingdom  indicates  that
        there may be a medical explanation for failure  to  conceive  based
        upon issues relating to hormonal balances or other matters.  Whilst
        this may be a scientific explanation  for  any  such  difficulties,
        unless accepted by her husband who is  then  willing  to  pursue  a
        medical 'solution', the risk is said to remain.


    52. In relation to a Convention reason, that of women likely to  be  at
        risk of suffering FGM/C, in K and Fornah v SSHD [2006] UKHL  46  it
        was  held  that  in  societies  where  women  are  expected  to  be
        circumcised, forcible circumcision will always be persecution,  and
        it will be for membership of a  particular  social  group,  however
        widely or narrowly that group may  be  defined.   Lord  Bingham  of
        Cornhill said that women in Sierra Leone were clearly "a  group  of
        persons  sharing  a  common   characteristic   which,   without   a
        fundamental change in social mores,  is  unchangeable  -  namely  a
        position of social inferiority as compared  with  men".  He  added:
        "They are perceived by society as inferior. That  is  true  of  all
        women,  those  who  accept  or  willingly  embrace  their  inferior
        position and those who do not."  Female genital mutilation  was  an
        extreme manifestation of the discrimination to which all women were
        subjected in Sierra Leone. Lord Bingham noted that: "The operation,
        is often very crudely performed, causes excruciating pain....It can
        give rise to serious long-term ill effects,  physical  and  mental,
        and it is sometimes fatal". Lord Hope stated that "in Sierra  Leone
        FGM is a process that society expects women to undergo"  and  "that
        an uninitiated indigenous women represents an abomination, fit  for
        the worse kind of sexual exploitation". Lady Hale thought that  the
        treatment an uninitiated woman  might  face  if  she  succeeded  in
        resisting FGM might itself amount to persecution.


    53. LB has previously undergone FGM/C but I find having undergone  such
        experiences she does not necessarily cease to be a  member  of  the
        relevant social group if the evidence  indicates  a  real  risk  of
        further and repeated FGM/C in  certain  circumstances  for  Guinean
        women, especially in light of the inferior position of women within
        Guinean society and the lack of support provided by  the  community
        to those opposing such practices.


    54. I find in relation to the evidence  upon  which  the  Tribunal  are
        entitled to place weight in LB's favour, relating to  the  risk  of
        further FGM/C on return as a  result  of  fertility  issues  and  a
        perception of a failure  to  conceive  to  date  in  light  of  the
        incomplete  nature   of   her   previous   cutting   and   societal
        expectations, that she will have discharged  the  burden  of  proof
        upon her to the required standard to establish  that  she  faces  a
        real risk  of  further  FGM/C  on  return  to  the  lower  standard
        applicable to appeals of this nature, if what she states  regarding
        her husbands position is  true.  The  rejection  of  the  remaining
        elements of her case, based upon the adverse credibility  findings,
        may not impact upon this core element per se, but it is not for the
        Tribunal to find that the evidence is of  a  sufficient  degree  to
        eliminate a real prospect of such risk on return.  It is for LB  to
        prove to the required standard that she will face such a real  risk
        on return.


    55. As noted above, the Tribunal has not been given the  whole  picture
        in relation to events in Guinea.   No  up-to-date  statements  have
        been provided in relation to the current family  situation  or  the
        reaction of LB's family or husband to  her  actions  and  the  only
        witness statements I have been able to  consider  are  those  dated
        13th August 2012 and the reply to the  Respondents  refusal  letter
        dated the same date. LB also failed to attend  the  hearing  before
        the Upper Tribunal to  enable  her  to  be  questioned  and  cross-
        examined on the relevant issues.


    56. Whilst I accept the evidence of  Professor  Knorr  in  relation  to
        country conditions and the risk of further suffering of  women  who
        fall within the classes of those identified as  being  at  risk  of
        FGM/C or further FGM/C in Guinea, the evidence does not  support  a
        finding that all women from Guinea are at  risk  of  such  harm  on
        return.  It is the absence of any familial protection from either a
        father within the  family  or  husband  which  appears  to  be  the
        defining factor, provided that those individuals are not themselves
        the perpetrators of harm/risk/abuse.  LB,  if  this  appeal  fails,
        will be no more than a failed asylum seeker who will be returned to
        her home state with no credible evidence to support  her  claim  of
        hostile action and reaction from her father or husband in the  past
        and no credible evidence she is not able to return to  her  husband
        per se. The failure to engage with the  process  before  the  Upper
        Tribunal, the paucity of evidence, and finding she has lied in  the
        past, means that even applying the  lower  standard  applicable  to
        appeals of this nature, LB has arguably  failed  to  discharge  the
        burden of proof upon her to the required standard to show that  she
        can be found as coming within a  group  at  risk  of  further  harm
        identified by Professor Knorr in her evidence.


    57. Professor Knorr referred to a general class of persons who  can  be
        said to have  deserted  their  husbands.  If  all  married  Guinean
        females coming to the United Kingdom and  claiming  asylum  can  be
        said to have deserted their husband, such as to create an  enhanced
        risk on return, then all such individuals are entitled  to  refugee
        status, in addition to those at risk of FGM on return.  There is no
        country guidance case indicating that all married  Guinean  females
        are at risk and this is not supported by the evidence before me. LB
        did not advance her case on this basis and this is an issue  raised
        by Professor Knorr.  LB claimed in her earlier  evidence  that  she
        was expecting her husband to join her in  the  United  Kingdom  but
        that he did not arrive and there is no evidence that she  has  seen
        him since. The fact she has claimed asylum may  also  indicate  she
        wishes to remain in this country and  not  return.  Notwithstanding
        this, and whilst recognising the  societal  reality  for  women  in
        Guinea, there is insufficient evidence to support a claim that  all
        married women are treated in such a manner so as to entitle them to
        international protection. It must be  a  fact  specific  assessment
        depending upon evidence relating to the nature of the marriage  and
        the  reaction  of  the  individual's  husband  and/or  father   and
        resultant likelihood of a  married  woman  not  being  entitled  to
        return to the marital or family home. The evidence does not support
        a finding being made that this is the likely outcome in every  such
        case, although does provide guidance on the  consequences  for  the
        individual if this does occur.


    58. In this case LB claimed that she lived with  her  husband  separate
        from  his  other  wives.   She  claimed  they  jointly   make   the
        application for the visit visas to come to the United  Kingdom  for
        the purposes of a shopping trip for  which  a  substantial  sum  of
        money was made available [8,000$US - husbands  visa  application  -
        reply to question 103]. She claimed this was a trip  prior  to  her
        having to undergo further FGM/C, although she  has  been  found  to
        lack credibility in relation to  other  material  elements  of  her
        claim and other aspects to lack plausibility. The country  material
        speaks of the difficult  situation  faced  by  women  generally  in
        Guinea and if LB was married to a man who behaved as societal norms
        indicate he would behave, one wonders why he thought  it  necessary
        or appropriate to spend substantial sums of money to enable  LB  to
        come to the United  Kingdom  if  he  wanted  her  to  undergo  this
        procedure. The country material indicates that if this was his wish
        she would  have  little  chance  of  opposing  him  and  that  such
        procedure could be undertaken with there being  little  expense  or
        inconvenience to him. It is necessary for an  individual  to  prove
        what they are alleging and this applies in relation to this element
        of the evidence as much as to  other  matters.  Notwithstanding  LB
        coming to the United Kingdom and remaining here,  and  the  country
        material provided, I find she has not substantiated a claim to face
        a real risk of her husband believing that  she  has  abandoned  him
        such as to  create  a  real  risk  of  rejection  or  ill-treatment
        sufficient to warrant a grant of international protection,  on  the
        facts.


Decision

    59. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remake  the  decision
        as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    60. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005. I
        continue that order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Dated the 27th May 2014





