
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06675/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Heard on 9th September 2016     |On 14th September 2016          |
|Prepared on 12th September 2016 |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                               Ms Ramela Valli
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. S. Ahluwahlia of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  26  May  1986.  She
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  tribunal  Kelly
    sitting at Taylor House on 17 June 2016 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  24th
    March 2015. That decision was to refuse the Appellant's application for
    asylum which had been made on  the  grounds  that  she  was  a  refugee
    entitled to asylum and also that her removal to Sri Lanka would  breach
    Articles 3 and 8 of the European convention on human rights.

2.   The Appellant first came to the United Kingdom on 3rd of  October  2010
    with leave to enter as a Tier 4 student valid from  14th  of  September
    2010 to 15th of October 2013. On 29th of October 2010 she attended  the
    asylum screening unit and claimed asylum but failed to  attend  a  full
    asylum interview arranged for 12th  of  November  2010  and  failed  to
    comply with a reporting requirement. She  re-established  contact  with
    the Respondent in  October  2011  and  was  offered  a  further  asylum
    interview appointment on 2nd of November 2011 but she said she felt too
    unwell to proceed with that  interview.  On  27th  of  April  2012  her
    student visa was curtailed to 26th of June  2012  because  her  sponsor
    advised the Respondent that the Appellant had failed her course. A full
    asylum interview was finally carried out on 17th of March 2015.

The Appellant's Claim

3.   The Appellant's claim was that she had been arrested  and  ill  treated
    by the Sri Lankan authorities who continued to have an adverse interest
    in her. Her problems began in 2006 when she was forcibly  recruited  by
    the LTTE a Tamil separatist organisation. She was made to  undergo  two
    months of compulsory training but  when  this  finished  the  Appellant
    refused to join the organisation saying that she wanted to go abroad to
    study. The LTTE threatened her and said that if she wanted to  do  that
    she must first help them but in return they  would  contribute  towards
    her studies and  arrange  for  an  agent  to  facilitate  her  trip  to
    Singapore  where  she  studied  computer  networking.  She  distributed
    leaflets about the plight of the Tamil people on the street or in shops
    and temples. The purpose of the leaflets was to  raise  funds  for  the
    LTTE although potential donors were not told this.  The  leaflets  were
    supplied to her by two men whom she met after her arrival in Singapore.

4.   She returned to Sri Lanka  on  15th  of  December  2009  when  she  was
    arrested by two men and driven to an office where  she  was  questioned
    about the help she had given to the  LTTE  in  Singapore.  After  being
    threatened and beaten up she confessed to working for the LTTE and  was
    blindfolded and driven to another location where she was  detained  for
    the  next  three  months.  During  that  time   she   was   beaten   to
    unconsciousness and burned with cigarettes. This occurred two or  three
    times per week. She was also deprived of food and water  and  was  only
    released (on or about 15th of March  2010)  after  her  mother  paid  a
    bribe.

5.   Between March 2010 and the time she  travelled  to  United  Kingdom  in
    October 2010 she was kept in a house in an  unknown  location  are  not
    allowed to go out. An agent helped her to obtain a student visa and she
    left Sri Lanka on a Sri Lankan Airways flight using  her  own  passport
    accompanied by an agent to the airport.  She  attended  college  for  a
    couple of weeks after her arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  until  her
    mother telephoned her on 20th of October 2010 to notify  her  that  the
    Appellant was now the subject  of  an  arrest  warrant  in  Sri  Lanka.
    Although her mother posted the warrant to  her  in  United  Kingdom  it
    never arrived. The Appellant was unable to concentrate on  her  studies
    after this and claimed asylum on 29th of October 2010.  She  failed  to
    keep in touch with the Respondent thereafter because  she  was  unwell.
    Since arriving in the United Kingdom she  had  attended  four  or  five
    demonstrations in support of a separate state for  Tamils.  She  feared
    that she would be at risk of death or serious harm if returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.

6.   The Respondent rejected the claim because she did not accept  that  the
    Appellant had been a member of the LTTE. The  Appellant's  account  was
    said to contain a number of discrepancies and to be  inconsistent  with
    background country information relating to Sri Lanka.

The Hearing at First Instance

7.   The Appellant did not give oral evidence. The Judge had  before  her  a
    report from Dr Zapata, a Consultant  Psychiatrist  who  said  that  the
    Appellant lacked the mental capacity to give  evidence.  The  Appellant
    had provided a witness statement and had given replies in her screening
    and asylum interviews. The Judge found  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be
    undermined by the vagueness and implausibility of  certain  aspects  of
    the account and also by the Appellant's conduct since  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom. The Appellant was an economic migrant who believe  that
    she would enjoy a better quality of life in the  United  Kingdom  where
    other members of her family had previously claimed asylum successfully.
    The Appellant had made an unsuccessful application for a visit visa  to
    come to United Kingdom in 2008 more than two years before  she  claimed
    to have been detained and tortured in Sri Lanka.

8.   At paragraphs  22  to  28  the  Judge  set  out  what  she  found  were
    difficulties  in  the  Appellant's   account   which   undermined   its
    credibility. It was not plausible  that  the  LTTE  would  recruit  the
    Appellant by force requiring her to  undertake  2  months  of  physical
    training only to agree to pay  for  the  Appellant  to  study  computer
    networking and  cyber  security  in  Singapore  and  distributing  some
    fundraising leaflets. The account given of the training did not  accord
    with what  was  known  of  LTTE  training  in  general.  The  Appellant
    described carrying weights  and  being  trained  how  to  collect  food
    parcels whereas the refusal  letter  had  referred  to  training  being
    weapons training, battle craft  and  indoctrination.  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant (who did not appear  before  me)  proffered  the  explanation
    during the hearing that the Appellant's training may have differed from
    that referred to in the objective evidence because she  was  not  being
    trained as a cadre. But if that were so and the  Appellant  was  merely
    being trained as a fundraiser the Judge found that the sort of physical
    training she had described in the asylum interview would be senseless.

9.   The Judge did not accept that the if the  Appellant  were  tasked  with
    raising money for the LTTE she would be instructed by them to keep this
    fact concealed from fellow Tamils as the objective  evidence  suggested
    that the LTTE had an extensive and  visible  international  fundraising
    operation. The Appellant had been vague and inconsistent in respect  of
    the arrangements by which she forwarded the  proceeds  of  her  alleged
    fundraising to the LTTE. Two and a half years  of  fundraising  on  the
    LTTE's behalf should have left the Appellant with a  greater  level  of
    knowledge about the organisation  than  she  exhibited  in  her  asylum
    interview. Her claim to have been detained for 3 months  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka was undermined by the fact that she was still  in  possession
    of a passport after her detention and able to use it to travel  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2010. The passport she used to leave  Sri  Lanka  was
    the same one she had submitted in support of  unsuccessful  application
    for a visit visa in 2008. If she had been arrested and detained on 15th
    of December 2009 as she exited the airport the  Judge  found  that  the
    passport and other belongings would have been seized from her.  If  her
    release was unofficial and secured only through a  bribe  the  passport
    would not have been returned. If her unofficial escape  from  detention
    caused her to be of adverse interest to the authorities it  was  highly
    unlikely she would have been able to travel through the airport in  her
    own name without being rearrested even if she was assisted by an agent.

10.  There was no plausible  explanation  why  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    would issue an arrest warrant more than 6 months after the  Appellant's
    escape from detention. The Appellant could provide no details  of  that
    warrant or the nature of the charges. She  had  not  asked  her  mother
    about the warrant despite the fact that she  had  remained  in  regular
    contact with her mother since arrival in this country.  The  Judge  did
    not accept the claim that the warrant had been lost in the post or that
    the Appellant's mother had failed to take  or  obtain  a  copy  of  the
    warrant before forwarding it on to the Appellant.

11.  The Appellant had provided two medical reports. One as indicated  above
    was from Doctor Zapata who stated that post-traumatic  stress  disorder
    (PTSD) and depression could cause short and long term memory  problems.
    The Judge rejected this as a  cause  for  the  difficulties  which  the
    Appellant had in giving her evidence since the credibility  issues  she
    had referred to did not relate to the  ill-treatment  of  torture  from
    which the Appellant said she suffered which might be too distressing to
    recall if it  had  taken  place.  They  also  did  not  relate  to  the
    chronological order in which events occurred or to specific dates  such
    that the discrepancies might be attributable  to  the  sort  of  memory
    problems that Doctor Zapata associated with PTSD and  depression.  They
    were not peripheral discrepancies they were matters the Judge found  to
    be inherently implausible or gaps in the Appellant's  knowledge.  There
    was no reference to any significant cognitive impairment in the medical
    evidence. The Appellant had only been prescribed a  very  low  dose  of
    antidepressant medication and had not been referred  by  her  GP  to  a
    psychiatrist. In her screening interview she had made no  reference  to
    any mental health problems.

12.  While the Appellant as a Tamil might fear adverse  treatment  from  the
    authorities this did not mean that her fears  were  based  in  reality.
    Doctor Zapata appeared to recognise that even if her  fears  of  return
    were genuinely held it did not follow that they were well founded.  The
    Judge found that  the  Appellant  had  exaggerated  her  mental  health
    condition for the purpose of  bolstering  her  asylum  claim.  Although
    claiming to be mentally  unwell  she  had  nevertheless  been  able  to
    participate in a number of pro-Tamil events and demonstrations  and  to
    embark upon an arranged marriage.

13.  The second report relied upon by the Appellant was  a  scarring  report
    prepared by Dr Martin dated 17th of December 2015. The  Respondent  had
    conceded that the  Appellant  may  have  suffered  some  form  of  ill-
    treatment in the past. The Judge accepted  Dr  Martin's  qualifications
    and noted his findings that the majority of scars  on  the  Appellant's
    body were typical of those that would  be  expected  if  she  had  been
    intentionally burned as she claimed. However such burns might have been
    inflicted in a number of circumstances and it did not  follow  from  Dr
    Martens findings that the  burns  were  inflicted  in  the  manner  and
    circumstances that the Appellant had described. If the  Appellant  were
    otherwise credible then the Judge would have  been  content  to  accept
    that the burns were caused in the manner claimed but as  the  Appellant
    was not credible the report did not assist the Appellant.

14.  The Judge also noted the delay by the Appellant in claiming asylum  and
    the lack of cooperation with the Respondent thereafter. Even though the
    Appellant had attended demonstrations as the Judge did not accept  that
    the Appellant had been of previous adverse interest to the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities there was no risk she would be identified by them attending
    such demonstrations. The Judge referred to the country guidance case of
    GJ [2013] UKUT 00319 and found the Appellant did not fall within any of
    the risk  groups  highlighted  there.  The  Appellant's  mental  health
    problems were not sufficiently severe to reach the very high  threshold
    necessary to engage Article 3 on health grounds. The Appellant had been
    able  to  enter  into  a  customary  marriage  and   attend   political
    demonstrations  and  had  only  been  prescribed  a  modest   dose   of
    antidepressant medication. Thus  while  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had some mental health problems these fell far short  of  the
    severity necessary to lead to a grant of leave on  Article  3  grounds.
    The Judge considered the case law on health matters noting that  Doctor
    Zapata had referred to an increase  suicide  risk  on  the  Appellant's
    return but that was premised on the assumption that  no  mental  health
    treatment would be available  to  the  Appellant  in  Sri  Lanka.  This
    appeared to ignore the fact that the Appellant's parents and 3 siblings
    continue to live there who could support the Appellant on  her  return.
    They were likely to be of sufficient means to access any mental  health
    treatment the Appellant might need.

15.  At Paragraph 30 the Judge concluded her  determination  by  considering
    Article  8.  The  Appellant's  customary  marriage  was   not   legally
    recognised in this  country  and  therefore  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  However  the
    Appellant did enjoy a private life in this country but her removal  was
    proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  pursued.  The  Judge  noted  at
    paragraph 41 that the Appellant's husband  had  married  the  Appellant
    knowing she was an asylum seeker and that her  asylum  application  was
    pending. He therefore entered into the marriage in the  full  knowledge
    that her immigration status was precarious and she might not be able to
    remain in this country. The couple's unborn child had been conceived in
    the full knowledge that the Appellant might be required  to  return  to
    Sri Lanka. Section 117B (4) of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 cited by the Judge at paragraph 41 provided that little weight
    should be attached to a private life that was established at  the  time
    when the applicant's  immigration  status  was  precarious.  The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The Onward Appeal

16.  The Appellant appealed against this  decision  on  grounds  settled  by
    counsel who had appeared at first instance  (but  who  did  not  appear
    before me). The first ground argued that the Judge had  approached  the
    medical evidence incorrectly. She should have considered it as part  of
    a holistic assessment of all of the evidence  before  deciding  whether
    the Appellant was credible. She should have  weighed  in  favour  of  a
    positive credibility finding that the doctor's  opinion  was  that  the
    burns were caused as the Appellant had described. Instead the Judge had
    made  her  decision  on  credibility  before  considering  the  medical
    evidence and then discounted it in reliance on her  decision  that  the
    Appellant was not credible. That was an erroneous approach according to
    the Court of Appeal decision in Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ  367  where  it
    was held that the Judge should not reach a conclusion by reference only
    to the Appellant's evidence and then if it be negative ask whether  the
    conclusion should be shifted by the medical evidence.

17.  The second  ground  was  that  the  Judge  had  made  findings  without
    evidence  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  defence   training.   The
    quotations in the refusal letter from documents about the LTTE were not
    identified and were not produced to the tribunal. Without having  sight
    of those documents it was unreasonable for the tribunal  to  treat  the
    quotations  in  the  refusal  letter  as  evidence  that   belied   the
    Appellant's case. In any event it was unreasonable to  treat  what  the
    refusal  letter  said  as  being  inconsistent  with  the   Appellant's
    evidence. What the Respondent was referring  to  was  the  training  of
    fighters. The documents did not say that the  LTTE  provided  no  other
    training or no training for civilians. The Appellant received  training
    as a civilian not as a fighter. Even if the Judge was entitled to  rely
    on the quotations from the unidentified report  it  did  not  show  the
    Appellant's description of her activities of in Singapore to have  been
    inconsistent with the country evidence.

18.  The 3rd point was that the Judge had mistaken the Appellant's  evidence
    about her possession of a passport after detention.  Her  evidence  was
    not that she was still in possession of the  passport  after  detention
    but that the agent who secured her release by payment of a  bribe  also
    recovered her passport.

19.   The  determination  was  also  attacked  for  findings  said   to   be
    inconsistent with country guidance.  The  Judge  had  found  it  highly
    unlikely that the Appellant would have been able to travel through  the
    airport and board a flight to the UK in  her  own  name  without  being
    rearrested. That was inconsistent with GJ which endorsed  the  evidence
    of a witness that the seriousness of any charge against  an  individual
    was not determinative of whether a bribe could be paid. It was possible
    to leave through the airport even when  a  person  was  being  actively
    sought. If the Judge did not apply that country guidance she should  at
    least explain why she was not applying it. The grounds did not seek  to
    challenge the Judge's dismissal of the Article 8 claim.

20.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler who granted permission  in  the
    following terms:

         "The Judge did not reject the medical evidence found in a  scarring
         report but accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been  intentionally
         burned. She was however not  persuaded  that  the  burns  had  been
         inflicted in the circumstances described by the Appellant.

         The remaining grounds challenge adverse findings on 3 matters:  the
         Appellant's description of her LTTE training, her evidence that her
         passport was returned to the agent when she was released on payment
         of a bribe and her  account  of  passing  through  the  airport  in
         Colombo without being rearrested. It is  arguable  that  the  Judge
         erred in law in relation to those findings, which were material  to
         her overall finding that the Appellant's account was not  credible.
         In these circumstances it is appropriate to grant permission.

         The Judge was entitled to take  her  general  credibility  findings
         into account when reaching that conclusion and did not  demonstrate
         an arguable failure to consider the medical evidence by  way  of  a
         holistic assessment of the  claim  as  a  whole.  Nevertheless  all
         grounds may be argued as  permission  is  given  to  challenge  the
         overall credibility findings ".

The Hearing Before Me

21.  Counsel for the Appellant submitted that in the event that an error  of
    law was found the matter should be remitted back to the First-tier  for
    rehearing. There had been a further incident in Sri Lanka  on  10  July
    but the Appellant was waiting for documents to be sent from  Sri  about
    it. A further expert's report might also be sought in the future.

22.  Taking the grounds raised in the onward grounds of  appeal  in  reverse
    order counsel argued that the Appellant had explained in her  statement
    that after her passport was confiscated the agent had told her he would
    sort it out which he did. The Judge had overlooked that. The Judge  had
    also erred in finding that the Appellant could not have  been  able  to
    leave Sri Lanka on her own documents  it  if  she  was  wanted  by  the
    authorities. There had been a concession made by the Respondent  during
    the hearing of GJ that a witness who had given evidence to the tribunal
    was correct to say that one could leave Sri Lanka on payment of a bribe
    even if wanted by the authorities. The Judge should have explained  her
    reasons for departing from this country guidance.

23.  What the Respondent had said in the refusal letter about  training  was
    for those being trained as fighters but this Appellant was not going to
    be a fighter. I pointed out at this stage that in her determination  at
    paragraph 23 the Judge had specifically dealt with the  point  made  by
    counsel that there were two kinds of training one for fighters and  the
    other which the Appellant had undergone. The Judge  had  answered  that
    point in her determination by saying that if the Appellant  was  merely
    being trained as a fundraiser physical  training  would  be  senseless.
    Further such an explanation  was  at  odds  with  the  Appellant's  own
    account that the LTTE's concern in recruiting her was to  recruit  more
    people to partake in the war. That was taken from the  Appellant's  own
    answer at question 83 of the  asylum  interview.  In  response  counsel
    pointed to the objections taken to the material in the  refusal  letter
    which had been mentioned in the grounds of onward appeal.

24.  The fourth point was the Mibanga point that  the  Judge  had  made  her
    findings  of  credibility  and  that  the  medical  evidence  was  then
    considered afterwards as an adjunct instead of being considered  in  an
    overall assessment of credibility. Dr Martin had found that each of the
    scars on the Appellant's legs were typical of  cigarette  burns.  There
    was a significantly large number of scars such that it  was  impossible
    to say they had been incurred accidentally. That they were fully mature
    indicated they had been imposed several years ago not  recently.  There
    was a sixth point that the Judge had not  dealt  with  the  Appellant's
    claim under Article 8 family life. Counsel appreciated  that  this  had
    not been raised in the grounds of  onward  appeal  and  the  Presenting
    Officer indicated that he would object to the matter  being  raised  at
    this late stage. In reply counsel argued that Article  8  both  private
    and family life had been put to the Judge during the  hearing  (as  was
    clear from the Judge's own notes and the skeleton argument). It  was  a
    Robinson obvious point that the Judge  had  not  considered  Article  8
    outside the rules correctly.

25.  In response the presenting officer accepted that  the  Judge  may  have
    failed to apply  GJ  correctly  in  relation  to  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant had left Sri Lanka on her  own  passport  but  that  was  not
    sufficient of itself to undermine the determination  when  set  against
    the reasons given by the Judge for her finding of lack of  credibility.
    The Judge had given  her  reasons  why  she  rejected  the  Appellant's
    evidence on the training received by the Appellant. The  Mibanga  point
    was also unfounded.  The  Judge  was  considering  credibility  in  its
    entirety. When she came to consider the medical evidence  she  had  not
    finished  considering  her  assessment  thereof.  For  example  in  the
    following paragraph at paragraph 32 the Judge had dealt with the impact
    on the Appellant's credibility of the delay in claiming  asylum.  There
    were a number of components to the Judge's  criticism  of  credibility.
    Why would the LTTE pay for a fundraiser to study abroad  when  all  she
    had done for them was to distribute leaflets. The Judge had  spoken  of
    vagueness  in  the  Appellant's  account  for  example  about   the   2
    individuals who had sent the  Appellant  to  Singapore  to  study.  The
    Appellant had not known much about the LTTE. The  scarring  report  was
    only one component of the evidence. In any event the Judge had accepted
    the medical evidence as far as it went so this was not a  true  Mibanga
    point. He reiterated  his  opposition  to  the  reintroduction  of  the
    Article 8 claim.

26.  In conclusion counsel argued that the Judge's pre-existing decision  on
    credibility  had  affected  her  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence
    including  the  mental  health  issues.  The  Judge  had  accepted  the
    Appellant had depression. In effect what the Judge was saying was  that
    she had made her conclusion on credibility and the medical evidence did
    not displace that conclusion. Counsel accepted the  Respondent's  point
    on Article 8 and concluded that the case was finally  balanced  overall
    but the balance should fall in the Appellant's favour.

Findings

27.   This  case  turned  on  an  assessment  of  the  credibility  of   the
    Appellant's claim. The Judge set out at some length her cogent  reasons
    for  finding  that  the  Appellant  lacked  credibility.  It   was   of
    significance that the Appellant appeared to know so  little  about  the
    organisation that trained her and had given her leaflets to distribute.
    It was also significant that the Appellant claimed the existence of  an
    arrest warrant which had  somehow  been  lost  in  the  post.  In  this
    connection I note that the Appellant before me claimed that  there  had
    been a further incident two months ago but still no  documentation  had
    been forwarded to the  Appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  respect
    thereof.

28.  It was for the  Judge  to  weigh  the  evidence  and  make  an  overall
    assessment of the credibility of the  Appellant's  case.  Much  of  the
    criticism made by the Appellant of the Judges determination is  a  mere
    disagreement with the outcome of the case. One point taken against  the
    determination is that the Judge felt the Appellant's evidence of  being
    trained by the LTTE was  undermined  because  her  description  of  the
    training did not match the description quoted in  the  refusal  letter.
    The refusal letter indicated that if a person was being a trained as  a
    fighter the training would be far more militaristic than anything which
    the Appellant had experienced. That was  attacked  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal with the argument  that  the  Respondent's  sources  information
    could not be relied upon as the documents  from  which  the  quotations
    were taken were not produced at the hearing.  That  point  is  somewhat
    undermined by the fact that the refusal letter is dated 24  March  2015
    15 months before the final hearing before the Judge. The Appellant  and
    her legal representatives  had  more  than  ample  time  to  check  the
    quotations if they suspected they might be inaccurate.  It  is  evident
    that no such checks were carried out and it is only extremely  late  in
    the day after the Judge had given her decision that the documents  have
    been challenged and then only in the most vague  of  terms.  There  was
    nothing for example to prevent the Appellant  and  her  representatives
    from looking up the documents on the website quoted in the  letter.  It
    is difficult to avoid the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  and  those
    advising her take objection  to  the  documents  because  they  do  not
    support the Appellant's  case  rather  than  because  they  are  of  no
    evidential value. In any event as I have indicated the Judge was  aware
    of the potential explanation for the difference between the Appellant's
    claimed training and that of the training for a fighter and gave cogent
    reasons why she did not accept that explanation.

29.  A  further  point  taken  against  the  determination  is  the  Judge's
    scepticism  about  the  Appellant's  departure  from  Sri   Lanka.   In
    particular that the Appellant having been arrested and detained and her
    passport confiscated was nevertheless able to leave Sri Lanka  on  that
    same passport without any difficulties. It is fair to say that evidence
    was received by the Upper Tribunal during the  case  of  GJ  that  upon
    payment of a sufficient bribe  someone  who  was  of  interest  to  the
    authorities could still leave Sri Lanka on  their  own  documents.  The
    important point however is not whether that was possible but whether it
    happened in this case, bearing in mind of  course  the  lower  standard
    applicable in asylum appeals which the Judge had directed  herself  on.
    The Judge held that it was not possible in this case that the Appellant
    could have left Sri Lanka in such a way.

30.  It  is  not  hard  to  see  why  the  Judge  would  have  reached  that
    conclusion. Firstly when the Appellant was released  according  to  her
    statement she was not released  with  her  passport.  This  meant  that
    someone had  to  apply  to  the  relevant  authorities  to  obtain  the
    passport. Leaving aside the issue of whether it might have been  easier
    for the Appellant to have obtained  an  alternative  fake  passport  to
    leave Sri Lanka, there were obvious difficulties in this case  in  that
    the Appellant had to explain how after being released on  a  bribe  but
    still apparently wanted by  the  authorities  they  would  simply  have
    released her passport to a third party on payment of a  further  bribe.
    For the Judge this was clearly an account too far and suggestive of the
    fact that the Appellant was embroidering her account as she went  along
    to deal with credibility issues which were thrown up on the way.  I  do
    not read GJ as saying that such  a  complicated  account  of  obtaining
    one's own passport and then leaving on it was sufficiently possible  to
    have  been  a  realistic  prospect  in  this  case.  The   Respondent's
    concession in GJ heavily relied on in the submissions made to me really
    extended no further than to acknowledge the existence  of  bribery  and
    corruption in Sri Lanka. That is not in doubt, what was  in  doubt  was
    whether the very  complicated  story  advanced  by  the  Appellant  was
    credible. The Judge was required to take a view thereon in the light of
    all of the evidence in the case.  This  she  did  and  she  came  to  a
    sustainable conclusion that the Appellant's account was fabricated.

31.  A further point taken against the determination is that the  Judge  has
    considered the credibility of the Appellant and found against  her  and
    then as something of an  afterthought  rejected  the  medical  evidence
    which might otherwise have supported the Appellant's case. The Judge of
    necessity had to set out her conclusions in some form of order. Whether
    she considered the medical evidence at  an  earlier  paragraph  of  the
    determination than her consideration of  the  credibility  evidence  or
    vice versa made very little difference provided that the Judge  had  in
    mind all of the evidence when arriving at each and  every  one  of  her
    conclusions. A fair reading of the determination  in  this  case  shows
    that to be the case. The Judge did  not  reject  Dr  Martin's  scarring
    report as an afterthought. Far from it,  she  engaged  fully  with  the
    report accepting many of the doctor's conclusions. Where  she  differed
    from the Appellant's case was that she did not accept that the scarring
    on the Appellant's body particularly her legs had been inflicted in the
    way that the Appellant claimed.

32.  There had been some mistreatment of the Appellant in the past  but  the
    Appellant's account of how she got the scarring was not accepted by the
    Judge. It was not for Dr Martin to establish whether the Appellant  was
    or was not credible in her account. What Dr Martin did was to  indicate
    that the  scarring  on  the  Appellant's  body  could  only  have  been
    inflicted intentionally. That still begged the question of whether  the
    scarring was inflicted against the Appellant's will or by her volition.
    It was not for the  Judge  to  speculate  on  how  the  scarring  might
    otherwise have occurred. What the Judge had to decide was  whether  the
    Appellant's account met the necessary legal test and she found that  it
    did not. As the Presenting Officer correctly pointed out the assessment
    of the medical evidence was not in fact the  final  assessment  carried
    out by the Judge. After the medical  evidence  the  Judge  went  on  to
    consider the section 8 point as to delay.

33.  Much was made in argument before me of the comment by the Judge in  her
    determination that if the Appellant could have established  credibility
    then the Judge would have accepted  that  the  scarring  found  by  the
    Doctor Martin was caused in the manner claimed. Here one  has  to  look
    carefully at the words used by the Judge. She did not say that  if  the
    Appellant had been credible then her finding was  that  the  burns  had
    been incurred as she claimed. She indicated that she would be "content"
    to accept that the burns were caused in the manner  claimed.  In  other
    words the Judge was not making a finding that all  things  being  equal
    the burns were caused as the Appellant had said but rather that if  the
    Appellant  was  credible  there  would  be  no  reason  to  oppose  the
    Appellant's claimed version of events that the scarring  was  inflicted
    deliberately by the Sri Lankan authorities. The  burns  may  have  been
    inflicted in a number of circumstances but it did not  follow  from  Dr
    Martin's report that  the  burns  were  inflicted  in  the  manner  and
    circumstances that the Appellant described. That is not a Mibanga point
    at all because the Judge was assessing  all  of  the  evidence  in  the
    round.

34.  Similarly the Judge was entitled to come to the view that  she  did  in
    relation to the report of Doctor Zapata. He based  his  report  on  the
    presumption that the Appellant was receiving support from  her  husband
    and family in the United Kingdom. In fact the position would be that if
    she were returned to Sri Lanka  she  would  receive  support  from  her
    family there that is her parents and three siblings. Where the  medical
    report was founded on a mistake of fact as here it was a matter for the
    Judge  to  decide  what  weight  could  be  placed  on   the   doctor's
    conclusions.  Inevitably  Doctor  Zapata  was  heavily  reliant  on  an
    acceptance of the Appellant's claim. If however that claim such as  the
    claim to have been tortured was incorrect then  it  would  follow  that
    Doctor Zapata's conclusions were undermined.  It  was  not  for  Doctor
    Zapata to usurp the position of the tribunal and make his own  findings
    as to whether the Appellant was credible. That was  a  matter  for  the
    Judge which she did. Of course the Judge could not  simply  reject  the
    report without giving adequate reasons for her conclusions but as  will
    be seen from a fair reading of the determination the Judge gave  cogent
    reasons at some length to explain why she came to the view that she did
    on the medical evidence. Again this was not a Mibanga point.

35.  I would also add one further point here that permission to  appeal  the
    medical evidence point was not granted in terms  by  Judge  Pooler.  He
    found that the Judge was  entitled  to  take  her  general  credibility
    findings into account  when  reaching  her  conclusions  and  that  her
    findings did not  demonstrate  an  arguable  failure  to  consider  the
    medical evidence by way of a holistic assessment  of  the  claim  as  a
    whole. In effect he  granted  permission  on  other  grounds  but  gave
    permission for all grounds to be argued insofar as they related to  the
    credibility aspects of the case. However  on  the  technical  point  of
    whether the Judge had approached the medical evidence correctly or  had
    breached the Mibanga principle I do not read the grant of permission as
    giving any support to the Appellant's arguments.  Having  said  that  I
    must come to my own view and for the reasons which I set  out  at  some
    length above I reject the Mibanga argument in this case.

36.  Finally in relation to Article 8 counsel who  drafted  the  grounds  of
    onward appeal did not see fit to  appeal  the  Judge's  findings  under
    Article 8. This is not perhaps surprising given  that  the  Appellant's
    circumstances may well change significantly in  the  near  future.  For
    example as and when she gives birth  that  child  may  or  may  not  be
    entitled to British citizenship and different considerations may  apply
    at that time. That is not a matter for me but equally it would  not  be
    appropriate to allow an Article 8 appeal to proceed at the error of law
    stage where permission had to  appeal  had  not  been  sought  on  that
    ground.

37.  Overall the grounds of onward appeal amount as I have indicated  to  no
    more than a disagreement with the result. I do not  consider  that  the
    matter is finely balanced as was submitted to me  by  counsel,  a  fair
    reading of the determination in this case shows that there is no  merit
    to this appeal. The grounds do not demonstrate any  material  error  of
    law on the Judge's part and I therefore dismiss the appeal.

Notice of decision

The decision of the First-tier tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal against that decision.

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order in this case as there is no public  policy  reason
for so doing the  Appellant's  claim  for  international  protection  having
failed.


                                       Dated this 13th day of September 2016

.................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


To the Respondent
Fee award

The appeal has been dismissed and no fee was payable there  can  be  no  fee
award.


                                       Dated this 13th day of September 2016

.................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
