

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 13th March 2015                       |On 20th May 2015                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic of Iran who is now
      aged 26 years old. He appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fox)[2] to dismiss  his  appeal  against  a
      decision to remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s10 of  the
      Immigration and  Asylum  Act  1999[3].  That  decision  followed  from
      rejection of the Appellant's claim to international protection.

   2. When the Appellant claimed asylum in May 2014 the basis of  his  claim
      was that he faced persecution in  Iran  for  reasons  of  his  imputed
      religious belief and political  opinion.  He  stated  that  he  was  a
      businessman  working  on  the  island  of  Kish,  a  popular   tourist
      destination in the Persian Gulf. He claimed that whilst working  there
      he had come to know other business owners, some of whom were  Filipino
      Christians.  He had befriended these people  and  they  had  discussed
      their faith with him. The local Baseeji  observed  these  interactions
      and he was warned. The Appellant's friends had promised to  bring  him
      Christian reading material next  time  they  went  to  Dubai  and  had
      surreptitiously passed him leaflets etc. Then during  Newroz  2014  he
      got into an argument with the  Baseej  because  he  was  playing  loud
      music. He was assaulted, his shop destroyed and his house  raided,  at
      which time the Christian materials were found in his  possession.  The
      Appellant fears that as a result he will come to serious harm in Iran.

   3. The Respondent does not doubt that a Muslim suspected of converting to
      Christianity will face serious problems in Iran. She did  not  however
      accept that this was a description  that  applied  to  the  Appellant.
      Finding his knowledge to be lacking she  doubted  his  expressions  of
      interest in Christianity and - somewhat bizarrely given the background
      material - also doubted his claim to be Muslim.    The  account  being
      rejected, the claim was turned down.

   4. By the time of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant
      claimed that he had converted to Christianity. The  Tribunal  rejected
      the Appellant's account.  It  was  found  implausible  that  Christian
      tourists would risk the punishments that await evangelists in Iran  by
      giving out materials to shopkeepers such as  the  Appellant,  and  the
      Tribunal considered it equally  implausible  that  Filipino  nationals
      would do the same.  Although it was accepted that  the  Appellant  had
      been brought up as a Muslim it was considered that  his  knowledge  of
      Christianity "left much to be desired".  It was found to be a "strange
      co-incidence" that the church he now attends in the UK is opposite the
      Home  Office  building  in  Manchester.  In  respect  of  his  claimed
      conversion the Tribunal  wrote  "there  is  little  or  no  supporting
      evidence for  this  contention"  [at  23].   The  appeal  was  thereby
      dismissed.

   5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in
      the following ways:

       i) Error of fact amounting to  an  error  of  law.   The  Appellant's
          evidence was that other businesspeople on the island of  Kish  had
          given him Christian literature.  It  was  not  his  evidence  that
          pamphlets etc were provided by tourists whom he did not know.

      ii) Procedural unfairness.  Whilst the Tribunal may have been entitled
          (had this  been  the  evidence)  to  find  it  "implausible"  that
          tourists would try and convert strangers to Christianity in  Iran,
          that was not the evidence  about  the  Appellant's  contacts.  His
          evidence was that the discussions and exchange  of  material  took
          place behind closed doors with trusted friends.  As  such  it  was
          unfair for the Tribunal to place this evidence  in  this  bracket,
          and further to take  this  point  against  the  Appellant  without
          giving him a chance to respond to it (it not  having  featured  in
          the refusal letter).

     iii) Failing to take material evidence into account. In  finding  there
          to be "little or no" evidence to support the Appellant's claim  to
          have converted to Christianity the First-tier Tribunal  overlooked
          a certificate of baptism  issued  by  his  church  in  the  UK,  a
          photograph of him actually being baptised and a letter from Pastor
          Sheila Murphy of the World Harvest Baptist Church  confirming  his
          attendance at services and classes.   No  consideration  has  been
          given to the Appellant's oral evidence.

   6. For the Respondent Ms Johnstone submitted that the findings were  open
      to the Tribunal on the evidence before it.  She  emphasised  that  the
      Tribunal had not  misunderstood  the  evidence  and  had  specifically
      referred to Filipino nationals. She  argued  that  the  findings  were
      sustainable. As  for  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  converted  to
      Christianity she submitted that the evidence was so weak the  Tribunal
      was not obliged to say more than it did.

      Error of Law

   7. I am satisfied that this decision contains errors of law such that  it
      should be set aside.

   8. The Respondent had given specific reasons for  rejecting  this  claim,
      which the First-tier Tribunal had not upheld. That did not  mean  that
      the account had to be accepted, but in assessing  the  merits  of  the
      claim for itself the Tribunal was obliged, as a matter of fairness, to
      raise any new issues with the Appellant, and as a matter  of  law,  to
      take all of the evidence into account. It may  be  that  the  evidence
      from the World Harvest Baptist Church would  not  have  attracted  any
      substantial weight but it was an error to say that there  was  "little
      or no" evidence when there plainly was some,  in  particular  evidence
      that the Appellant had  actually  been  baptised.   Furthermore  I  am
      satisfied  that  the  reasons  given  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
      evidence about Kish are not sustainable. The only reason given is that
      it is "implausible" that tourists would risk  their  own  position  by
      giving out Christian pamphlets. That was  not  the  Appellant's  case.
      The "implausibility" or otherwise of such behaviour cannot be extended
      to reject his evidence that he had a number of private  conversations,
      over a relatively long  period  of  time,  with  people  he  knew  and
      trusted.  If  the  Tribunal  found  that  evidence  to  be  inherently
      implausible it is not easy to understand why.

   9. Before me the parties agreed that if the decision were to be set aside
      the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. That  is  in
      part because of  the  fairness  points  raised  in  the  grounds,  but
      primarily because the re-making will involve at  least  two  witnesses
      and take three hours. The Practice Statements for the Immigration  and
      Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal provide at paragraph 7  (b)  that
      an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal where "the nature
      or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for
      the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard
      to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the
      case to the First-tier Tribunal".  Having regard to  that  guidance  I
      agree that the matter should be remitted.

      Decisions

  10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law
      and it is set aside.

  11. The matter is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

  12. In view of the subject matter of this appeal I make  a  direction  for
      anonymity having had regard to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of
      2013: Anonymity Orders.

          "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
          Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
          shall directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his
          family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and  to  the
          Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
          contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               10th May 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 4th December 2014 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Grant-Hutchinson
[2] Determination promulgated 7th November 2014
[3] Decision dated 28th August 2014

