
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06845/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Centre City Tower     |       Decision and Reasons         |
|                                          |Promulgated                         |
|On 15 June 2015                           |       On 3 August 2015             |
|                                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                     AZ

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Masih, instructed by Braitch Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan and was born in 1995.

 2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim.

 3. This appeal is against the decision promulgated on 23 October  2014  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes which refused the  appellant's  asylum
    and human rights appeal.

 4. The background to this matter is that the appellant came to the  UK  in
    November 2009 as a minor and claimed asylum. His claim was that he  was
    from an area near Kabul and that  his  father  had  become  of  adverse
    interest to the Taliban. The appellant did not know  whether  this  was
    because his father was in the Taliban, something he heard  people  say,
    or because he worked for the government. The Taliban had  come  to  the
    family home and beaten his father, on the  first  occasion  taking  him
    away overnight.  When they came on other occasions his father  was  not
    there.

 5. In approximately 2008 the appellant's father was seriously  hurt  in  a
    bomb explosion and taken to hospital where he remained for an  extended
    period, the appellant visiting him there. After  his  father  had  been
    injured the Taliban came again to the family home and  this  time  beat
    and threatened the appellant's mother. They warned her not to send  the
    appellant away as they wanted to recruit him.  The  appellant's  mother
    immediately sent the appellant out of Afghanistan with  the  assistance
    of one of her brothers.

 6. The appellant then came to the UK  where  he  claimed  asylum  and  was
    assisted by Social Services and a foster family. He also  made  contact
    with his paternal uncle who, after coming  to  the  UK,  had  become  a
    British citizen.  The  appellant  eventually  went  to  live  with  his
    paternal uncle.

 7. The appellant's initial asylum claim was refused on 13 April  2010.  He
    did  not  appeal  the  refusal.  At  the  same  time  he  was   granted
    discretionary leave as an unaccompanied minor until 20 September 2012.

 8. The appellant applied in time to extend that leave on asylum and  human
    rights grounds. In his  witness  statement  dated  28  August  2012  in
    support of that application he stated that he had not had contact  with
    his family, did not know where they were and still feared the  Taliban.
    He had asked his social worker to assist him to contact the  Red  Cross
    but heard nothing further. Commenting on the  earlier  refusal  of  his
    claim, he indicated did not know exactly what his father did or why the
    Taliban released his father after taking him over night  as  they  were
    not close.

 9. The application was refused on 26 August 2014 and it is  that  decision
    that has led to these proceedings.

10. By the time that the appeal came before Judge Parkes, the evidence  had
    moved on and there were new  events  that  had  not  been  put  to  the
    respondent so were not covered in the refusal letter.

11. The appellant submitted a witness statement dated 2  October  2014.  In
    that statement he explained that since the refusal of  26  August  2014
    his paternal uncle had told him about significant events in Afghanistan
    that had previously been kept from him.  His uncle  told  him  that  in
    approximately October 2012 family in Afghanistan had informed the uncle
    that the appellant's father and brother had been killed by the Taliban.
    The uncle had also informed the appellant that on receiving  this  news
    he had travelled to Afghanistan. He  met  the  appellant's  mother  and
    sister who told him that after the appellant left the family had  moved
    to Loghar. It was after that  move  that  the  appellant's  father  and
    brother had been killed  by  the  Taliban.  Whilst  the  uncle  was  in
    Afghanistan, the appellant's mother and  sister  moved  to  Budkhak  in
    Kabul. The uncle returned to the UK in March 2013 but did not tell  the
    appellant anything of who he had met or of the death of his father  and
    brother.

12. The appellant's witness statement of 2 October 2014 also indicated that
    he only learned after the refusal of  August  2014  that  his  paternal
    uncle had travelled again to Afghanistan in December 2013, returning in
    April 2014. His uncle had told him that during  the  second  visit  the
    appellant's mother had refused to see him as the  paternal  family  had
    not tried to avenge  the  death  of  the  appellant's  father  and  his
    brother.

13. The appellant also indicated in his witness statement dated  2  October
    2014 that his had spoken to his mother on one occasion and  she  talked
    to him about the death of his father and brother.  She  was  distraught
    and warned him not to return. She told him that his father  was  a  spy
    for the government, reporting on Taliban activities and that was why he
    had been killed. His mother told him that his younger brother had  been
    killed trying to protect his father.

14. The appellant's paternal uncle set out the same information in his  own
    witness statement dated 2  October  2014.  He  confirmed  that  he  had
    learned  in  2012  what  had  happened  to  the   appellant's   family,
    specifically the deaths of his father and brother. He confirmed that he
    visited the appellant's mother and sister in 2012, had tried  to  visit
    them in 2014 but had not told the appellant anything of  these  matters
    until after the refusal of 26 August 2014.

15. As Judge Parkes records at  [7],  the  appellant  and  his  uncle  gave
    evidence at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

16. The appellant's first ground is that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    take into account material parts of the appellant's claim, specifically
    the new evidence concerning the death of his father and brother.

17. We found that this ground had merit. As the permission judge indicated,
    brevity is a virtue but here the appellant has no  indication  of  what
    the First-tier Tribunal made of the evidence both  he  and  uncle  gave
    concerning the clearly potentially material  matter  of  death  of  his
    father and brother at the hands of the Taliban. Judge Parkes  does  not
    refer to this aspect of the claim at all. There is no  summary  of  the
    appellant's account that might indicate that the judge was aware of the
    later evidence. At [7] he refers to the appellant's response to refusal
    of 26 August 2014 being  contained  the  appeal  bundle  but  there  is
    nothing further to suggest that he was astute to the new matters in the
    2 October 2014 statements.

18. Indeed, at [13], the First-tier Tribunal  judge  states,  referring  to
    the incident when the Taliban beat the appellant's mother:

             "If this attack  were  true  it  would  have  highlighted  the
             interest of the Taliban in the family as  it  would  be  clear
             that not only was his father was (sic) of  interest.  However,
             only the Appellant was sent to safety. In the absence  of  the
             Appellant it is not clear why the  Appellant's  brother  would
             not in due course become of interest to  the  Taliban  or  why
             they might be expected to  leave  the  family,  including  the
             father, alone."

19. It will be clear that the appellant's new  evidence  went  directly  to
    this point, his case before Judge Parkes  being  that  his  father  and
    brother  became  of  fatal  interest  to  the  Taliban  after  he  left
    Afghanistan. The comments at [13] suggested to us that Judge Parkes had
    not taken account the later evidence.

20. There is also the comment at [16] that when the appellant had spoken to
    his mother on the telephone "it did not appear that they had much of  a
    conversation". As above, it was  the  appellant's  evidence  in  his  2
    October 2014 witness statement that he and  his  mother  discussed  the
    death  of  his  father  and  brother  and  that  his  mother  was  very
    distressed, warning him  not  to  return.  We  found  it  difficult  to
    reconcile this with the comment that they  did  not  have  "much  of  a
    conversation". The adverse view of the limited  telephone  conversation
    then feeds in to a finding at [17] that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    truthful about the  amount  of  contact  he  had  with  his  family  in
    Afghanistan. We also noted that the question of the appellant's limited
    contact with the family in Afghanistan was another point on  which  his
    evidence was supported by his uncle but that evidence not addressed  at
    any point by Judge Parkes.

21. It was our conclusion that an error of law arose from  the  failure  to
    show that material aspects of the appellant's  account  and  his  later
    witness statement and that of his paternal uncle had  been  taken  into
    account. It was also our view that it was possible that the conclusions
    on credibility and risk on return could have  been  different  and  the
    appeal allowed had those parts of the evidence been taken into  account
    and that the decision therefore could not stand and would  have  to  be
    remade.

22. Where the  error  goes  to  the  heart  of  the  credibility  findings,
    following paragraph 7.2  (b)  of  Part  3  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012, it was our  view  that  the
    nature of the fact finding that will have to take place if an error  of
    law is found is such that it is appropriate to remit the appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be re-made de novo.

23. The appellant's  second  ground  concerned  the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi dated 11 October 2014. We did not find that  this  had  merit
    where, quite properly, Dr Giustozzi does not  comment  on  credibility.
    Although it is a little odd that he appears to seek to do so  at  [19],
    this is not  material  where  there  was  nothing  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  judge  to  disagree  with  or   distinguish   regarding   the
    credibility of the appellant.

24. Dr Giustozzi does comment at [5] on Taliban retribution  against  spies
    and [7] the Taliban being active in Loghar.  In  so  far  as  they  are
    relevant to the new evidence on the death of the appellant's father and
    brother, these did fall to be considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge and will have  to  be  so  considered  as  part  of  the  overall
    credibility assessment that is to be remade.

25.  The third ground argues that the First-tier Tribunal was incorrect  in
    placing negative weight on the failure to appeal the  2010  refusal  of
    the appellant's original asylum claim. Judge Parkes states at [8]  that
    "the fact that he [the appellant] was content to leave matters as  they
    stood and to remain in the UK on the more limited basis does not assist
    his case."

26. We were not entirely sure if that  statement  showed  that  a  negative
    inference had been drawn from the failure to appeal the first decision.
    On balance, we did find that it suggested  that  the  later  claim  was
    found to be undermined to some degree by the failure to appeal and that
    was not a permissible approach, where the appellant was a minor aged 15
    at the time of the first refusal, had come relatively recently  to  the
    UK and was presumably taking advice from his solicitors and/or others.

27. We should indicate that we were grateful for Ms Masih's  indication  at
    the outset of her submission that the allegation of bias in the grounds
    of appeal was entirely misconceived and not pursued before us.

Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point
    of law and is set aside to be remade.

29. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  re-made  de
    novo.




Signed [pic]                            Date 23 July 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

