
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06199/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                      |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 25 March 2015                       |              On 14 April 2015       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            MAHAMED AHMED MAHAMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mahamed Ahmed Mahamed, was born on 1 January 1992 and is
    a male citizen of Somalia.  The appellant appeals against a decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 6 November 2014 (Judge
    Saffer; Judge Hussain).  The First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  an  appeal
    from the appellant against the decision of the respondent dated 19 June
    2014 to refuse him leave to enter and make directions for  his  removal
    to Somalia.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant appeared in person before the Upper Tribunal on 25  March
    (as he had before the First-tier Tribunal).  The previous  hearing  had
    been adjourned because no interpreter had been present.  I was  careful
    to explain the nature of the proceedings to the appellant and  to  tell
    him that he should notify me if, at any point during  the  hearing,  he
    did not understand any part of those proceedings.  I am  satisfied  the
    appellant did understand the proceedings and that he  was  given  every
    opportunity to put his case.

 3. Granting permission, Judge Andrew stated:

         It is arguable that the judges did not properly analyse the  mental
         health of the appellant and the effect that this would have on  his
         safety when he returned to Somalia.

 4. In addition to the question  of  the  appellant's  mental  health,  the
    grounds of appeal  also  challenged  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that it had failed  to  engage  with  the  latest
    country guidance case (MOJ (Return to Mogadishu)  CG  [2014]  UKUT  442
    (IAC).  The grounds acknowledged that "some of the issues  set  out  in
    MOJ were addressed by the FTTJs".  However, the appellant asserts  that
    the Tribunal failed to have proper regard  to  his  clan  associations,
    financial resources, likelihood of obtaining  employment  and  how  the
    appellant's travel to the United Kingdom was funded and why he would no
    longer be able to secure financial support upon  return.   The  grounds
    complain that, although the Tribunal found that the appellant is from a
    majority clan, it  failed  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  clan
    membership is no longer as significant as it has been in the past.

 5. The grounds also assert that the Tribunal did  not  adequately  support
    with reasons its finding [28] that it was "reasonably likely that  [the
    appellant] has  family  in  Marka  (his  parents,  three  brothers  and
    sister)".

 6. I find that the Tribunal did not err  in  its  application  of  country
    guidance.  The logic of the grounds is somewhat  difficult  to  follow.
    MOJ  found  that  conditions  in  Somalia  had  changed  and  the  clan
    membership (which had often been  important  if  not  determinative  as
    regards  the  safety  of  return)  is  no  longer  so  important  as  a
    "protection function" than as a means of accessing social and financial
    support mechanisms.  The grounds seek to cast doubt upon the fact  that
    the appellant's majority clan membership may assist him, stressing that
    clans may only "potentially" offer social  and  financial  support  and
    that his clan would be less likely than in  the  past  to  be  able  to
    protect him.  It is not at all clear why these factors should  increase
    to the level  of  real  risk  any  problems  which  the  appellant  may
    encounter  on  return  to  Somalia.   MOJ  does  not  state  that  clan
    membership offers no protection to its members or  that  majority  clan
    membership is itself a risk factor whilst it is clearly the  case  that
    members of powerful, socially cohesive  majority  clans  (such  as  the
    appellant) are better placed than some  other  returnees  in  terms  of
    finding work and social support.

 7. The Tribunal did  consider  the  question  of  the  appellant's  mental
    difficulties.  The Tribunal [30] found that the appellant could use his
    majority clan  membership  to  access  "some  support".   The  Tribunal
    accepted that "mental health services in Mogadishu are very unlikely to
    be anything other than rudimentary given the humanitarian problems over
    many years".  However,  the  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant  had
    "failed to establish he would be unable to access  rudimentary  support
    or that his sister  could  not  send  money  for  him  to  obtain  such
    treatment as was available although he has established that his  mental
    health problems are of such severity as to mean that it would be unduly
    harsh for him to relocate [within Somalia]" if he were unable to remain
    in Marka and access  facilities  there.   Foremost  in  the  Tribunal's
    thinking was its finding that the appellant could re-establish  contact
    with his family members in  Somalia  and  that,  whilst  mental  health
    treatment might be only at a rudimentary level  or  available  only  in
    Mogadishu, mental health problems were such that his  family  would  be
    able to offer support providing him with  accommodation  and  financial
    assistance.  There was evidence before the Tribunal that the  appellant
    suffers from post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

 8. The appellant had stated in his asylum interview [16] that he had  last
    spoken with his family four months before (i.e. in January  2014).   At
    [28], the Tribunal wrote, "we accept [the appellant] has been in  touch
    [with his family]".  The grounds assert that there was no evidence  for
    the Tribunal to make that finding.  I  find  that  the  ground  has  no
    merit.  Even if there was no very good basis for the  Tribunal  finding
    the appellant had remained in touch with his family when  he  had  last
    spoken to them some nine months previously, its alternative finding was
    manifestly available to it ("even if he has lost contact with  them  we
    are satisfied that  it  is  reasonably  likely  he  could  re-establish
    contact as he would be returning to his home area  where  his  clan  is
    linked to the majority clan and he could ask people where  they  are").
    Whether or not the appellant had remained in contact or would  need  to
    re-establish contact, the Tribunal was entitled to proceed on the basis
    the appellant would have not only the support of his  family  but  also
    other members of his (majority) clan.   As  I  have  noted  above,  the
    ability of the appellant to obtain  support  from  his  family  members
    supports, in turn, the Tribunal's finding that the  appellant's  mental
    health condition would not lead to his being exposed to a real risk  of
    ill-treatment in Somalia.  In consequence, the Tribunal did not err  in
    law by dismissing the appellant's appeal.  I find that the  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be dismissed also.

NOTICE OF DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 6 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 6 April 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
