

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06404/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 4th November 2014                         |On: 3rd February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     UHA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Afzal, IIAS
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria date of  birth  29th  November
       1994. She appeals with permission[1] the decision of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  (Judge  Ransley)[2]  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the
       Respondent's decision to remove her from the United Kingdom  pursuant
       to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999[3]. That  decision  had
       followed the Respondent's  rejection  of  the  Appellant's  claim  to
       international protection.


  Background and Matters in Issue


    2. The basis of the Appellant's claim to  international  protection  was
       that she was a victim  of  trafficking.  She  claimed  to  have  been
       brought to the United Kingdom in 2005 by  a  man  she  knew  only  as
       "Uncle John". She stated that she had been kept in a house  in  Essex
       and forced to work as a prostitute.  She  feared  return  to  Nigeria
       because she did  not  want  to  be  re-trafficked,  or  punished  for
       escaping. She further relied on human rights grounds.


    3. The Respondent rejected the claim for want  of  credibility  and  the
       matter progressed to appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.   By  the
       time it did there had been a torturous history,  three issues arising
       from which have assumed significance in the present appeal:


        a) In respect of her age the Appellant had originally been assessed
           as being over 18.  As a result she had twice  been  interviewed,
           in October and November of 2011, as an  adult.  However  on  the
           20th February 2012 Manchester  City  Council  decided  that  the
           Appellant was in fact a minor. Her date of birth was  thereafter
           agreed to be November 1994. This meant that she was 10  in  2005
           (when she claims to have arrived in the  UK)  and  16  when  she
           claimed asylum and was interviewed.


        b) On the 25th November 2011  the  Competent  Authority  reached  a
           conclusive  grounds  decision  that  the  Appellant   had   been
           trafficked. A long list of "trafficking indicators"  were  found
           to be present  in  her  case.  On  the  13th  January  2012  the
           Competent Authority reconsidered its  decision  and  found  that
           because of numerous inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  account
           it could no  longer  be  accepted  that  she  was  a  victim  of
           trafficking. Following the age  assessment  in  her  favour  the
           Appellant's representatives requested, by way  of  letter  dated
           the 21st March 2012, that the Competent  Authority  revisit  the
           matter a third time. This they did, issuing a conclusive grounds
           decision on the 27th July 2012 that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
           victim of trafficking.


        c) The Appellant had made her protection claim in October  2011  at
           which time her Article 8 case would have been considered in line
           with the principles set out in Razgar. No decision was  made  at
           that time. On the 9th July 2012 changes were introduced  to  the
           immigration rules which meant  that  the  Appellant  would  have
           qualified for leave to  remain  under  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv),
           since at that point she was under 18 and had spent  7  years  of
           her life here. No decision was made at that time.  The  decision
           was not in fact made until the 20th June 2013 by which time  the
           Appellant had turned 18 and could no  longer  benefit  from  the
           provisions of 276ADE(1)(iv), nor indeed rely on her status as  a
           minor in any Razgar consideration.


    4. The matters in issue before the First-tier  Tribunal  were  therefore
       not straightforward.


    5. The Appellant's Counsel  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  began  by
       submitting that the entire refusal decision was vitiated by the  fact
       that the  interviews  had  been  conducted  without  the  appropriate
       safeguards when the Appellant was a minor.  It was submitted that the
       entire process (set out above  at  (i)  and  (ii))  was  flawed.  The
       Competent Authority had only reversed its initial  positive  decision
       because of discrepancies arising in the evidence of a child, and at a
       time when they believed her to be lying about  her  age.  This  meant
       that the Competent Authority's decision was compromised, as  was  the
       asylum process overall. He requested that the appeal  be  allowed  on
       the basis that the decision was "not in accordance with the law".


    6. The First-tier Tribunal did not accept this submission. It was  noted
       that the Competent Authority decision is not one  which  is  directly
       appealable to the Tribunal. The Respondent gave numerous reasons  why
       the Appellant's credibility was doubted  and  these  arose  from  the
       detailed evidence that she had given to the Home  Office  interviewer
       as well as her own solicitor.   Even if she was technically  a  minor
       when she had given that evidence she was nearly 17 and "not  a  young
       child". Presumably she had been assisted in giving her account by her
       solicitor.  The discrepancies that arose were fundamental,  and  were
       matters which even a young person could be expected to be  consistent
       about - for instance to what extent she had known her father.   Other
       credibility issues arose during the course of the appeal process  and
       hearing, at which time the Appellant was no longer a minor.   In  sum
       the  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  was  an  unreliable   and
       untruthful witness. In addition to the discrepancies arising  in  her
       account,  the  determination  notes  that  the  Appellant  had   been
       apprehended at Manchester Airport attempting to leave  the  UK  on  a
       false document: this further damaged her credibility.  Her  claim  to
       have never been to school and to have spent her early  teenage  years
       as a slave in a house in Essex did not equate to the fact that  since
       entering the education system in Manchester she  had  performed  well
       and, in just  three  years,   had  managed  to  attain  a  number  of
       qualifications.  The asylum/human rights appeal based on  a  fear  of
       trafficking was thereby  dismissed.  In  respect  of  Article  8  the
       Tribunal noted that the Respondent had accepted  that  the  Appellant
       had lived in the UK  since  2005.   She  did  not  however  meet  the
       requirements of the Rules. Nor was  her  removal  a  disproportionate
       interference with her private life; although there had been  a  delay
       it was not significant, having only been six months. The  appeal  was
       further dismissed under Article 8.


    7. The grounds of  appeal  were  drafted  by  Counsel  Mr  Schwenk,  who
       represented the Appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  is
       submitted that the First-tier Tribunal erred in placing  reliance  on
       discrepancies arising from the  interviews  etc  conducted  when  the
       Appellant was still a child:  had those matters  been  excluded  from
       consideration it cannot be safely concluded that the  Tribunal  would
       have reached the same conclusion.  Secondly it is submitted  that  it
       had been open to the Tribunal to reach a  different  conclusion  from
       the Competent Authority:  reliance  is  placed  on  AS  (Afghanistan)
       [2013] EWCA Civ 1469.  Finally it is submitted  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal made a material error of fact in stating that the Respondent
       had only delayed for 6 months in reaching a  decision.  In  fact  the
       decision had taken 18 months and this was  a  significant  length  of
       time in the life of such a young appellant. Judge Ransley  was  wrong
       to state that the Appellant did not lose any material advantage as  a
       result of the delay: in fact  she  had  lost  an  opportunity  to  be
       granted leave to remain under the Rules and the benefit of the policy
       to grant discretionary leave until she reached the age  of  seventeen
       and half.  The proportionality assessment may have  had  a  different
       outcome had these mistakes not occurred.


  My Findings


    8. My apologies for the very late promulgation of this decision.


       Credibility


    9. The grounds are of course correct to point out that  the  court  must
       exercise caution before admitting evidence  obtained  from  a  minor,
       much less placing weight on any  discrepancies  arising  therein:  FA
       (Children) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1636.  It is now accepted that  the
       Appellant's screening interview, asylum  interview,  initial  witness
       statement and evidence given to  the  Competent  Authority  were  all
       obtained, without any necessary precautions, when the Appellant was a
       minor.  As such I agree that the Tribunal should have  been  slow  to
       draw adverse conclusions from any of it.  Judge Ransley  was  however
       clearly aware of this. She knew that the Appellant had been  a  minor
       but as she notes, she was nearly seventeen and  as  such  was  not  a
       "young child" at the time. The particular discrepancy highlighted  in
       the determination relates to the Appellant's  relationship  with  her
       father, regarded by the  Tribunal  as  "such  a  basic  fact  in  her
       personal/family history" as to be something a 16 year  old  could  be
       expected to be consistent about.   There  was  therefore  a  specific
       reason why Judge Ransley felt it appropriate to admit that  evidence,
       and to place weight upon it. I have not been shown any  authority  to
       support the proposition that  all  such  evidence  should  always  be
       excluded.   Nor has it been shown that the  approach  taken  to  this
       evidence was irrational.  Nor  am  I  satisfied  that  in  this  case
       exclusion of the material would have led to a different outcome. That
       is because, as the determination makes clear, the First-tier Tribunal
       found there to be numerous discrepancies in the evidence given by the
       Appellant as an adult, for instance between what she had told support
       worker Louise Massamba and the evidence she gave in court.    Central
       to the findings are matters all arising from the  evidence  given  on
       appeal: see paragraphs 53, 55, 56, 59.  I am not therefore  satisfied
       that ground (i) has been made out.


       Trafficking


   10. AS (Afghanistan) is not authority for the proposition that the First-
       tier Tribunal can depart from  any  finding  made  by  the  Competent
       Authority.  The point of that case is that where the decision of  the
       CA is manifestly irrational the First-tier Tribunal  is  entitled  to
       take a different view. In this case it is evident from  the  decision
       that the First-tier Tribunal did not find the conclusion of the CA to
       be perverse or otherwise flawed. The determination sets out  numerous
       reasons why the Appellant's evidence on trafficking was not believed,
       even to the lower standard of  proof:  in  making  that  finding  the
       determination in fact places very little, if  any,  reliance  on  the
       conclusions of the CA.   Ground two is not therefore made out.  There
       was no error in admitting the CA decision, nor in declining to review
       it.


       Article 8


   11. The Article 8 reasoning is set out at paragraphs  77  to  82  of  the
       determination. It is accepted that the Appellant  has  established  a
       private life and that her removal would  interfere  with  it.  It  is
       accepted that the decision is taken in pursuit of one of the rational
       aims set out in Article 8(2).  As  to  proportionality  the  Tribunal
       rejects suggestions that  the  Appellant  is  suffering  from  mental
       health issues or trauma; she is  a  young  adult  who  speaks  fluent
       English and has achieved qualifications in her time in the  UK  which
       would assist her in re-establishing herself in  Nigeria.  It  is  not
       accepted that she has lost contact with her family in Nigeria. As  to
       the delay, the determination finds that it was not attributable to  a
       dysfunctional system operated by the Respondent. Rather it was due to
       a mix of factors, including  the  various  age  assessments  and  the
       indecision of the Competent Authority. It is held that the  Appellant
       was not deprived of any benefit by the delay.


   12. The grounds submit that in weighing  proportionality  the  First-tier
       Tribunal has failed to have regard to the fact  that  the  new  rules
       create a "perverse" situation:


           "As the Judge points out at para 74 of her determination  having
           now passed 18 years of age she can only qualify under the  Rules
           if she has spent half her life in the  UK  (which  she  has  not
           yet). Thus the day before she turned 18 she appeared to  qualify
           under the rules. The following day she appears not to."


   13. It  is  further  submitted  that  in  weighing  matters  relevant  to
       proportionality the Judge made an error of fact in that she was under
       the impression that the delay in resolving  this  claim  amounted  to
       only six months. In fact it was 18 months.


   14. I have considered these  grounds  carefully.  Having  done  so  I  am
       satisfied that the determination does not contain an error such  that
       it should be set aside.  Presuming that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
       not being invited to strike paragraph 276ADE of  the  Rules  down  as
       being oppressive or unjust, the real issue  raised  here  is  one  of
       delay. The Appellant made her claim in October 2011 and between  then
       and the 29th May 2012 when she turned seventeen and a half she could,
       had the claim and age  assessment  been  properly  dealt  with,  have
       benefitted from a grant of Discretionary Leave in accordance with the
       Respondent's policy on unaccompanied minors.  She wasn't. It is  hard
       to see how, had she been so, this  would  have  impacted  upon  Judge
       Ransley's decision. At the date of the  determination  the  Appellant
       was nearly 19. The fact that she might have had an earlier  grant  of
       DL would not have made any  difference  to  this  determination.  The
       point about 276ADE is slightly  different,  because  the  substantive
       benefit that is said to  have  been  lost  was  indefinite  leave  to
       remain. It  is  submitted  that  between  the  9th  July  2012  (when
       paragraph 276ADE was introduced) and the 29th November 2012 (when she
       turned 18) she may have qualified under the Rules.  That may  or  may
       not be true: it cannot be said with certainty that  she  had  accrued
       her seven years' residence within this time frame  since  we  do  not
       know when she arrived in 2005. The fact is that she did not  make  an
       application under the Rules during that period so we  simply  do  not
       know  what  the  Respondent's  decision  would  have  been.   If  the
       Appellant wished to avail herself of the  chance  to  get  indefinite
       leave to remain at that time she should  have  made  an  application.
       Whilst I accept that the delay was rather longer than six months, the
       Judge was quite correct to say that the Appellant lost no substantive
       benefit as a result.




  Decision


   15. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  an
       error of law and it is upheld.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           28th January 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on the 12th
December 2013 but granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal Judge
Grubb on the 13th January 2014
[2] Determination promulgated on the 29th June 2014
[3] Decision dated 25th June 2013

