

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06835/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision and Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 4 January 2016                      |                 On 18 January 2016     |
|                                       |                                        |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between


                                    A M A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J. Rendle, Counsel, instructed by Wai Leung
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal of Mr A.MA, a claimed citizen of
       Syria against the respondent's decision to  refuse  his  application
       for asylum and to remove him from the UK.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.




    Background


    3. The appellant  claimed  to  have  left  Syria  in  August  2014  and
       travelled clandestinely to the UK arriving on 22 September 2014 when
       he claimed asylum.


    4. The respondent, in the Reasons for  Refusal  letter  dated  2  April
       2015, did not accept  that  the  appellant  is  a  Syrian  national.
       Whilst it was accepted that  the  appellant  answered  a  number  of
       questions correctly  at  interview  in  relation  to  Syria  it  was
       asserted that this information is openly available through  a  brief
       internet search  and  the  respondent  asserted  that  many  of  the
       appellant's responses  were  either  inaccurate  or  incorrect.   In
       addition  the   respondent   relied   on   the   linguistic   origin
       identification report prepared by Verified AB dated 8 December  2015
       which points strongly to the conclusion that the appellant  is  from
       Egypt and not Syria.


    5. The appellant appealed.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hembrough
       dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds.   The   appellant   sought
       permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the grounds  that:  1.
       the judge  had  erred  in  relation  to  his  consideration  of  the
       appellant's identity documents; 2. The judge's findings in  relation
       to the appellant's literacy were flawed; and 3. The judge had  erred
       in placing weight on the language report, given that the findings of
       the two purported experts were contradictory.


    6. Permission was granted on the basis that although the judge did  not
       arguably err and made reasoned findings, it may be arguable that the
       Verified AB report contained contradictory findings.


    7. At the hearing before me, Mr Rendle conceded that grounds  1  and  2
       could not succeed if ground 3 was found to  be  without  merit.   Mr
       Rendle expanded on his grounds of appeal and pointed  out  that  the
       two language analysists had only been commissioned  by  Verified  AB
       since 2014 and it was unclear whether this was their  first  report.
       Only the first analyst was recorded as having undergone  and  passed
       testing.  It  was  Mr  Rendle's  submission  (and  indeed  this  was
       recorded as his case before the First-tier Tribunal) that the report
       at paragraphs 2 to 3 sets out a number  of  both  consistencies  and
       inconsistencies  with  the  claimed  linguistic  community  in   the
       Damascus area (where the  appellant  claimed  he  was  from)  before
       reaching the conclusion that  the analysis clearly suggests that the
       results obtained 'most likely are inconsistent with  the  linguistic
       community as stated in the hypothesis' (Damascus area, Syrian).


    8.  Turning  then  to  the  assessment  of  the  alternate   linguistic
       community, (Egyptian) Mr Rendle was  of  the  view  that  there  was
       nothing in that assessment at paragraph 4 of the  report  to  mirror
       the conclusions at paragraphs 2 and 3. It was Mr Rendle's submission
       that, given that at 2 and 3 there were some consistencies  with  the
       claimed linguistic community  being  from  the  Damascus  area,  the
       analysis at 4 of the alternate linguistic community of  Egypt  ought
       to likewise have contained both consistencies  and  inconsistencies.
       However that assessment noted that the appellant's language was only
       consistent with being from the linguistic community in  Egypt,  with
       no inconsistencies at all.  It was therefore Mr Rendle's  contention
       that there were two very different assessments of the same piece  of
       speech and on that basis the report cannot be relied on.


    9. Mr Rendle relied on his analogy in the grounds of appeal that  if  a
       French and Italian analyst were to look at the  phrase  'Mamma  mia!
       C'est la vie' it would be anticipated that they would both find  one
       consistent and one inconsistent element with their  own  vernacular.
       Although Judge Hembrough found, at [60] that 'I do  not  think  that
       there is any inconsistency in this given that the  Egyptian  analyst
       does not profess to have any  expertise  in  the  morphological  and
       syntactical features of the Arab dialect as spoken in  Damascus'  it
       was Mr Rendle's submission that this missed the point.   Relying  on
       his example in the grounds, he submitted that it would be immaterial
       if the French analyst had no knowledge of the Italian  language,  it
       would be suffice to find that 'Mamma mia' were not French words.


   10.  I did not find any merit in this argument:  the judge made detailed
       and  closely  reasoned  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
       credibility  in  general  and  specifically  in  relation   to   the
       linguistic analysis report from  paragraphs  [40]  to  [62]  of  the
       decision.  The judge properly directed himself  at  paragraphs  [55]
       and [56] in relation to the limitations of  linguistic  reports  and
       set out guidance both from the  Upper  Tribunal  in  RB  (Linguistic
       evidence - Sprakab) Somalia  [2010]  UKUT  329  (AC)  and  from  the
       Supreme Court in MN and KY [2014] UKSC 30.  The judge notes that  he
       was referred by Mr Rendle to the observations in both of  the  above
       decisions as to the limitations of such reports 'which were  not  to
       be regarded as determinative'.   The  judge  further  indicated  (at
       [58]) that had also taken into account that the Verified  AB  report
       contained a section headed  'Limitations'  and  'which  sets  out  a
       variety of factors which may  mean  that  the  results  of  analysis
       should be treated with extra caution.  Indeed it was  with  this  in
       mind that I was prompted to enquire as to whether the  Appellant  or
       any member of his family had travelled  outside  Syria'  (the  judge
       recorded at [37] that the appellant stated that none of  his  family
       members had ever travelled outside Syria).


   11. Judge Hembrough considered Mr Rendle's submissions that the analysts
       'seemed to be recently  in  post'  and  the  submission  that  their
       findings were inconsistent (for the reasons  set  out  again  by  Mr
       Rendle before me and summarised at  paragraphs  7-9  above).   Judge
       Hembrough found at [60]:




       'I do not think that there is any inconsistency in this given that
       the Egyptian analyst does not profess to have any expertise in the
       morphological and syntactical features of the Arab dialect as spoken
       in Damascus.  I find the conclusions of the report to be clearly
       stated and consistent.  Put shortly the analysis supports the
       hypothesis that the appellant belongs to a linguistic community that
       occurs in Cairo with certainty.'


   12. In finding no inconsistency between the two language analyses  I  am
       not satisfied that  Judge  Hembrough  made  any  error.   Mr  Rendle
       conceded that he was not himself an expert in language analysis  and
       did not offer any alternative expert view (where such ought to  have
       been available) which might support his claim both before the First-
       tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal that there was an inconsistency
       in the findings.  There was  nothing  before  either  Tribunal  that
       supported a finding that  the  fact  that  one  analyst  found  some
       consistencies as well as (mainly) inconsistencies with  the  dialect
       of Damascus meant inevitably that the second  analyst  had  to  make
       similar findings of both consistencies as  well  as  inconsistencies
       with Egyptian Arabic.  I find his submissions on this  point  to  be
       entirely speculative.  In addition  the  analogy  to  a  French  and
       Italian  analyst  assessing  a  piece  of  speech  containing   both
       languages is unhelpful,  not  least  because  the  analysis  in  the
       appellant's case relates to the same language, Arabic, but different
       dialects.


   13. I further noted, at 3.3.1 of the assessment in the  language  report
       in relation to the claim that the appellant was  from  a  linguistic
       community that occurs in Damascus area, that  the  general  comments
       indicate that:
           'the analyst noted inconsistencies in the  realization  of  some
           traits, hesitation and unnatural pauses in the person's  speech.
           All of these might suggest that  the  person  is  attempting  to
           mimic a dialect other than his own'.


   14. Although Mr Rendell dismissed this paragraph as a generic  'cut  and
       paste' there was again no evidence for  this  assertion  and  it  is
       clear  in  reaching  his  finding  at  [60]  that   there   was   no
       inconsistency, the judge took into consideration all aspects of  the
       report in the round including, as set out above,  the  finding  that
       the analyst was of  the  view  that  the  appellant's  speech  might
       suggest he was attempting to mimic another dialect.  It may well  be
       that this could explain  why  there  were  some  consistencies  with
       Damascus dialect.


   15. In finding, at [60] that the Egyptian analyst does  not  profess  to
       have any expertise in the morphological and syntactical features  of
       the Arab dialect as spoken in Damascus, the judge made findings open
       to him on the evidence.  It was not in any way  irrational  for  the
       judge to conclude that Egyptian analyst did not  have  expertise  in
       the dialect spoken in Damascus.


   16. In the alternative I am satisfied that  any  error,  in  failing  to
       explicitly address Mr Rendell's point that given  the  consistencies
       noted  in  the  first   analysis,   there   had   to   be   'mirror'
       inconsistencies in the second analysis, is not material.  The  judge
       considered the report in its entirety and in the context of all  the
       evidence.  As noted above  there  was  no  evidence  to  support  Mr
       Rendell's hypothesis as to what should and should not have  appeared
       in each report.  Taken to its logical conclusion it would mean  that
       any such language report could not be relied on unless both analysts
       make  in  effect  identical  findings.   That   cannot   be   right,
       particularly as both analysts in this case were assessing  the  same
       extract but for different dialects.


   17. In relation to Mr Rendell's complaint as  to  the  alleged  lack  of
       expertise of the two analysts, the  judge  clearly  considered  this
       submission (as noted at [59]) and in finding the 'conclusions of the
       report to be clearly stated and consistent' and in stating that,  in
       relation to the report, he had had regard to the entire  content  in
       the round and was 'mindful of its limitations', implicitly  rejected
       this submission.  I  note  that  paragraph  4  of  the  'Method  and
       limitations' section of the report, relied on by the judge,  it  was
       indicated that:
           ''the analyst selection tests  are  designed  to  gauge  several
           distinct aspects of suitability in the candidate.   In  addition
           to being able to discriminate one's own dialect and instances of
           particular features of  it/  aptitude  for  abstract  reasoning,
           integrity and phonetic awareness is sought."

   18. It was clear therefore that analysts had been subject  to  selection
       tests, as set out above and in seeking to dispute  their  experience
       Mr Rendell's submissions amount to no more than a disagreement  with
       the judge's findings which were detailed and plainly open to him.


   19. I am not satisfied therefore that there is any merit in ground 3.


   20. In relation to grounds 1 and 2, I share Mr Rendell's view that these
       grounds were 'going nowhere' if ground 3 did not succeed.


   21. The judge did not consider the language report in isolation, but  in
       the round and gave clear  reasons  for  not  finding  the  appellant
       credible in relation to not bringing his claimed Syrian passport and
       birth certificate with him, at [52] and in relation to  his  claimed
       illiteracy      at [45] to [47].  The grounds were again speculative
       and amount to a disagreement with the weight placed by the judge  on
       the evidence before him.


   22. In addition to these matters and the weight the judge placed on  the
       language analysis, the judge also set out a number of other negative
       credibility findings including in relation to inconsistencies in the
       appellant's evidence as to why he allegedly did not  attend  school,
       the  appellant's  inability  to  name  a  single  Syrian  television
       programme and his lack of knowledge  in  relation  to  a  number  of
       Syrian-specific issues which the judge found, at [47]  'was  lacking
       when it came to the finer detail'.  The  judge  also  made  negative
       credibility findings in  respect  of  the  appellant's  evidence  in
       relation to his parents and that the appellant had not called  other
       witnesses who knew him, whose credibility had been accepted  by  the
       Home Office, to support his appeal.


   23. Therefore, even if there were any error in the judge's consideration
       of the issues set out in Grounds 1 and 2, and for the  avoidance  of
       doubt I am not satisfied that any  has  been  any  identified,  such
       would not be material given the  weight  of  the  remainder  of  the
       judge's carefully reasoned findings (including as  to  the  language
       report) which support his clear finding that the appellant  is  from
       Egypt and not Syria.


          Decision:

   24. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                            Dated: 11 January 2016




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson







