
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
aa/06623/2015

                                                    aa/06632/2015

                                                    aa/06636/2015

                                                    aa/06639/2015

                                                    aa/06648/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7th March 2016                         |On 22nd April 2016                |


                                    Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     MSS
                                     FRA
                                     FNS
                                     MRS
                                     FIS
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Richardson of Counsel, instructed by Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  is  Mr  MSS  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.  The appellants
    are mother and father and three children all citizens of Sri Lanka born
    on 2nd June 1971, 8th May 1974, 22nd April 2004, 2nd May 2006  and  7th
    January 2009.

 2. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ford who allowed the appeals on asylum grounds against a
    decision to remove the appellants to Sri Lanka in decision  promulgated
    on 25th September 2015.

 3. The appeals came before the  Tribunal  on  27th  July  2015  (and  that
    followed an adjournment of  the  appeal  on  13th  July  2015  for  the
    appellant to obtain an arrest warrant via  his  solicitors).   On  that
    date, the Secretary of State submitted that 27th July 2015 was a Monday
    and, in the event on the Friday  before  the  weekend  the  appellants'
    representatives produced a bundle of documents which included an arrest
    warrant.   The  appeals  were  consequently  adjourned  to   give   the
    respondent an opportunity to  carry  out  verification  checks  on  the
    document.  The adjournment was made with directions that the matter  be
    listed on the first open date after 4 weeks.   There  were  no  further
    directions.

 4. The appeal came before Judge Ford on 2nd  September  2015  and  in  the
    following decision at paragraph 34 the judge  recorded  that  the  case
    turned on credibility.  At  paragraph  41  the  judge  noted  that  the
    appellants had produced a warrant of arrest, two summonses and a letter
    from a lawyer.  The judge recorded that  the  respondent  had  had  the
    opportunity to conduct verification checks there being no  response  to
    those checks the judge found the documents were reliable.  Consequently
    at paragraph 42 the judge found that the principal appellant's  account
    was credible and the judge gave as one of the reasons for that  finding
    the reliability of the document.

 5. An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State seeking to rely on a document verification report which  appeared
    to have been received by the respondent on the afternoon of the day  of
    the hearing.  According to the report police in Colombo confirmed  that
    the warrant was not  genuine  and  the  grounds  sought  to  admit  the
    document in line with the principles laid  out  in  Ladd  and  Marshall
    [1954] 1WLR 1489.  In effect a mistake of fact amounting to an error of
    law might arise if the Ladd and Marshall principles were met.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nicholson who found  that  it
    may have an important influence on the case.

 7. At the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Walker  submitted  that  the  document
    verification report had not been received by  the  Secretary  of  State
    until 2nd September 2015 which was the date of  the  hearing.   It  was
    argued that had the document been before the  judge  his  decision  may
    have been different given the findings made.  The document verification
    report showed that the High Commission in Colombo had verified that the
    arrest warrant was not genuine.

 8. I enquired as to the nature of RALON, the body undertaking the document
    verification on behalf of the Secretary of State. RALON  was  the  Risk
    and Liaison Overseas Network which was part of the Home Office.  It was
    to this organisation that the arrest warrant was referred for checking.
     Mr Walker also submitted at  the  hearing,  with  the  consent  of  Mr
    Richardson, email correspondence showing that  the  Presenting  Officer
    Ian Proctor had sent an email to an official of the Home Office on 29th
    July 2015 requesting the document verification check.  A chasing  email
    was also attached dated 1st September 2015 the  same  official  of  the
    Home Office to RALON Colombo.  That official confirmed that the request
    had been sent on 30th July 2015.

 9. Mr Walker submitted MM (Unfairness E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC)
    and specifically referred to paragraph 25 which stated

         "The pivotal importance  of  the  error  of  fact  upon  which  the
         reasoning of the judge was demonstrably based helps to explain  why
         in appeals raising issues of international protection there is room
         for departure from an inflexible application of  common  law  rules
         and principles where this is necessary to redress unfairness."

10. As stated in MM

         "It is established that neither the rule in Al-Mehdawi v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [1990] 1 AC 876 (that a procedural
         failure caused by an appellant's own representative did not lead to
         an appeal being in breach of the rules of natural  justice)  nor  a
         failure to meet the first  of  the  Ladd  and  Marshall  principles
         applies with full vigour in asylum and human rights appeals  -  see
         SP (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  EWCA
         Civ 13.  The decision of the Court of Appeal in E&R v Secretary  of
         State points towards a broader approach in  which  the  common  law
         right to a fair hearing predominates.  We consider that this appeal
         must succeed accordingly."

11. Mr Richardson submitted at the hearing that the Home Office  could  not
    in any sense be said to have acted with reasonable diligence and indeed
    he also submitted that the case law referred to by President  McCloskey
    in MM related to appellants and not the Secretary of State.

12. I am not so persuaded that the Home  Office  failed  to  act  with  due
    diligence, the first principle in relation to  Ladd  and  Marshall,  in
    this matter.  It is clear that the Home Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Proctor made efforts to contact the official  of  the  Home  Office  to
    arrange for a verification check on 29th July 2015  shortly  after  the
    hearing date.  He  cannot  be  said  to  have  delayed.   I  am  rather
    surprised that the judge knowing that a document check was  due  to  be
    organised only gave five weeks for that  check  but  as  Mr  Richardson
    pointed out the Home Office did not apply  for  a  further  adjournment
    when the hearing was resumed on 2nd September 2015.  It is not the case
    however that the Home Office failed to attempt to verify until the  day
    of the hearing.  Even if the Home Office did not  act  with  reasonable
    diligence the genuineness of the documentation goes to the  very  heart
    of this determination and this is characterised by paragraph 41 of  the
    decision which states

         "The Appellant has produced  documents  including  a  warrant,  two
         summonses and a letter from a lawyer representing him in Sri  Lanka
         quoted above.  I have to take all of the evidence into account  and
         having done so,  I  find  those  documents  to  be  reliable.   The
         Respondent had the opportunity to conduct verification  checks  but
         did not do so within the 28 days  allowed.   I  am  satisfied  that
         those documents are reliable."

13. As pointed out by Mr Walker, the letter from the lawyer produced by the
    appellant also refers to the arrest warrants and  the  authenticity  of
    the letter is also called into question by  the  document  verification
    check.  The second principle of the Ladd  and  Marshall  principles  is
    that the new evidence must be such that if given it would probably have
    an important influence on the result of the case (though it need not be
    decisive).  I find that this criteria is met as is the  third  criteria
    in Ladd and Marshall  in that the new evidence was apparently  credible
    although it need not be incontrovertible.

14. Mr Richardson submitted that further to SD (Treatment of  post  hearing
    evidence) Russia [2008] UKAIT 00037 the Home Office Presenting  Officer
    should have applied to have the matter reconvened or obtain the written
    submissions of the other side in relation to the matters  including  in
    the late submission.  He maintains that this decision was not  in  fact
    promulgated until 25th September 2015.

15. That the decision, however, was not promulgated  until  25th  September
    2015 does not mean that it was not  written  and  decided  before  that
    date.  Nonetheless, I take guidance from E v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2004] EWCA Civ 49 which acknowledges that a mistake of
    fact giving rise to unfairness is  a  separate  head  of  challenge  in
    appeal on a point of law.

16. At paragraph 66 in E v SSHD, Lord Justice Carnwath sets out

         "In our view, the time has now come to accept  that  a  mistake  of
         fact giving rise to unfairness is a separate head of  challenge  in
         an appeal on a point of law, at least in those  statutory  contexts
         where the parties share an interest in co-operating to achieve  the
         correct result.  Asylum law is undoubtedly such an  area.   Without
         seeking to lay down a precise code, the ordinary requirements for a
         finding of unfairness are apparent from the above analysis of CICB.
          First, there must have been a mistake  as  to  an  existing  fact,
         including a mistake  as  to  the  availability  of  evidence  on  a
         particular matter.  Secondly, the fact or evidence must  have  been
         "established",  in  the  sense  that  it  was   uncontentious   and
         objectively verifiable.  Thirdly, the appellant (or  his  advisers)
         must not have been responsible  for  the  mistake.   Fourthly,  the
         mistake must have played a material (not necessarily decisive) part
         in the Tribunal's reasoning."

17. I note that at paragraph 91 it is stated  that  the  admission  of  new
    evidence is subject to Ladd and Marshall principles but  those  may  be
    departed from in  exceptional  circumstances  where  the  interests  of
    justice require.

18. First I am not persuaded that the Secretary of State did not  act  with
    reasonable diligence.  The documents were sprung upon the  Tribunal  on
    27th July and the Presenting Officer acted with diligence in requesting
    document verification  checks  shortly  after  the  hearing.   Had  the
    failure to respond occurred over a matter of weeks the diligence of the
    Home Office may be called into question but that was not the case here.
     The documents provided by the appellant go, as I  have  said,  to  the
    heart of this determination and in  these  particular  circumstances  I
    consider even if there were no  reasonable  diligence,  which  I  think
    there was.   Paragraph 94 of E v SSHD confirms that practical realities
    should not be ignored and the evidence throws considerable doubt on the
    Tribunal's understanding of the credibility of the lead  appellant  and
    the documentation verification check provided not  only,  in  my  view,
    complies with the Ladd and Marshall test but also should be  considered
    to have exceptional treatment in the interests of justice.

Notice of Decision

19. I therefore find there is an error of law which  is  material  and  the
    matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  hearing
    bearing in mind the nature and extent of the findings to be made.

20. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 20th April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





