
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06066/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 November 2014                          |On 27 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                  JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     K M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F MacCrae, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Dias
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Botswana,  appeals  with  permission
    against  the  determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Hillis
    promulgated on 4  October  2014,  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent made on 6 August 2014 to  refuse  her  claim
    for asylum and to remove her to Botswana.

 2. The appellant's case is that she is a lesbian and, as  a  result  faces
    persecution on return to Botswana. She has  two  children  born  on  23
    November 2010 and 5 October 2012. The father of the older  child  is  a
    citizen of Botswana. It is claimed the appellant  had  a  relationship.
    She met that man via Facebook and came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor between 5 February 2012 and  June  2012.  She  became  pregnant
    during that stay but returned to Botswana.

 3. The appellant returned to the United Kingdom on 5 June  2013  with  her
    children, and claimed asylum on 19 October 2013.

 4. The respondent accepted the appellant's identity, but  did  not  accept
    that she is a lesbian or that she had, as a  result,  come  to  adverse
    attention.  The  respondent  concluded  also  that  to  return  her  to
    Botswana would not be in breach of her rights under  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, and concluded that she had not established a family life in
    this country for the purposes of appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.
    In doing so, she found that the appellant had not established a  family
    life in the UK with the claimed father of the second child, nor that he
    was in fact the father of the child.

 5. The respondent also considered, having had regard  to  her  duty  under
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,  that
    while the children's bests interests were a primary consideration, that
    is not the sole consideration and that the family could be  removed  to
    Botswana together; that there were no exceptional circumstances,   such
    that consideration of a grant of leave outside the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules was warranted. While decisions were made on 8  August
    2014 to remove the two children as well as their mother, the Respondent
    considered that as no human rights claim had been made  in  respect  of
    either, that they did not have a right of appeal within country.   That
    decision was upheld by the First-tier Tribunal who concluded  that  the
    appeals were therefore not valid for reasons given in decisions  of  27
    August 2014.  There was no challenge to those decisions.

 6. At the hearing, Judge Hillis heard evidence from  the  appellant.   She
    also heard submissions from Mr T Hussain of Counsel and Mr Lees, a Home
    Office Presenting Officer.  He also had before him bundles prepared  by
    both parties.

 7. Judge Hillis found:-

    i)   The appellant was not a credible witness in the  core  aspects  of
         her applications [24];

    ii)  The appellant was not at risk on return to Botswana [25]; and

    iii) As it is to be accepted that the asylum and  human  rights  claims
         stand or fall together in the circumstances of  the  appeal,  there
         was no evidence before him to disagree with that submission made by
         both representatives [26].

   8. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

    i)   It was incumbent on Judge Hillis pursuant to section 55 of the  UK
         Borders Act 2009 to undertake an evaluation of the bests  interests
         of the children; and,

    ii)  He had not done so, which constitutes an error of law.

   9. I note in passing that there is no challenge to the finding  that  the
      appellant was not credible witness or to the dismissal of  her  appeal
      on asylum grounds.

  10. On 16 October 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge Gibb  granted  permission
      stating:-

          "The grounds are arguable.  The appellant's representatives should
         be prepared to clarify what evidence and/or submissions made in the
         correlation to the best interests of the children, and  whether  it
         is accepted  that  there  was  a  joint  agreed  position  by  both
         representatives that the asylum and human rights  claims  stood  or
         fell together ([26] of the determination). There is nothing in  the
         determination on the subject of whether the younger child may be  a
         British citizen (see [22]), which would  be  a  highly  significant
         matter, as would the contact, if any, with his father (if paternity
         is established).  Subject to the concern that the  judge  may  have
         been unclear on the agreed position in not considering the children
         the matter merits further the consideration.

  11. Despite these observations, there  has  been  no  additional  material
      submitted by the appellant's representatives.  I accept that Ms MacRae
      had been instructed only shortly before the hearing,  and  I  make  no
      criticism of her.  She, quite correctly, sought the assistance  of  Mr
      Hussain who had previously represented  the  appellant  but  had  been
      unable to obtain any information of assistance such as his note of the
      hearing. Mr Mangion was unable to provide any copy of Mr Lees' note of
      the hearing. There was thus only the record  of  proceedings  kept  by
      Judge Hillis as evidence of what occurred at  the  hearing.  I  showed
      this to both representatives

  12. It is recorded in his manuscript record by Judge Hillis that  Mr  Lees
      for the Home Office had submitted that Article  8  did  not  apply  as
      there was no family or private life in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
      requirements of Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE were  not  met.   The
      record of the submissions made by Mr Hussain contains no reference  to
      the best interests of the children. What is recorded is as follows:

         "HR [Human Rights] stand or fall."

  13. Ms MacRae quite properly and candidly admitted that in light  of  that
      submission, she was in some difficulty, although she submitted that it
      was nonetheless a duty on a tribunal to consider the best interests of
      children.  In the  context  of  this  appeal,  this  would  have  been
      pursuant to any assessment pursuant to Article 8.

  14. It has to be borne in mind that in this case the  Respondent  had  set
      out, albeit briefly, in the refusal letter her assessment of the  best
      needs of the children.  There was no express  reference  to  the  best
      interests of the children in the grounds of appeal nor  is  there  any
      indication that this matter was raised in any  skeleton  argument  put
      before Judge Hillis; there is no indication that any such document was
      put before him.  Further, as noted above, no submissions were made  on
      this issue.  I considered that Judge Hillis was entitled  to  conclude
      in light of the above and that there was no challenge to the Secretary
      of State's analysis of the best interests of  the  children  and  that
      issues regarding Article 8 were simply not being  raised  or  pursued.
      In the circumstances, Judge Hillis did not err in law as it is not  an
      error of law for a judge not to make findings of an  issue  which  not
      only was not raised before him but had in effect been conceded.

  15. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the determination of Judge Hillis
      involved the making of an error of law and I uphold it.

  16. Whilst I note that there are indications that the younger  child  may,
      if what is said is true, be a  British  citizen,  but  as  yet  to  be
      established.  If he is a British citizen then it would be open to  the
      Appellant to make a fresh application for a leave to  remain  on  that
      basis including an application pursuant to Regulation 15A(2a)  of  the
      Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

Summary of Conclusions

 1. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis did  not  involve
    the making of an error and I uphold it.



Signed                              Date:  26 November 2014
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

