
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06443/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15 September 2015                 |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                              MAHDI HASANZADEH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Smith, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on 21 March 1977.   He  sought
    asylum in the UK, saying that following a romantic  mishap  he  was  at
    risk from  the  Iranian  Revolutionary  Guard  Corps.   The  respondent
    rejected his claim.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. A few days before his appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  to  be
    heard, the appellant produced a statement  that  he  had  converted  to
    Christianity since coming to the UK, and so would be at risk on return.

 3. In his determination  promulgated  on  3  February  2015  Judge  Dennis
    declined to deal with the matter, and said at paragraph 23, "The appeal
    is allowed insofar as it is remitted back to the respondent to consider
    and reach a decision on the  appellant's  new  and  distinct  basis  of
    claim".

 4. In his grounds of appeal to the UT the appellant says  that  the  judge
    erred in law by failing to decide his case.

 5. In a written  response  to  the  grant  of  permission  the  respondent
    concedes that there has been material error of law, because it was  the
    function of the judge to determine the appeal in respect of all matters
    relied upon.

 6. Mr Mullen suggested  that  there  were  comments  by  the  judge  which
    amounted to findings which ought to be preserved, and that the remittal
    should be to the same judge.  Ms Smith submitted that there  should  be
    an entirely fresh hearing before another judge.  I think  that  is  the
    safer course.

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   There  are
    no findings to preserve.  Under  s.12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the FtT.  The  member(s)  of  the  FtT  chosen  to
    reconsider the case are not to include Judge Dennis.

 8. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           15 September 2015
