

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06868/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2014                               |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                       ABDULLAH ADULRAHMAN DABWAN SAIF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 17 December 2013, Upper Tribunal Judge Coker granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal against the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ferguson that was promulgated on 31 October 2013.

 2. Judge Ferguson dismissed the appellant's appeal against the immigration
    decisions of 5 July 2013 refusing to vary his leave and to  remove  him
    from the UK by way of directions under s.47 of the Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.  Judge Ferguson decided  that  the  appellant
    was not a refugee or otherwise in need of international protection.

 3. The grounds of appeal argue the determination was not legally sound  on
    three fronts.  First, the judge had made  his  assessment  of  risk  on
    return by taking the case at its highest.  This approach was flawed for
    two reasons.    At  its  highest  the  case  clearly  showed  that  the
    appellant had a well founded fear of persecution in the  Yemen  because
    he faced real threats to his life and freedoms from a  terrorist  group
    from which he had no effective protection from the  state  authorities.
    In the alternative, by taking the case at its highest the judge  failed
    to make findings on relevant issues.  The second and third  grounds  of
    appeal in essence developed these two reasons.

 4. After discussing the issues with Mr Vokes and Mr Smart, although  I  am
    satisfied that the first ground is not made out,  I  am  satisfied  the
    second is well made and insofar as the third ground  is  on  a  similar
    footing it too must succeed.  My reasons are as follow.

 5. The first ground fails because it is based on a misreading of the text.
     At no point does Judge Ferguson say that he is taking the  appellant's
    case at its highest.  At two points (paragraphs 27 and 32) he refers to
    taking the evidence at its highest.   In those two paragraphs the judge
    is making findings of fact and therefore this expression in context  is
    merely his description of the weight he attached to the evidence.

 6. The second and third grounds do not fall  away  even  though  they  are
    linked  to  this  misreading  because,  as  Mr   Vokes   developed   in
    submissions, there are good reasons to find that Judge Ferguson  failed
    to have proper regard to all the evidence and thereby  failed  to  make
    findings of fact that would have an impact on his assessment of risk on
    return.

 7. In paragraphs 30 and 32,  Judge  Ferguson  refers  to  the  appellant's
    father and brothers remaining in the Yemen,  albeit  in  hiding.   This
    fails to have regard to the appellant's most recent statement in  which
    he describes how one of his two remaining brothers had tried to flee to
    Saudi Arabia because of the ongoing threats in  Yemen.   The  appellant
    had confirmed that he was one of four brothers.   He  and  one  brother
    were in the UK.  At the time of application and interview his other two
    brothers were in Yemen but before the hearing one of those had fled.

 8. In the same paragraphs the  judge  relies  on  no  harm  befalling  the
    appellant's mother and sister who continued to  reside  in  the  family
    home as being a reason to find that the appellant had not established a
    well founded fear of persecution.  It is not clear on  what  basis  the
    judge drew this conclusion.

 9. The appellant admitted that his  mother  and  sister  remained  in  the
    family home and that they had  not  attracted  any  adverse  attention.
    However, his explanation for his mother and sister not being at risk is
    recorded in paragraph 8 of the determination.  The appellant  explained
    that killing women brought shame on the killer.   Therefore,  the  fact
    that the appellant's mother and sister had not faced  harm  was  not  a
    basis from which to infer that the threats to the appellant's life  and
    freedoms might be reduced.  The judge does not explain on what basis he
    could draw from this evidence that the risks facing the appellant  were
    reduced.

10. In paragraph 31 Judge Ferguson examined  whether  the  appellant  could
    obtain adequate protection against Al Qaeda.  This fails to have regard
    to the appellant's evidence which is supported by the expert report  to
    the extent that those seeking to harm the appellant and his father  and
    brothers are unlikely to emanate from Al  Qaeda.   The  judge  recorded
    this evidence in  paragraph  21  and  noted  the  evidence  that  those
    threatening the appellant were likely to be one of  the  militias  that
    had grown out of the security vacuum. At no point does  Judge  Ferguson
    explain why he  considered  the  protection  issue  only  in  terms  of
    protection from Al Qaeda or  why  he  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    evidence he recorded when assessing risk on return.

11. But of even greater significance than these three points  is  the  fact
    that  although  the  Secretary  of  State  challenged  the  appellant's
    credibility Judge Ferguson makes no finding as to whether he found  the
    appellant to be generally credible or whether there were parts  of  his
    account he accepted and parts he did not find reliable.  This of course
    further undermines the failure of the judge to  make  relevant  factual
    findings on the specific points already discussed.

12. Mr Smart accepted  that  the  determination  contained  a  legal  error
    because of these matters but argued that the outcome would nevertheless
    have been the same.  He argued that the determination  when  looked  at
    overall showed that the judge was sufficiently aware of the appellants'
    case so as to assess the risks he faced on return.

13. I do not share Mr Smart's view.  The  duty  on  the  Tribunal  to  make
    relevant findings of fact in order to carry out a  thorough  assessment
    of risk on return is well established.  The  points  identified  by  Mr
    Vokes clearly go to the assessment of risk of return and therefore  the
    failure to make findings on those points undermines  the  determination
    in its entirety.

14. For these reasons I find that the determination must be set aside.

15. The parties recommended that if I were to set aside  the  determination
    that the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I find this is
    a situation where that is the appropriate course because there  has  as
    yet been no satisfactory judicial assessment of the  appellant's  case.
    Such an assessment should be carried out in the First-tier Tribunal  to
    ensure that appeal rights are preserved.

Decision

The determination promulgated on 31 October 2013  contains  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

The appeal against the immigration decisions of 5 July 2013 is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be heard by any judge other than Judge Ferguson.


                               Signed                     Date


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
