
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06412/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2015                        |On 1st October 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                              bahattin gogremis
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins of Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a male Turkish citizen  born  27th  October  1990  who
    appeals against a decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Charlton-
    Brown promulgated on 16th December 2014.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 24th September 2010  and
    subsequently made an asylum and human rights claim which was refused on
    13th October 2010.

 3. The Appellant claimed that he had a well-founded fear of persecution if
    returned to Turkey as he is a Kurd who is supporter of the DTP and  BDP
    political parties.  He claimed to have been detained and ill-treated on
    three occasions, in November  2008,  September  2009,  and  July/August
    2010.  The Appellant claimed that he is a draft evader who  would  come
    to the attention of the Turkish authorities if returned, and that he is
    suspected of involvement with the PKK.

 4. The application was refused and the reasons given for that refusal were
    set out in a letter dated 13th October  2010.   In  brief  summary  the
    Respondent did not accept  the  Appellant's  claim  to  be  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, did not accept that he had been engaged  in  politics  which
    opposed the Turkish Government, and it was not  accepted  that  he  had
    been arrested, detained and ill-treated  as  claimed.   The  Respondent
    accepted that the Appellant was at an age when he would be required  to
    complete military service, and that he may be subject  to  imprisonment
    if returned to Turkey, because he had evaded military service,  but  it
    was not accepted that this amounted to persecution.

 5. The Appellant's appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Jackson on 19th November 2013 and  dismissed  on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

 6. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
    relation to the findings made by Judge Jackson on Article 8 of the 1950
    European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 7. The appeal was heard by Upper Tribunal Judge Poole on 18th  March  2014
    and allowed to the extent that the appeal was remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for fresh consideration  of  the  Appellant's  Article  8
    claim.  There had been no appeal to the Upper Tribunal in  relation  to
    asylum, humanitarian protection, or any  other  Articles  of  the  1950
    Convention.  Judge Poole directed  that  the  findings  made  by  Judge
    Jackson in relation to risk on return be preserved, as was the  finding
    that the Appellant is a draft evader and potentially faces imprisonment
    upon return to Turkey.

 8. The appeal was heard by Judge  Charlton-Brown  on  1st  December  2014.
    Evidence was given by the Appellant and his  wife,  and  this  evidence
    included the fact that the couple had  a  British  child  born  in  the
    United Kingdom on 26th April 2014.  Judge Charlton-Brown found that the
    removal of the Appellant to Turkey would not  be  disproportionate  and
    would not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 9. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending in summary that the judge had erred by seeking to rely  upon
    findings and analysis made by Judge Jackson in relation to  Article  8,
    when that aspect of his decision  had  been  set  aside  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

10. It was further submitted that the judge had  erred  by  not  adequately
    considering the essential question in  the  appeal,  which  related  to
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    (the 2002 Act) whether it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's
    British child to leave the United Kingdom.  It  was  further  contended
    that the judge had not adequately  addressed  the  point  that  if  the
    Appellant was removed from the United Kingdom  he  would  be  separated
    from his British wife and child because of the preserved  finding  that
    the Appellant faced imprisonment on return to Turkey for draft evasion,
    and thereafter would have to undertake military service.

11. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Shimmin on 12th January 2015.

Error of Law

12. The appeal came before me on 24th July 2015.  After hearing submissions
    from both parties I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    and set out below my reasons for so doing;

    18.  In my view the judge erred in  law  in  making  reference  to  the
         findings made by Judge Jackson, in paragraphs 22, 23, 24 and 30  of
         her decision.  The decision of Judge Jackson, so far as it  related
         to Article 8, had  been  set  aside  by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  who
         specifically found that Judge Jackson had materially erred  in  his
         consideration of Article 8.  The task of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         thereafter was to consider afresh the appeal in relation to Article
         8.
    19.  I conclude that the  judge  erred  by  placing  some  reliance  on
         findings made by Judge Jackson in relation to Article  8,  and  did
         not carry out the task of considering Article 8 de novo.
    20.  One of the core issues in the appeal related to  the  relationship
         of the Appellant with his British child.  It is accepted  that  the
         Appellant  has  a  British  wife  and  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with  his  child.   I  do  not  find  that  the  judge
         adequately  considered  the  provisions  contained  within  section
         117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  There should have  been  a  detailed  and
         comprehensive analysis so that findings could be made as to whether
         it would be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  contain
         such an analysis, and there are no adequate conclusions or findings
         on this, which is a material issue.
    21.  The judge did not make findings on the reasonableness of the child
         leaving the United  Kingdom,  taking  into  account  the  preserved
         findings from the previous decision, that the  Appellant  would  be
         separated from his family if removed to Turkey, by  reason  of  him
         being likely to  receive  a  sentence  of  imprisonment  for  draft
         evasion, and thereafter having to undertake military service.
    22.  As I conclude the judge erred in law, the decision of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal is set aside.

13. Having set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  having
    considered paragraph 7 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    dated 25th September 2012, I decided that it was  appropriate  for  the
    decision to be re-made by the Upper Tribunal at a resumed hearing.



The Resumed Hearing

Preliminary Issues

14. I received from Mr Collins a skeleton  argument  dated  14th  September
    2015,  a  copy  of  the  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction   Family
    Migration; Appendix FM section 1.OB April 2015 (the IDI), together with
    an extract from the Country of Origin Information  Report  on  Military
    Service in Turkey.  I received from Miss Brocklesby-Weller YM  (Uganda)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

15. I was made aware that the representatives had  different  views  as  to
    whether the decision should be re-made, taking into account Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules, which Miss Brocklesby-Weller submitted  would
    be appropriate, or whether there should be no consideration of Appendix
    FM, and the decision should be re-made  with  reference  to  Article  8
    outside the rules, taking into account section 117B of  the  2002  Act,
    which Mr Collins submitted was appropriate.

16. In addition I was referred  to  the  IDI  which  Mr  Collins  submitted
    indicated at 11.2.3 that it would be unreasonable in  the  majority  of
    circumstances, to expect a British child to leave the UK.  I was  asked
    whether it may be appropriate for the decision to be sent  back  to  be
    considered again by the Respondent in the light of the latest IDI.

17. Having reflected upon the submissions I indicated that it was not in my
    view appropriate to send the decision back to the Secretary  of  State,
    and the decision would be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  I would  hear
    submissions from both representatives as  to  whether  or  not  it  was
    appropriate to consider Appendix FM and make a decision on that in  due
    course.

18. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

Evidence

19. I firstly heard evidence from the Appellant.  He was asked  in  English
    to confirm his proficiency in that language, and he said that he  could
    speak and understand some English although "not really good".

20. Thereafter the Appellant gave his evidence with the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter in Turkish.  There was no difficulty in communication.

21. The Appellant  was  questioned  by  both  representatives  and  I  have
    recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it
    is not necessary to reiterate them in full here.  In very brief summary
    the Appellant stated that he and his wife cared for  and  looked  after
    their son and if he was removed to Turkey, his wife would remain in the
    United Kingdom.  He confirmed that his parents live in Turkey, and that
    his wife and son had visited Turkey in 2014, but if he was removed from
    the United Kingdom, his wife and son would not join him.

22. I then heard evidence from the Appellant's wife  Hamide  Cokgezici  who
    adopted her witness statement dated 14th August  2013.   All  questions
    and answers have been recorded in my Record of Proceedings and will not
    be reiterated in full here.  In brief summary Mrs  Cokgezici  confirmed
    that she and the Appellant had a traditional marriage  on  12th  August
    2012 and a formal marriage recognised in the UK on 18th February  2013.
    Both these ceremonies took place in this country.

23. Mrs Cokgezici was born in Turkey and came to the United Kingdom in 1999
    when she was 7 years of age as her father's dependant.   She  confirmed
    that she had been naturalised as a British citizen and that she and the
    Appellant have a son who is British, and who was born in  this  country
    on 26th April 2014.

Submissions

24. Miss Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the one issue to be  decided  was
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant's British son to
    leave the United Kingdom.  There was no dispute as to the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his son.  It was submitted that  Appendix  FM
    applied and Miss Brocklesby-Weller  relied  upon  paragraph  39  of  YM
    (Uganda) in support of that submission.

25. I was told that it was accepted that the  suitability  and  eligibility
    requirements of Appendix FM were satisfied so that it  was  appropriate
    to consider EX.1(a).  It was understood, and Mr Collins confirmed, that
    no reliance was placed upon EX.1(b) which  relates  to  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a partner.

26. I was asked to find that British nationality alone did not mean that it
    was not reasonable to expect a child to leave the  United  Kingdom.   I
    was reminded that nationality is not  a  trump  card  although  it  was
    accepted that it is a weighty matter.

27. I was asked to take into account the very young age of the  Appellant's
    son, and that if he returned to  Turkey  he  would  have  close  family
    members there, and in the circumstances of this case, it would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom.  In relation to
    the point that the Appellant would have to undertake  military  service
    and serve a sentence of imprisonment, I was asked to find that this was
    as a result of him failing to obey Turkish law.

28. If Article 8 was  considered  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  it  was
    accepted that the same question would be considered, with reference  to
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act but I must also take into  account  the
    other provisions of section 117B, such as the fact that maintenance  of
    immigration controls is in the public interest, and  the  Appellant  is
    not financially independent.

29. I then heard submissions from Mr Collins who relied upon  his  skeleton
    argument.  It was confirmed  this  appeal  was  not  being  pursued  on
    Zambrano principles, and that it was accepted  that  if  the  Appellant
    left this country, his son would not be forced to leave,  as  he  could
    remain with his mother.

30. Mr Collins submitted that YM (Uganda) related to deportation which  was
    not the case in this appeal.  Mr Collins  submitted  that  because  the
    Respondent's decision had been made as long ago as 13th  October  2010,
    prior to the introduction of Appendix FM into the Immigration Rules, it
    was appropriate to consider this  case  with  reference  to  Article  8
    outside the rules.  It was however accepted  that  if  the  appeal  was
    considered under EX.1(a) or Article 8 and  section  117B(6),  the  same
    question had to be considered, whether it was reasonable to expect  the
    child to leave the UK.

31. Mr Collins confirmed that if  EX.1  was  considered,  no  reliance  was
    placed  upon  EX.1(b)  which  relates  to  a  genuine  and   subsisting
    relationship with a partner, and would involve  showing  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life  with  that  partner  continuing  outside  the
    United Kingdom.

32. Mr Collins submitted that the IDI at 11.2.3 confirmed that generally if
    a parent or primary carer would be required  to  return  to  a  country
    outside the EU, it would be unreasonable to expect  a  British  citizen
    child to leave the EU with that parent or carer, unless the  parent  or
    carer was involved in  criminality  or  had  a  very  poor  immigration
    history, neither of which exceptions applied in this case.

33. Mr Collins also relied upon paragraph 5 of the head note to Sanade  and
    Others [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) stating that it would not be  reasonable
    to require a British child or spouse to relocate outside  the  European
    Union.

34. I was asked to  allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to expect the  Appellant's  British  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

35. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

36. I have taken into account all the evidence both  oral  and  documentary
    placed before me, and taken into account the submissions made  by  both
    representatives.

37. I find that the Appellant is a Turkish citizen who entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 24th September 2010.   I  accept  that  he  entered  into  a
    traditional marriage with his wife on 12th August 2012,  and  a  formal
    marriage ceremony took place on 18th February 2013.  The couple have  a
    British son born on 26th April 2014.

38. I accept the Appellant's wife was born in Turkey but came to the United
    Kingdom in 1999 aged 7 and that she is a naturalised British citizen.

39. The findings made by the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant is  not
    entitled to a grant of asylum, or humanitarian protection, and that his
    removal  would  not  breach  Articles  2  and  3  are  preserved.   The
    Appellant's account in relation to the events in Turkey,  and  risk  on
    return were not accepted by the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Appellant
    was not found to be a credible witness on those issues.

40. Findings made by Judge Jackson at paragraphs 78 and 91 of his  decision
    are preserved in that the Appellant would be recorded in  Turkey  as  a
    draft evader and  if  returned  to  Turkey  is  facing  a  sentence  of
    imprisonment followed by compulsory military  service.   Judge  Jackson
    found that whether or not the Appellant's wife relocated to Turkey, the
    relationship was likely to be one with little face to face contact  for
    several years.

41. I find that the Appellant has close family members in Turkey  including
    his parents, and that his wife also has family members in  Turkey,  and
    that she has visited Turkey, the last time being with her son in 2014.

42. I have  to  decide  whether  this  appeal  should  be  considered  with
    reference  to  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM,  or  whether  this   should   be
    disregarded, and the appeal should be decided with reference to Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Whichever course is  taken,  I  agree
    with the representatives, that the question to be decided is the  same,
    and that is whether it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave
    the United Kingdom.

43. In my view  it  is  appropriate  to  consider  Appendix  FM,  and  Miss
    Brocklesby-Weller was correct to refer to paragraph 39 of  YM  (Uganda)
    which in summary confirms that the "new" Immigration Rules  are  to  be
    applied even if the original decision was  made  by  the  Secretary  of
    State prior to the introduction of those rules.

44. As it is common ground that no reliance is placed upon  EX.1(b)  I  set
    out below EX.1(a):

    EX.1. This paragraph applies if
    (a)(i)    the  applicant  has  a  genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with a child who -
         (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years
             when the applicant was first granted leave on the  basis  that
             this paragraph applied;
         (bb) is in the UK;
         (cc) is a British citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously  for
             at  least  seven  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of
             application; and
       (ii)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK;

45. It is accepted on behalf of the Respondent that  the  Appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son, and that his
    son is in the UK, and is a British citizen.  In assessing the issue  of
    reasonableness I take into account that the child is  very  young  with
    Turkish relatives and that British nationality is not a "trump card".

46. I have considered ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4 which gives  guidance  on
    the best interests of children.  I note paragraph 41  in  which  it  is
    stated, inter alia,

    The fact of British citizenship does not trump everything else.  But it
    will hardly ever be less than a very  significant  and  weighty  factor
    against moving children who have that status to another country with  a
    parent who has no right to remain here, especially if the fact of doing
    this is that they would inevitably lose those benefits  and  advantages
    for the rest of their childhood.

47. I have also taken into account the principles in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74
    and in particular paragraph 12 which I set out below in part;

    The  benefits  of  British  citizenship  are  an  important  factor  in
    assessing whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  a  child  with  such
    citizenship to live in another country.  Moreover in H  (H)  Lord  Kerr
    explained (at paragraph 145) that what he was seeking to say  was  that
    no factor should be given greater weight than the interests of a child.

48. I also take into account the principles in Sanade and  Others  and  set
    out below paragraph 95;

    We shall take this helpful submission into account when we consider the
    application of Article 8 to each Appellant's case.  We agree  with  it.
    This means that where the child or indeed the  remaining  spouse  is  a
    British citizen and therefore a citizen of the European  Union,  it  is
    not possible to require them to relocate outside of the European  Union
    or to submit that it would be reasonable for them to do so.   The  case
    serves to emphasise the importance of nationality already identified in
    the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH  (Tanzania).   If  interference
    with the family life is to be justified, it can only be  on  the  basis
    that  the  conduct  of  the  person  to  be  removed  gives   rise   to
    considerations of such weight as to justify separation.

49. This is not a case where it is suggested that the British  child  would
    be forced to leave the United Kingdom.  If the Appellant  was  removed,
    it would be possible for  his  son  to  remain  with  his  mother,  the
    Appellant's wife.  But that is not the issue, as  the  question  to  be
    decided is whether it is reasonable to expect the child to  leave  this
    country.

50. I have considered the Respondent's IDI and set out below  the  guidance
    contained therein at 11.2.3;

    Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent  or
    primary carer to return to a country outside  the  EU,  the  case  must
    always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable to expect
    a British citizen child to leave the EU with  that  parent  or  primary
    carer.
    In such cases it will usually be appropriate  to  grant  leave  to  the
    parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain  in  the  UK  with  a
    child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship.

51. There are two exceptions to the above guidance,  where  the  parent  or
    primary carer has  been  involved  in  criminality  falling  below  the
    thresholds set out in paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules, or has  a
    very poor immigration  history  such  as  repeatedly  and  deliberately
    breaching the Immigration Rules.  It was not  suggested,  and  I  find,
    that the Appellant does not fall within these two exceptions.

52. Having applied the facts of this case as I find them, to the  case  law
    referred to above, and the guidance in the  IDI,  I  conclude  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the British citizen  child  to  leave
    the UK, as this would mean that he would potentially lose the  benefits
    and advantages of British citizenship for the rest  of  his  childhood.
    If he was removed to Turkey, because the preserved  findings  that  the
    Appellant would serve a sentence of imprisonment, and have to undertake
    military service, his British child would in  any  event  be  separated
    from his father for a period of time.

53. I therefore conclude that this appeal succeeds  under  the  Immigration
    Rules with reference to EX.1 of Appendix FM.

54. If I was wrong to consider EX.1, my decision would have been  the  same
    had  I  considered  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  with
    reference to section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act.   The  question  to  be
    considered and answered is the same question in section 117B(6)  as  in
    EX.1(a)(ii).  If I considered Article 8 outside the rules I would  have
    had to consider the other  provisions  of  section  117B  such  as  the
    maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  being  in  the  public
    interest, and that it is in the public interest that an individual  can
    speak English and is financially independent.  In this case it has  not
    been  proved  that  the  Appellant  is  financially  independent,   but
    notwithstanding that, I would have reached the same conclusion, that it
    would not be reasonable to expect the Appellant's child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds in relation to Articles  2  and
3.

I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules with reference to EX.1(a)  of
Appendix FM.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made no anonymity direction.  Mr  Collins  confirmed
that there was no application for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes  no
anonymity order.


Signed                              Date: 18th September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 18th September 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

