
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06494/2013
     AA/06498/2013
     AA/06501/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14 January 2014                              |On 24 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            jh (FIRST appellant)
                           fnh (SECOND appellant)
                            hh (THIRD appellant)
                      (anonymity direction maintained)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Schwenk, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  The first appellant  is  the
    husband of the second appellant and the first and second appellants are
    the parents of the third appellant.  They are subject to  an  anonymity
    direction in these proceedings.  I shall refer to the  first  appellant
    as "the appellant".  By a decision dated 21 June 2013,  the  respondent
    refused the appellants' applications to vary their leave to remain  and
    issued directions requiring them to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    appellants appealed against that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Saffer) which, in a determination  which  is  dated  10  October
    2013,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Saffer accepted the appellant's account of  past  events  in  Sri
    Lanka.  He found that the appellant had been  ill-treated  by  the  Sri
    Lankan  authorities  in  2008.   The  judge  found  that  the  injuries
    identified by the medical expert, Dr Lord, "were caused in  the  manner
    and at the time claimed by the first appellant."  [38].  The judge also
    found that the Sri Lankan authorities visited the appellant's  father's
    home in 2008 and again in 2012.  The judge recorded at  [43],  "Despite
    my accepting that it is reasonably likely the appellants have  told  me
    the truth regarding the past, they have failed to established that they
    are currently refugees."  The judge had regard to the country  guidance
    of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    319 (IAC). Country guidance was summarised by the Tribunal at [356]  as
    follows:

    Having considered and reviewed all the evidence, including  the  latest
    UNHCR guidance, we consider that the change in the GOSL's  approach  is
    so significant that it is preferable to reframe the risk  analysis  for
    the present political situation in Sri Lanka.  We  give  the  following
    country guidance:

      (1) This determination replaces all existing country guidance  on  Sri
      Lanka.

      (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed since
      the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE in Sri  Lanka  itself  is  a
      spent force and there have been no terrorist incidents since  the  end
      of the civil war.

      (3) The government's present objective is to identify Tamil  activists
      in  the  diaspora  who  are  working  for  Tamil  separatism  and   to
      destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment  6(1)
      to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983, which prohibits the 'violation
      of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka. Its  focus  is  on  preventing
      both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any  similar  Tamil  separatist
      organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

      (4) If a person is detained by the Sri Lankan security services  there
      remains a real risk of ill-treatment or harm  requiring  international
      protection.

      (5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka for a person
      at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the government now
      controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils are required to return to a
      named address after passing through the airport.

      (6) There are no detention facilities at the airport. Only those whose
      names appear on a "stop" list will be detained from the  airport.  Any
      risk for those in whom  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  are  or  become
      interested exists not at the airport, but after arrival in their  home
      area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID or police within
      a few days.

      (7) The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution  or
      serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
      otherwise, are:

           (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to the
           integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they  are,  or
           are perceived to have a significant role in  relation  to  post-
           conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or  a  renewal
           of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

           (b) Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or  human
           rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised  the  Sri
           Lankan government, in particular its human rights record, or who
           are associated with publications  critical  of  the  Sri  Lankan
           government.

           (c) Individuals who have given evidence to the  Lessons  Learned
           and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the   Sri   Lankan
           security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan  authorities  in
           alleged war crimes. Among  those  who  may  have  witnessed  war
           crimes during the conflict, particularly in the No-Fire Zones in
           May 2009, only those who have already identified  themselves  by
           giving  such  evidence  would  be  known  to  the   Sri   Lankan
           authorities and therefore only they are at real risk of  adverse
           attention or persecution on return as potential  or  actual  war
           crimes witnesses.

           (d) A person whose name appears on a  computerised  "stop"  list
           accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of  those  against
           whom  there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest   warrant.
           Individuals whose name appears on a "stop" list will be  stopped
           at the airport and handed over to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan
           authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

    (8) The Sri Lankan authorities'  approach  is  based  on  sophisticated
    intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
    diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know that many Sri  Lankan  Tamils
    travelled abroad as economic migrants and also  that  everyone  in  the
    Northern Province had some level of involvement with  the  LTTE  during
    the civil war. In post-conflict Sri Lanka, an individual's past history
    will be relevant only to the extent that it is  perceived  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as indicating a present  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.

    (9) The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led  "watch"
    list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not  reasonably
    likely to be detained at the airport  but  will  be  monitored  by  the
    security services after his or her return. If that monitoring does  not
    indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist working to  destabilise
    the unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the internal armed conflict, the
    individual in question is not, in  general,  reasonably  likely  to  be
    detained by the security forces. That will be a  question  of  fact  in
    each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by such  an
    individual.

    (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of  an
    individual's activities and responsibilities during the civil war,  the
    exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and
    Article 12(2) of the Qualification Directive). Regard should be had  to
    the categories for exclusion set out in the "Eligibility Guidelines For
    Assessing the International Protection Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri
    Lanka", published by UNHCR on 21 December 2012.




 3. The judge concluded that the appellants had failed to prove  that  they
    would be currently perceived as a threat to the integrity of Sri  Lanka
    as a single state or  that  they  would  have  a  significant  role  in
    relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism and renewal  of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka [41].  The judge noted that, "This was  because  of  a
    lack of evidence [the appellant] has done  anything  to  support  [such
    activities] since 2008.  Sri Lanka  has  a  sophisticated  intelligence
    monitoring system both within Sri Lanka and the Diaspora."   The  judge
    found that there had been no visits to the  appellant's  father's  home
    between 2008 and 2012 because "as it was known that [the appellant] was
    not in Sri Lanka given the computerised checks at immigration and as he
    used his own passport."  [40].

 4. The difficulty in the judge's findings arises, as Mr  Schwenk  submits,
    the failure of the judge to make a finding  on  the  appellant's  claim
    that his father's home had been visited by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    in May 2013 and again  only  a  week  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing in October 2013.  At [16] Judge Saffer had noted:

         On 14/0513, which was about one week before his asylum application,
         people went to his father's home and said that the  appellant  must
         come to speak with them immediately and this put the  appellant  in
         fear.  They came last week.

 5. Whilst Judge Saffer made specific findings  regarding  the  appellants'
    claims [accepting that these were true] he made no  particular  finding
    regarding the visits by the Sri Lankan authorities to his parent's home
    in May and October 2013.  Mr Schwenk submitted that, at [43], that  the
    judge had  made  a  blanket  acceptance  in  treating  the  appellant's
    evidence of past events (see above).  I agree with that submission.   I
    consider the judge's finding at [43] to be sufficient to  indicate  his
    acceptance of  all  of  the  evidence  of  past  events  given  by  the
    appellant, including the visits to his  father's  home  in  2013.   The
    consequences are accurately summarised in the grounds [5]:

    The appellant does not claim to be a threat to the integrity of the Sri
    Lankan  state  or  have  a  significant  role  in  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatism.  However he does claim, and the judge  appears  to  accept,
    that he is  currently  wanted  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.   The
    appellant submits that the... evidence is clear that those detained  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities (which the appellant clearly  is  reasonably
    like to be) are at risk of a breach of their protected rights.  Indeed,
    the head note of GJ says this in terms: (iv) if a person is detained by
    the Sri Lankan Security Services there remains  a  real  risk  of  ill-
    treatment or harm requiring international protection."

 6. Judge Saffer should have assessed the risk  to  the  appellant  on  the
    basis that, as at the date of the hearing before him,  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities still sought to arrest the appellant.  As the Tribunal made
    it clear in GJ, "The Sri Lankan authorities know that many  Sri  Lankan
    Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone  in
    the Northern Province had some  level  of  involvement  with  the  LTTE
    during the civil war."  The fact that the Sri Lankan  authorities  were
    still seeking to arrest the appellant immediately before his flight  to
    the United Kingdom and after he  had  arrived  in  this  country  would
    indicate that  the  appellant  does  not  fall  into  either  of  those
    categories  (economic  migrant/individual  caught  up   in   the   LTTE
    struggle).  The appellant does not suggest that he actually  poses  any
    risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state but, as the Tribunal  made  clear,
    what matters is whether he is perceived by the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    to pose such a risk.  The fact that the  appellant  is  still  actively
    sought by way of arrest  by  those  authorities  indicate  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that he would be stopped upon return to Sri Lanka and
    thereafter face interrogation and possible ill-treatment.  Therefore, I
    find that the judge has erred in law by  failing  to  consider  in  his
    assessment of risk the attempts made by the Sri Lankan  authorities  in
    2013 to arrest the appellant (which the First-tier Tribunal accepted as
    true).  Accordingly, I have set aside the determination and have remade
    the decision.  Having regard to all of the evidence and to the guidance
    offered by GJ, I am satisfied that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant will be stopped and arrested upon return  to  Sri  Lanka  and
    that he will thereafter be  exposed  to  ill-treatment.   For  whatever
    reason, I find that the Sri Lankan authorities believe he continues  to
    offer a threat to  the  Sri  Lankan  state.   I  therefore  remake  the
    decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights (Article  3)
    grounds.

DECISION

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   I  have
    remade the decision.  This appeal is allowed on asylum  grounds.   This
    appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR).

Anonymity direction maintained.






Signed                              Date 23 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

