
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06569/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2016                            |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                    [A D]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to have been born on [ ] 1982.  He claims to be  a
    Kuwaiti Bidoun.  The Appellant claims to have left  Kuwait  in  January
    2014 and travelled to Turkey by aeroplane.  Thereafter he  contends  he
    travelled by ship to Greece and onward across Europe arriving in the UK
    on 15th April 2014.  The Appellant claimed asylum and his asylum  claim
    was refused by the Secretary of State on  8th  August  2014.   In  that
    Notice of Refusal the Secretary of State contended that  the  Appellant
    was not a Kuwaiti Bidoun but  was  a  citizen  of  Iraq  and  that  the
    Appellant had not raised any fears of return to Iraq.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Immigration Judge Fox
    sitting at  Manchester  on  6th  November  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 10th November 2014 the Appellant's appeal was  dismissed
    on both asylum and human rights grounds and the Appellant was found not
    to be in need of humanitarian protection.

 3. On 26th November 2014 Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Osborne on 9th November 2014.

 4. Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged and  on  21st  April  2015  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Taylor granted permission to appeal.  Judge Taylor noted
    that the grounds stated that the Appellant's brother had been  accepted
    as an undocumented Bidoun  and  had  been  granted  asylum  in  the  UK
    following DNA evidence.   Moreover  she  acknowledged  that  there  was
    strong evidence from Sprakab that the Appellant was  Kuwaiti  and  that
    arguably therefore more detailed and cogent reasons  were  required  to
    reject the Appellant's account in its entirety than  are  given  within
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination and that it may  be  that
    too high a standard of proof was applied.

 5. On 1st May 2015 the Secretary of State  responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Those grounds contended that the findings of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge were open to him and that the grounds suggest
    an artificially restricted approach to the evidence whereas the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was obliged to consider all evidence in  the  round
    and  was  not  bound  to  find  any  of  the  particular   strands   as
    determinative.  The Rule 24 response contended that the approach to the
    Appellant's brother's refugee status was entirely in  line  with  long-
    standing Tribunal authority in AC (Somalia) [2005] UKAIT 00124 in  that
    the Sprakab evidence was part of the evidential picture  and  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge approached that lawfully.   Consequently  the
    Secretary of State maintained the position as found by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appears  by  his  instructed  Counsel  Mr
    Brown.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer Ms Johnstone.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Brown submits that there is strong evidence that the  Appellant  was
    from Kuwait referring me to the interview record that took place on 8th
    July 2014 and to questions and answers put to  the  Appellant  therein.
    By way of example he refers to questions 89  to  98  and  the  coherent
    response the Appellant gave with regard to issues relating  to  Bidouns
    in Kuwait.  He further points out that it was fully recognised that the
    Appellant's brother who had been granted asylum was  a  Kuwaiti  Bidoun
    and that this had been proven by DNA evidence.  He submits that this is
    an adequacy of reasons challenge and that the  language  analysis  does
    not state that the Appellant  is  an  Iraqi  national.   He  refers  to
    paragraph 22 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination where the
    judge states therein "I note what is said in  regard  to  the  language
    analysis in that the Appellant could be an Iraqi national."  He  states
    that that is clearly not what is said in the language  analysis  report
    and that statement is simply wrong.  On such grounds the  decision  is,
    he contends, not safe and should be  set  aside  and  be  remitted  for
    rehearing.  He submits that it was on that basis  that  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Taylor granted permission to appeal.

 8. He also considers that the findings set out  at  paragraph  26  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  are  disturbing  and  that  the
    decision itself is littered with inaccuracies and sentences that do not
    make sense and that the only step that the court can contemplate is  to
    remit the matter back to the  First-tier  for  rehearing  finding  that
    there are multiple errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

 9. Ms Johnstone submits that the reference at paragraph 22 of the  judge's
    decision is not what is said in the Sprakab Report but that it is taken
    from an extract from the Notice of Refusal.  She refers to the  witness
    statement of Christine Cafferkey dated 4th August 2014 that was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge and  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had
    sought to obtain an Iraqi passport as an act of deception should not be
    ignored and had not been ignored by the First-tier Judge.  She contends
    that  the  findings  in  paragraph  26  that  the  overall  weight   of
    unexplained inconsistencies outweighed the biological nexus between the
    Appellant and his brother was a finding that was  open  to  the  judge.
    She asked me to maintain the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. I start by reminding myself that the issue before me  is  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I am not rehearing the matter.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 26 that he was not  prepared  to
    accept that the Appellant was a Kuwaiti Bidoun.  The main thrust of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was that despite the fact that the
    Appellant's brother was acknowledged as a Kuwaiti  Bidoun  he  did  not
    consider  even  applying  a  lower   standard   of   proof   that   the
    inconsistencies militating against  the  Appellant's  credibility  were
    outweighed by  the  biological  link  between  the  Appellant  and  his
    brother.  In support of this the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated  that
    the language analysis indicated that the Appellant could  be  an  Iraqi
    national.  That quite simply is not true.  That finding is  taken  from
    an interpretation of paragraph 14 of the Notice of  Refusal.   Actually
    nowhere  within  the  decision  does  the  judge  make  any   reference
    whatsoever to the Sprakab Report.

13. Whilst acknowledging the view expressed in the Rule  24  response  that
    the Sprakab evidence is part only of the evidential  picture  there  is
    clearly a responsibility upon the First-tier Tribunal Judge to give due
    consideration to the evidence available and in this instance  the  only
    evidence available of language analysis is that  of  Sprakab.   Sprakab
    Reports are,  it  is  acknowledged,  not  necessarily  foolproof.   The
    Sprakab Report acknowledges that it is not possible to determine  if  a
    speaker is part of the Al-Bidoon group  or  not  solely  from  language
    analysis but made findings in the  analysis  and  knowledge  assessment
    which were supportive to the position of the Appellant.  None of  those
    factors were considered by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   There  was
    clearly a responsibility upon him  to  do  so.   As  to  the  level  of
    evidential weight that he then gave to them that was a matter  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge but it is clear that  no  reference  is  made
    therein whatsoever.  In such circumstances the decision is  unsafe  and
    contains material errors of law.

14. In addition I agree with the contentions made  by  Mr  Brown  that  the
    analysis at paragraph 26  of  the  judge's  findings  is  unsafe.   The
    decision, if it has been proofread, has not been  corrected  and  there
    are substantial typographical errors throughout.   Some  sentences  are
    difficult to follow and whilst Ms Johnstone indicates that they are not
    material Mr Brown urges the point that looked at  in  the  round  along
    with the failure to properly address the weight of the  Sprakab  Report
    and finding that the  Appellant's  biological  [brother]  is  a  Kuwait
    Bidoun shows that the decision is unsafe and I agree with that finding.



15. In all the circumstances the correct approach is  to  find  a  material
    error of law, to set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and to remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing before any judge other than Immigration Judge Fox.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
The  decision  is  set  aside.   Directions  are  given  hereafter  for  the
rehearing of this matter.

1.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  The decision is set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    sitting at Manchester on the first available date 28 days hence with an
    ELH of three hours.

2.   The matter be relisted before any First-tier  Immigration  Judge  other
    than Immigration Judge Fox.

3.   That there be leave to either party to file a  supplemental  bundle  of
    evidence upon which they intend to rely at least seven days prehearing.



4.   That none of the findings of fact of the original  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge are to stand.

5.   Arabic interpreter required.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
