
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA066812014
                                                                 aa080882014
                                                                 aa066822014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                              |On 14 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            kr (first appellant)
                            ss (second appellant)
                            mk (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Mair, instructed by Ahmad & Williams,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of  Pakistan.   The  appellant  SS  is  the
    mother of the appellant KR and the third appellant is the son-in-law of
    SS.  The first and third appellants are married.  The  appellants  were
    refused asylum in the United Kingdom and directions were made for their
    removal to Pakistan.  They appealed against the decisions to the First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Bircher)  which,  in  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 15 January 2015 dismissed the appeals.   The  appellants
    now appeal, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge McWilliam considered that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had not taken into account copies of  a  letter  from  a
    Jirga council, the original of which the parties agree had been sent to
    but lost by the respondent.  This  letter  purportedly  confirmed  that
    there had been a meeting of the Jirga  council  to  resolve  a  dispute
    which had arisen between the appellants and a family (N) whose daughter
    had eloped as a member of the appellant's family.  There  had  been  an
    altercation involving gunfire and the N family had announced that  they
    would "take two of the daughters of  [SS]  as  compensation  for  their
    daughter eloping.  They also said they would kill her son and their own
    daughter." [Decision, 42].  It is the case of the appellants that the,

         "Jirga decided that two of the [daughters of  SS]  must  be  handed
         over to the N family  and  returned  for  the  elopement  of  their
         daughter with the first  appellant's  son.   The  Jirga  allowed  a
         period of three  and  six  months  for  the  handing  over  of  the
         daughters to them."

 3. Judge Bircher dealt with this letter from the Jirga council  at  [12  -
    19].  He was satisfied  the  original  letter  had  been  sent  to  the
    respondent and lost by  her.   He  notes  at  [13]  that  "because  the
    'original' was not before me and has not been authenticated  by  either
    side I am not in a position to identify it as  an  original  document."
    She noted there had been some delay in the  appeals  already  [18]  and
    concluded that, "whilst the  'original'  letter  may  prove  to  be  an
    important piece of evidence it was only one of the pieces  of  evidence
    before me."  At [19], the judge wrote,

         "I was satisfied that notwithstanding the missing 'original'  Jirga
         document there was sufficient evidence before me to  enable  me  to
         deal with the case  fairly  and  justly  and  the  request  for  an
         adjournment [to obtain the original, regarded as a  hopeless  quest
         by Judge Bircher] was therefore rejected."

 4. The judge's adjudication  upon  the  adjournment  application  and  her
    comments about the "original" letter beg an  important  question.   The
    judge had before her copies of the "original" but she makes no  further
    reference to the letter in her decision.  She describes the  "original"
    letter as potentially being "an important piece of evidence".  But  she
    does not indicate what weight, if any, she has  attached  to  the  copy
    letter.  The decision leaves the strong impression that, in the absence
    of the "original" letter, the copy letter was given no weight at all in
    the judge's assessment of the evidence.  That approach would appear  to
    have led the judge into legal error.  The judge had to  deal  with  the
    evidence before her and weigh it accordingly.  The judge has  proceeded
    at [65] to find that there had been no "Jirga council meeting in  which
    an order was given for the first appellant's husband to hand  over  two
    of his daughters to  the  injured  ...  family."   Although  she  does,
    indeed, refer to other  evidence  the  role,  if  any,  played  by  the
    contents of the copy letter  relating  to  the  Jirga  council  meeting
    remains entirely unclear.  It may well  be  the  case  that  the  other
    evidence simply outweighed the probative value  of  the  Jirga  council
    copy letter but, if that was the case, the judge should have said so.

 5. However, notwithstanding the fact that the judge appears to  have  made
    an error of law, I find there are no  grounds  for  setting  aside  her
    decision.  At [80] -  [81],  the  judge  dealt  with  the  question  of
    internal flight.  The appellant had claimed that SS would be  subjected
    to domestic violence from her estranged husband the judge had  rejected
    that claim of domestic violence.   The  Jirga  council  letter  has  no
    bearing on the judge's  analysis;  the  judge's  findings  on  domestic
    violence are discrete  and,  in  my  opinion,  soundly  reasoned.   The
    judge's basis for assessing internal flight, therefore, rested  on  the
    fact that SS would be able to resume her relationship with her  husband
    in Pakistan upon her return there.  If that were not possible  and  the
    marriage had broken down, then SS "will have the benefit  of  returning
    to Pakistan with the children but also, significantly with her  son-in-
    law who can adopt the role of the head of the  household."   The  judge
    went on to conclude as regards internal flight:

         "Alternatively the Tribunal in  KA  held  that  single  women  with
         children could live in larger cities  within  Pakistan  where  they
         would not experience the same level of societal discrimination that
         can occur in smaller towns or the  rural  areas  of  Pakistan.   It
         would not be unreasonable to expect the appellant and her  children
         to internally relocate to another area of  Pakistan  in  accordance
         with the case law of Januzi."

 6. Miss Mair, for  the  appellants,  accepted  that  before  me  that  the
    internal flight findings  form  part  of  the  core  findings  of  this
    decision.  She argued, however, that the family would  still  face  the
    real risk of violence in Pakistan on account of the history of domestic
    violence between SS and her husband.  As I have noted above, the  judge
    has rejected that account of domestic violence.  It follows that,  even
    if the judge had accepted that appellants' account of the elopement and
    the Jirga council meeting and decision, the appellants'  appeals  would
    still fall to be dismissed because the  appellants  would  be  able  to
    avail themselves of internal flight within Pakistan to  a  larger  city
    where they might live without the threat  of  violence.   That  finding
    remains sound notwithstanding the difficulties Judge Bircher  may  have
    encountered over the  Jirga  council  copy  letter.   I  have  decided,
    notwithstanding the judge's error in law, to exercise my discretion not
    to set aside this decision.  Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

These appeals are dismissed.








Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 9 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 9 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
