
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06323/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision sent to parties on:         |
|On 12 February 2016                  |On 19 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                chung min kim
                                ji hye chung
                                y k (a minor)
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal on 2 June 2010, allowing the claimants'  appeal
    against her decision to refuse him leave to  remain  on  asylum  and/or
    human  rights  grounds.   The  second  and  third  appellants  are  the
    principal claimant's wife and daughter.

Background

 2. The claimants are citizens of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
    (North Korea) and the First-tier Tribunal found  that  they  could  not
    lawfully be returned to the Republic of  Korea  (South  Korea)  because
    they were not entitled to South Korean citizenship.

 3. The claimants left North Korea for China on 30 August 2001.  In  China,
    the principal claimant, his wife and daughter  lived  with  the  wife's
    cousin, who ran a restaurant. The wife  helped  at  the  restaurant  by
    washing dishes. The principal claimant secured  work  on  a  pig  farm,
    living on the farm and returning to see his wife and daughter  every  3
    months.   After 6 years, with the cousin's help, they  found  an  agent
    who arranged passage for them to the United Kingdom via Hong Kong.  The
    family entered the United Kingdom on 16 November 2007, using  passports
    to which they were not entitled.  They all claimed asylum the day after
    they arrived in the United Kingdom, on 17 November 2007.

 4. The claimants are therefore persons who have been  outside  the  Korean
    peninsula for more than 10 years.  They have been in the United Kingdom
    for over 8 years.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Tribunal found that the claimant had  given  a  credible
    account of anti-Government statements by his wife in North Korea  after
    the death of their son during North Korean military service,  that  the
    claimant's father and two brothers had been  killed  in  front  of  him
    during the Korean war in the 1950s by South Korean soldiers,  and  that
    he had no genuine wish to go to South Korea.  The judge concluded  that
    the claimant and his family would be at risk of persecution or  serious
    harm if returned there.

 6. The judge then considered the alternative of return to South Korea:

         "47. I have considered  the  possibility  of  relocation  to  South
         Korea. ... It seems it was the wife's cousin  who  was  looking  at
         that possibility (the [claimant] spending time at the pig farm  and
         only seeing his family  every  3  months).   Bearing  in  mind  the
         precarious situation of the [claimant] and  his  family  in  China,
         where they could have been deported back to North Korea where there
         would be likelihood of persecution including execution as a  result
         of the illegal exit, the  wife's  cousin  may  have  considered  an
         opportunity to go to South Korea might have been a  better  option.
         ... I find that this [claimant] would have great difficulty in even
         pretending that he had the will or desire to live in South Korea.

         48.  He is not an automatic citizen of South Korea.  He is entitled
         to make an application for citizenship  and  he  is  not  a  person
         already with dual nationality. ... The success  of  an  application
         cannot be guaranteed.  It would appear that he is  likely  to  fail
         the process of obtaining citizenship by not  having  the  will  and
         desire to live in  South  Korea  for  genuine,  understandable  and
         reasonable considerations.  I find he is not de jure a national  of
         South Korea and that he is a person owing to a well-founded fear of
         persecution in the country of origin for reasons  of,  inter  alia,
         political opinion, is outside the country of his nationality and is
         unable or owing to such fear unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
         protection of that country.  Since  he  does  not  have  any  other
         nationality by right, he consequently fulfils the definition  of  a
         refugee.  It would neither be safe nor reasonable to remove him  to
         South Korea where he is  at  real  risk  of  refoulement  to  North
         Korea."

 7. That was the basis on which the appeal was allowed  under  the  Refugee
    Convention, and under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR. The appeal was not allowed
    or considered under Article 8 ECHR.

Permission to appeal

 8. The Secretary of State  sought  permission  to  appeal.   She  did  not
    challenge the conclusion that the claimant was at risk in  North  Korea
    but considered that he was also a South Korean citizen.  She  contended
    that the First-tier Tribunal  had  not  given  any  valid  or  adequate
    reasons why the claimant would not be  accepted  into  South  Korea  or
    entitled to South Korean citizenship.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on that basis  by  Senior  Immigration
    Judge Freeman, who considered  that  it  would  be  desirable  for  the
    judge's conclusions to be reviewed in the light  of  what  was  then  a
    forthcoming country guidance case on the issue.

10. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal proceedings

11. On 4 July 2011, following the decision of the Upper Tribunal in KK  and
    others (Nationality: North  Korea)  Korea  CG  [2011]  UKUT  92  (IAC),
    directions were sent to the parties, requiring them to provide  written
    submissions on the effect of the KK guidance on this appeal,  including
    any reasoned objections  to  the  appeal  being  determined  without  a
    further oral hearing.  Similar directions were  sent  on  21  September
    2012.

12. The Secretary of State did not respond to those directions.

13. On  11  October  2012,  Bolton  and  District  Citizens  Advice  Bureau
    responded for the  claimants,  stating  that  they  had  not  seen  the
    directions until after the expiry of the time limits  set  therein  and
    would submit KK representations within the next 7 working  days.   They
    asked for the appeal to be  heard  by  video  link  at  the  Manchester
    Hearing Centre.  A  hearing  was  set  for  31  October  2012  but  was
    adjourned. No submissions  were  received  from  the  claimant  or  any
    representative instructed by him.

14. On 24 November 2014, the Upper Tribunal sent to the parties  a  further
    Case Management Order and Directions, seeking submissions on the effect
    on the claimant's appeal of the new country guidance decision in  GP  &
    Others (South Korean citizenship) North Korea CG [2014] UKUT 391 (IAC).
    There was no response.  A similar order was  sent  out  on  12  January
    2016.

15. The Secretary of State did not respond to either of those orders.

16. The CAB Bolton responded.  They sent a letter  dated  18  January  2016
    stating that 'we can confirm we no longer  represent  the  above  named
    client.  We have not been representing  the  client  for  a  number  of
    years.   We  are  also  unaware  if  the  client  has  any  alternative
    representation.'

17.  The  claimants  are  under  a  duty  to  keep  in  touch  with   their
    representatives and to keep their address for service updated.

Discussion

18. It is time for these proceedings to be concluded.  The facts are clear:
    the claimants left North Korea in 2001 and entered the  United  Kingdom
    in November 2007. They are at risk in North Korea.  They do not wish to
    go to South Korea.

19. In regard to South Korean citizenship,  the  Upper  Tribunal's  country
    guidance in GP was as follows:

         "(1) The  Upper  Tribunal's  country  guidance  in  KK  and  others
         (Nationality: North Korea) Korea CG [2011] UKUT  92  (IAC)  stands,
         with the exception of paragraphs 2(d) and 2(e) thereof.  Paragraphs
         (2), (3) and (4) of this guidance replace that given in  paragraphs
         2(d) and 2(e) respectively of KK.

         (2)  South Korean law makes limited provision for dual  nationality
         under  the  Overseas  Koreans  Act  and  the  Nationality  Act  (as
         amended).

         (3)  All North Korean citizens are also citizens  of  South  Korea.
         While absence from the Korean Peninsula for more than 10 years  may
         entail fuller enquiries as to whether a person has acquired another
         nationality or right of  residence  before  a  travel  document  is
         issued, upon return to South Korea  all  persons  from  the  Korean
         Peninsula are treated as returning South Korean citizens.

         (4)  There is no evidence that  North  Koreans  returned  to  South
         Korea are sent back to North Korea or anywhere else, even  if  they
         fail the 'protection' procedure, and however long  they  have  been
         outside the Korean Peninsula.

         (5)  The process of returning North Koreans to South Korea  is  now
         set out in the United  Kingdom-South  Korea  Readmission  Agreement
         (the Readmission Agreement) entered into between the two  countries
         on 10 December 2011.  At present, the  issue  of  emergency  travel
         documents under the Readmission Agreement is confined to those  for
         whom documents and/or fingerprint evidence establish that they  are
         already known to South Korea as citizens, or who have registered as
         such with the South Korean Embassy in the United Kingdom.

         (6)  Applying MA (Ethiopia) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289, North Koreans  outside  the  Korean
         Peninsula who object to return to South Korea must  cooperate  with
         the United Kingdom authorities in seeking to establish whether they
         can avail themselves of  the  protection  of  another  country,  in
         particular South Korea. Unless they can demonstrate that in all  of
         the countries where they are entitled to citizenship  they  have  a
         well-founded fear of persecution for a Refugee  Convention  reason,
         they are not refugees.

         (7)  If they are not refugees, it remains open to such  persons  to
         seek to establish individual factors creating a risk  for  them  in
         South Korea which would engage the United  Kingdom's  international
         obligations under the EU Qualification Directive or the ECHR.

         (8)  There is no risk of refoulement of any North Korean  to  North
         Korea from South Korea, whether directly or via China. South  Korea
         does not return anyone to North Korea at all and it does not return
         North Koreans to China.   In  a  small  number  of  cases,  Chinese
         nationals have been returned to China.  A small number  of  persons
         identified  by  the  South  Korean  authorities  as  North   Korean
         intelligence agents have been prosecuted in South Korea.  There  is
         no evidence that they were subsequently  required  to  leave  South
         Korea.

         (9)  Once the 'protection'  procedure  has  been  completed,  North
         Korean migrants have the same rights as other South Korean citizens
         save that they are not required to  perform  military  service  for
         South  Korea.   They  have  access  to   resettlement   assistance,
         including housing, training and financial assistance.  Former North
         Koreans may have difficulty in adjusting to South Korea  and  there
         may be some discrimination in social  integration,  employment  and
         housing,  but  not  at  a  level   which   requires   international
         protection."

20. Paragraphs (3), (4) and (8) of that guidance are determinative of  this
    appeal.  There is no risk of refoulement  from  South  Korea  to  North
    Korea and the claimants are already South  Korean  citizens.  The  ECHR
    claims under Articles 2 and 3 on the facts must stand or fall with  the
    Refugee Convention claim and there is  no  Article  8  claim  in  these
    proceedings.

21. Even if there were an Article 8  ECHR  claim,  no  evidence  before  me
    indicates any strong connection between these parties  and  the  United
    Kingdom.  All of the private life they  will  have  acquired  has  been
    built up  while  they  were  here  unlawfully  and  section  117B(4)(b)
    requires me to give little weight to such private life.   Their  family
    life will have been conducted between the three of  them  and  will  be
    unaffected by returning them to South Korea.

22. On 9 February 2016, the Upper Tribunal sent to the appellant a  further
    hearing notice for a hearing  date  on  Monday  21  March  2016.   That
    hearing is hereby vacated: I consider that the appellant has  had  more
    than sufficient opportunity already to respond and  put  his  case  and
    that nothing will be served by a further oral hearing.

DECISION

23. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.

    I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on all grounds.


Date:    12 February 2016       Signed: Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                      Upper Tribunal Judge
                                                 Gleeson

