
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA062582015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th May 2016                             |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                                     BBH
                         (anonymity directiON MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Knight, Legal Representative, Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal from a decision by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Rowlands, who in a decision promulgated on 22nd October 2015, dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 25th March 2015 to refuse to grant her asylum and to  remove  her
    from the United Kingdom by way of directions under Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.
Background

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia. Her date of birth is [ ]  1983.
    Her asylum claim revolves around her alleged detention in Ethiopia  and
    her subsequent alleged involvement  with  a  political  party  that  is
    either banned or of adverse attention to the Ethiopian authorities.

3.   The following is a summary of the Appellant's claim. She  worked  as  a
    singer in Ethiopia. From 2001 she was a singer in the  Ethiopian  army.
    She eventually became part of the army despite having no such wish. She
    witnessed discrimination in the army based on  ethnic  origin  and,  to
    some limited extent, experienced discrimination as an individual who is
    half Amhara and half Oromo. She eventually notified the army  that  she
    was  leaving.  This  would  have  been  around  September   2005.   She
    subsequently carried on working  as  a  singer  in  Ethiopia  and  even
    managed to leave the country to undertake a singing job in  the  Middle
    East.

4.   When she went to the airport to undertake  a  further  singing  job  in
    September 2008 she was detained on the basis  that  she  had  committed
    treason or had sought to leave the country illegally  in  contravention
    of an order made, unknown to her, in October 2006. She was sentenced to
    one year in prison but served only eight months.  During  her  time  in
    prison she was subjected to serious ill-treatment and was raped.  As  a
    result she bore a child.

5.   After her release the Appellant  became  involved  in  an  organisation
    called Tinsae Ethiopian Patriots Union, or TEPU. She became a member in
    October  2010,  attended  meetings,  contributed  money  and   secretly
    distributed leaflets.  She  also  continued  singing  both  inside  and
    outside Ethiopia. She first entered the United Kingdom in March 2013 as
    a Tier 5 temporary worker under the Points-Based System enabling her to
    sing in an Ethiopian restaurant. She returned  to  Ethiopia  in  August
    2013.  Sometime between then and October 2013, when  she  next  entered
    the UK, she made a CD with songs designed to ferment rebellion  against
    the Ethiopian authorities. This CD was to be distributed after she left
    the country.

6.   The Appellant made a further application to enter the UK  in  September
    2013, again as a Tier 5 worker. She was granted entry  clearance  valid
    until 23rd December 2013.  On that day, on her way to the airport,  the
    Appellant was telephoned by her brother. She was  informed  that  their
    father had been arrest and that the authorities were searching for her.
    The authorities had arrested other members of the TEPU and the CDs  had
    been discovered and confiscated. She claimed asylum  on  13th  February
    2014.  She  claims  to  have  continued  to  support   Tinsae   through
    teleconferencing and 'Partalk', and through another organisation called
    the Ethiopian National Transitional Council, or  ENTC,  in  respect  of
    which her ex-partner was either Chair  or  Vice  President  of  the  UK
    chapter.

7.   The Appellant has a son born in  the  UK  on  16th  October  2014.  The
    father of the child, who was  her  partner,  is  either  settled  or  a
    British citizen. The child is therefore a British citizen.

8.   In her decision of 25  March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  did  not
    believe the Appellant's account and refused her  protection  claim.  An
    appeal against this decision was heard  on  23rd  September  2015.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not find the Appellant credible and  gave
    his reasons in paragraphs 37 to 41 of his decision.

Grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal

9.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
    was at that time without  legal  representation  because  her  previous
    solicitors had been the subject  of  a  Law  Society  intervention.  In
    granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek stated  in
    material part:

         "Although the First-tier Judge did not explain why he  had  decided
         that it was 'inappropriate' for the  appeal  to  be  adjourned  the
         basis for the application was  so  that  further  evidence  of  the
         nationality of the Appellant's daughter [this should be son]  could
         be obtained. The judge's  conclusions  in  relation  to  Article  8
         however, take into account the scenario whereby it is assumed  that
         her child is a British citizen."


    The decision continues:


         "One of the matters that the First-tier  Judge  took  into  account
         against the Appellant is the apparent inconsistency in relation  to
         the political group that she claimed to  have  been  a  member  of,
         being described as TEPU. The judge referred  to  the  Appellant  as
         having originally said in interview that she was  a  member  of  an
         organisation called the  ERPU  (the  acronym  being  given  in  the
         refusal letter at paragraph 35). What the judge did not make  clear
         at paragraph 40 is that it was in fact in the  screening  interview
         at 4.2 that she is recorded as having said that she was a member of
         the Ethiopian Renaissance Patriotic Union, which the Appellant says
         in the grounds was a misinterpretation. In the asylum interview  at
         question 65 she said that she was  a  member  of  Tinsae  Ethiopia,
         described in the refusal letter  at  paragraph  35  as  the  Tinsae
         Ethiopian Patriots Union. The two  names,  not  the  acronyms,  are
         arguably not dissimilar.


         In addition, after the screening interview, on 21st  February  2014
         the Appellant's solicitors wrote to the respondent clarifying  what
         was said  in  the  screening  interview  as  to  the  name  of  the
         organisation, before the refusal letter which is dated  25th  March
         2015.  That clarification is not referred to in the determination.


         The First-tier Judge stated  that  not  knowing  the  name  of  the
         organisation that she belonged to 'totally undermines  her  claim'.
         It is arguable that in coming to the view that  he  did  about  the
         Appellant's knowledge of the name of the  organisation  the  First-
         tier Judge erred in law.


         The judge gave a variety of reasons for rejecting  the  credibility
         of the Appellant's   claim and it may be that the issue of the name
         of the organisation is  therefore  not  material  to  the  outcome.
         Nevertheless, I grant permission for the reasons given above.


         The  grounds  make  various  other  complaints  about  the  judge's
         findings and it could be said that  these  are  mere  disagreements
         with the judge's  findings.   Nevertheless,  I  do  not  limit  the
         grounds that may be argued."

The Upper Tribunal hearing


10.  At the outset of the hearing  I  provided  to  both  representatives  a
    document that I had obtained  from  the  Internet  relating  to  Tinsae
    Ethiopia. This was virtually identical to a document that  had  already
    been provided by the Appellant in her  First-tier  Tribunal  bundle  at
    page 115.

11.  I applied Google Translate to that same  document  in  respect  of  the
    Amharic lettering that had not been  translated.  This  translated  the
    word 'Tinsae'  as  'resurrection'.   I  gave  both  representatives  an
    opportunity to consider this document and the translation obtained from
    the Internet and I gave both representatives an opportunity to make any
    submissions or application that they considered appropriate,  including
    the use of Google Translate' and its  reliability.  Having  been  given
    adequate time to consider the documents there  was  no  application  to
    adjourn by either representative, and no  application  to  prevent  the
    documents being admitted. I proceeded with the hearing.

12.  I additionally provided both representatives with a copy  of  the  Home
    Office  Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  (IDI)  entitled  "Family
    Migration: Appendix FM Section  1.0b  Family  Life  (as  a  Partner  or
    Parent) and Private Life:  10-Year  Routes".   This  was  published  in
    August 2015 and was current at the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    appeal hearing. I  provided  this  because  the  First-tier  Judge  did
    consider the possibility of the Appellant's son being a British citizen
    but concluded, giving reasons, that it was reasonable for  the  son  to
    leave the UK and, in effect, leave the EU. The issue of  reasonableness
    has to be considered in the context of the  instructions  and  guidance
    issued by the Secretary  of  State  as  such  guidance  identifies  the
    Respondent's own view of what action is  reasonable.  It  is  therefore
    relevant to the assessment  of  proportionality  under  Article  8  and
    whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  full  account  all   relevant
    considerations in his assessment of reasonableness.

Discussion

13.  I will deal first with the issue of the alleged mistranslation  of  the
    political group. In her screening interview at 4.2 the  Appellant  said
    that she had been involved with  the  Ethiopian  Renaissance  Patriotic
    Union. She did not give any acronym for the group.

14.  In a solicitors'  letter  sent  on  21st  February  2014  -  after  the
    interview, the solicitors stated that the Appellant had  in  fact  been
    involved with the Tinsae Ethiopian Patriotic Union. The refusal  letter
    made reference to the solicitors' letter  of  24th  February  2014  but
    concluded that the inconsistency was a proper basis upon which to  draw
    an adverse inference against the Appellant as she would have known  the
    name of the political group if she was genuinely involved  with  it.  I
    note that this inconsistency was never put  to  the  Appellant  in  her
    asylum interview, nor does the Appellant appear to have been asked  any
    questions in relation to this in cross-examination  during  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.

15.  The judge made no  reference  to  the  solicitors'  letter  or  to  the
    explanation provided by the Appellant that the  inconsistency  was  the
    result of  a  misunderstanding  or  mistranslation.  In  her  screening
    interview the Appellant used the word  'renaissance'  when  giving  the
    name of  the  group.  According  to  Google  Translate  'Tinsae'  means
    'resurrection'. The similarity between 'resurrection' and 'renaissance'
    is, in my judgement, striking. This supports the Appellant's  assertion
    that the word 'Tinsae' could have been translated by the interpreter at
    her screening interview as 'renaissance'. Although the  judge  did  not
    have the benefit of any translation of the word  'Tinsae'  he  did  not
    engage with the explanation offered by the Appellant at all. The  judge
    was obliged to do so. I am satisfied that this constituted an error  of
    law. The question remains whether it is material.

16.  Ms Isherwood invited me to find that this inconsistency was one  reason
    given by the judge in his overall credibility assessment  and  that  it
    was not material having regard to the totality of his findings. I  must
    therefore consider whether the judge's other findings were sufficiently
    comprehensive so as to exclude the possibility that he could have  come
    to a different  conclusion  had  he  not  failed  to  engage  with  the
    Appellant's explanation.

17.  At paragraph 37 of his decision the judge draws  an  adverse  inference
    against the Appellant because she had been able to  leave  the  country
    following her voluntary departure from the army and because nothing had
    been done to enforce her return to the army other than the  sending  of
    some letters. The judge was not therefore satisfied that the  Appellant
    had been detained for failing to return to  the  army  or  leaving  the
    country. I am satisfied, for the reasons he gave, that  the  judge  was
    entitled to that conclusion.

18.  At paragraph 38 the judge draws an adverse inference on the basis  that
    the Appellant produced a CD with her face on the cover which  had  been
    generated after she left Ethiopia. The judge stated:

         "I am not satisfied that the document  that  she  has  produced  is
         reliable.  On her own admission she has produced  evidence  in  the
         form of a CD cover with her picture on it to fit her claim and I am
         satisfied that this undermines any documents she produces."


19.  I am concerned with the judge's concluding remarks.  Whilst  the  judge
    was entitled to draw  an  adverse  inference  in  the  absence  of  any
    evidence of the CD's distribution and the  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    photograph had been put on the CD after she entered the  country,  this
    does not necessarily  undermine  the  reliability  of  other  documents
    produced by the Appellant. It is of course a factor for  the  judge  to
    take into account in assessing what weight to attach to other documents
    but the judge cannot automatically exclude the possibility  that  other
    documents may be reliable without particularised consideration of those
    documents.

20.  At paragraph 39 the judge stated: "As  she  was  also  inconsistent  in
    what she said about what she had been charged with and why it  was  not
    proceeded with also undermines her claim. [sic]"  I am  concerned  with
    the brevity of this finding.  The judge can only have been referring to
    submissions made by the Respondent that appear at paragraph 26  of  the
    determination.  These submissions are to the effect that the  Appellant
    had been inconsistent, "... about the reasons given for her  detention.
    At one point suggesting  that  it  was  for  'high  treason'  and  then
    claiming that it was for trying to leave the country without permission
    and 'getting pregnant'." The judge, however, misquotes the  Appellant's
    evidence and the Secretary of State's refusal letter. At no  stage  did
    the Appellant ever  claim  that  she  had  been  detained  for  getting
    pregnant.

21.  The Appellant maintains that she had  been  arrested  for  (i)  treason
    (this is the explanation given in her screening interview) and (ii) for
    trying to leave the country when she was not entitled to do so (this is
    the explanation given in her substantive interview). The  two  are  not
    necessarily inconsistent but I am nevertheless satisfied that the judge
    was entitled to find that there was an inconsistency  and  to  draw  an
    adverse inference.

22.  It is not clear  what  the  judge  means  when  he  says  "it  was  not
    proceeded with" at paragraph 39. The Appellant, on  her  evidence,  was
    detained, prosecuted and served time in  a  prison.  The  Secretary  of
    State claims that there is inconsistent evidence from the Appellant  as
    to the circumstances by which she came to be released. In her screening
    interview the Appellant said she was released with a warning and in her
    substantive interview the Appellant said she believed she was  released
    because she became pregnant. In the refusal  letter  the  Secretary  of
    State claims that this is an inconsistency.  This,  however,  fails  to
    take into account what the  Appellant  said  at  question  135  of  her
    interview where she indicated that she was 'warned' not to get involved
    in any political activities.  I am not consequently satisfied that  the
    Secretary of State or the judge were entitled to  conclude  that  there
    was an inconsistency in the Appellant's account.

23.  At paragraph 41 the judge then draws an adverse inference  in  relation
    to the CD based on the absence of any evidence of its in circulation in
    Ethiopia. One must wonder what evidence the Appellant could  reasonably
    have provided to show  that  an  unlawful  CD  was  in  circulation  in
    Ethiopia. I am  nevertheless  prepared  to  find  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to draw an adverse inference for the reasons he gave.

24.  Returning to paragraph 40,  I  have  already  dealt  with  the  judge's
    consideration of the name of the organisation in respect of  which  the
    Appellant claimed to be a member.  It is clear that the judge  attached
    significant weight to this, stating that this 'totally  undermines  her
    claim'. The judge did go on to give further reasons for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's involvement with  TEPU,  noting  that  a  letter  allegedly
    provided by the organisation had not been signed, was  unaddressed  and
    did not come from a specific person. These are valid  reasons  and  the
    judge was entitled to attach little weight to the letter.

25.  The judge then comments on the letter's failure to explain how  the  UK
    section of the organisation could possibly have information  about  the
    Appellant's activities. The Appellant does not however claim  that  the
    letter was issued by a UK section of the organisation. The  Appellant's
    evidence was that it was received by email from the organisation  which
    was based either Ethiopia or on  the  border  with  Ethiopia.   In  any
    event, the judge draws an adverse inference  based  on  the  assumption
    that the organisation  would  not  have  known  about  the  Appellant's
    activities if they were conducted in secret. The  Appellant's  evidence
    was that she was a cell member of a small unit who kept the  activities
    that were undertaken very secretive. There was however little probative
    enquiry by the Respondent  or  the  judge  as  to  what  was  meant  by
    'secret'. It was entirely unclear whether the  Appellant's  description
    in her asylum interview of her activities  being  'secret'  meant  that
    they were secret within the organisation itself or  whether  they  were
    secretive only to those outside of the organisation. I  therefore  have
    concerns as to the  basis  upon  which  the  judge  drew  this  adverse
    inference.

26.  In light of the above  assessment  I  am  persuaded  that  the  Judge's
    failure to engage with the explanation provided by  the  Appellant  for
    giving a different name for the organisation in her screening interview
    could have made a material difference to his ultimate conclusions.  The
    other credibility findings are not,  in  my  view,  so  watertight  and
    compelling  as  to  exclude  the  real  possibility  that  a   contrary
    conclusion could have been reached.

27.  Quite independently of the  above  considerations,  I  have  additional
    concerns relating to the judge's assessment of  the  reasonableness  of
    the Appellant's British citizen child leaving the UK. At  paragraph  47
    the judge did give reasons why, in his view, it would be reasonable for
    the child to leave the UK. He noted that the child was very  young  and
    would be going to a country where his mother was  a  national.  It  was
    said that the child would have no concept of what country he was in  at
    all and had siblings in Ethiopia.

28.  It is not in dispute  that  the  child's  father  did  not  attend  the
    hearing and no cogent explanation was provided for that non-attendance.
    There was however a statement from the father and  some  evidence  that
    the father maintained a relationship with the child. The possibility of
    the child's relationship with his father being disrupted was simply not
    considered in the decision.

29.  More fundamentally, the judge did not take into  account  the  IDIs  on
    family migration to which I have already referred. This is perhaps  not
    surprising given that no reference was made to it during the hearing by
    either party. It is however a well-known document and one in which  the
    Secretary of State has considered the circumstances in which the parent
    of a British citizen child could be reasonably required  to  leave  the
    UK. The Secretary of State's stated position is relevant to the Judge's
    own proportionality assessment because she is custodian of  the  public
    interest and her identification of what is  reasonable  in  the  public
    interest must be given weight. I am not satisfied that, had  the  judge
    considered this guidance and the Respondent's stated position, that his
    assessment of reasonableness would inevitably have been the same.

30.  For these two entirely independent reasons  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision is marred by material errors of  law.  The
    matter will be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal before a  judge
    other than Judge Rowlands. This is  because  the  credibility  findings
    will need to be revisited and because there has now been  a  change  of
    circumstances in that the Appellant is now reconciled with  the  father
    of her child and that relationship would need to be considered afresh.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is marred by a material error of law.

The appeal will be remitted back to the First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  heard
afresh by a judge other than Judge Rowlands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





[pic]                               8 June 2016
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

