
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06956/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 13 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                                     SA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Medly-Daley, Broudie Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iran who was born in 1982.  He has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    De Haney who, for reasons given in his  determination  dated  17  March
    2014, dismissed his appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human
    rights grounds against the decision to remove him as an illegal entrant
    dated 8 July 2013.

 2. The appellant reached the United Kingdom on 8 June 2013  after  illegal
    entry by lorry.   He  claims  to  be  in  need  of  protection  as  the
    consequence of a run in with the authorities over the keeping of  dogs.
    The appellant ran a pet shop.  Because of disproval by the  authorities
    over the keeping of dogs as pets, the appellant kept  his  dogs  in  an
    orchard away from his shop.  Two of the dogs were shot in 2012  and  in
    April or May 2013 the appellant realised that the shootings had been by
    the authorities as they returned and shot another dog.  On hearing  the
    shot the appellant went to the scene.   Such  was  his  anger  that  he
    turned on one of the two officers and broke the hunting  gun  that  had
    been used.  The appellant then fled to a farm to hide.  The day he  did
    so the authorities raided his parent's house where he lived.   He  then
    fled the country.  The appellant is unable to return  to  Iran  as  the
    council has complained about his  business.  Anyone  with  a  complaint
    against the government will be  described as a complaint  against  Iran
    and religion.

 3. The Secretary of State did not believe the appellant, neither did Judge
    De Haney.  The case had come before him  by  remittal  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal as a result of error in  an  earlier  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge J Edwards.

 4. Of the four grounds of challenge, two  assert  procedural  error.   The
    first is that the judge had erred by referring to the determination  of
    Judge Edwards; in doing  so  the  appellant  had  been  denied  a  fair
    hearing.

 5. I do not accept Mr Medly-Daley's submissions on  this  aspect.   It  is
    correct that Judge De Haney listed the determination of  Judge  Edwards
    along with the permission to appeal  by  Judge  Simpson,  the  decision
    remitting the case by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce as well as  the
    directions of Principal Resident Judge Southern.

 6. Judge De Haney explained at [10] that he had taken account  of  all  of
    the documentary evidence particularly the sections referred  to  by  Mr
    Medly-Daley and Mr Wardall.

 7. The decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce makes it  clear  that
    with the agreement of the parties the matter needed to be  redetermined
    afresh, and hence that was the basis on which it was remitted.

 8. There is no reason to believe that this  experienced  specialist  judge
    did anything other than determine the matter afresh as he was  required
    to.  Cataloguing the papers recording the history  of  the  proceedings
    cannot be taken as an indication that  the  judge  had  relied  on  the
    earlier judge's findings or that they were a factor taken into  account
    in reaching his own conclusions on the appellant's  credibility.  There
    is nothing in the language of the determination to support  a  contrary
    view.  He would be entitled to look at the  earlier  decisions  to  see
    what has been said earlier but this does not appear  to  have  been  an
    issue in the case.

 9. The judge is  recorded  in  the  second  ground  to  have  invited  the
    representatives to confirm the issues and that the issue of credibility
    was agreed.  Reference is made to a skeleton argument  submitted  prior
    to the hearing in terms that risk could be argued  in  the  absence  of
    credibility.  The judge had observed that this was contrary to  country
    guidance and that in his view the only issue was credibility.

10. It is argued that there was no relevant country guidance; SB  (Risk  on
    return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 being  considered  as
    not  having  addressed  in  sufficient   detail   the   processes   and
    investigations involved prior to the punishment of a fine being issued.
     It is also argued that the situation has moved on  since  the  country
    guidance was heard based on the Secretary of State's COIS  Report  that
    detention conditions in Iran were  likely  to  breach  Article  3.   No
    anonymity was granted and the hearing was a public one.

11. This ground can be considered with  ground  3  which  argues  that  the
    evidence in front of the judge (and not disputed by the respondent) was
    that failed asylum seekers would be arrested and that their backgrounds
    would be investigated.  This would result in detention for a  few  days
    (which would be likely to reach  Article  3  levels)  or  alternatively
    there would be prosecution for  propaganda  against  the  regime.   The
    appellant relies on grants of permission to appeal in  other  cases  to
    support this challenge and in  particular  the  acknowledgment  by  the
    Secretary of State that she  is  unable  to  return  people  without  a
    passport  containing a valid exit stamp (R (on the application  of  JM)
    [2014] EWHC 4430 (Admin)).

12. My conclusion on these grounds is as follows. The appellant's  evidence
    was that he had left Iran illegally.  The judge concluded in the  final
    sentence of his decision that he did not accept the appellant had  left
    Iran illegally.

13. The only inference from this conclusion is that the appellant had  left
    Iran lawfully and therefore with a valid exit stamp.  It is a  question
    of considering the reach of the lie.  The  only  reason  given  by  the
    appellant, who is apolitical and otherwise  has  not  had  any  adverse
    encounters with the authorities, as to why he left was because  of  the
    dog incident. That was found by the judge to be untrue. It is  not  for
    the judge to search for another reason why the appellant may have  left
    and if so in what circumstances.

14. I readily accept that if the only reason why the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal was because the appellant had lied that would be an error.   But
    in this case the judge had regard to the evidence including  Mr  Medly-
    Daley's seven page skeleton argument and the  cases  on  which  he  had
    relied, including the country guidance decision  in  SB.   The  judge's
    conclusions at paragraph 27 clearly show he understood the task  before
    him was to decide whether the appellant faced any risk.  He gave  valid
    reasons why he did not.  Accordingly I am not persuaded grounds 2 and 3
    are made out.

15. This leaves ground 4.  Three points are made.  The first  is  that  the
    judge had relied on a failure by  the  appellant  to  substantiate  his
    ownership of a pet shop and the existence of a trade  licence.   It  is
    argued that the appellant could not be required to  substantiate  every
    part of his claim.

16. It is correct that the Secretary of State had  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant had a "farm/orchid".  She did  not  specifically  reject  the
    appellant's claim that he had been  a pet  shop  owner.   Nevertheless,
    the judge gave reasons rationally open  to  him  on  the  evidence  for
    concluding in paragraph [22] that it was  not  credible  the  appellant
    would have been a pet  shop  owner  without  knowing  the  basic  facts
    regarding the appellant's knowledge surrounding the  keeping  of  dogs.
    The second limb to this ground  challenges  the  judge's  understanding
    expressed in [27] that it was nonsensical that the second official  had
    stood by and watched the incident. The author of the  ground  may  have
    intended to refer to [24] which deals with  this  aspect.  The  judge's
    conclusion was rationally open to him and this limb is no more  than  a
    disagreement.

17. The final  aspect  of  this  ground  is  a  similar  challenge  to  the
    evidential findings.  In this respect, the complaint is that the  judge
    had speculated about the disposition of dogs to bark when  people  were
    about as to why the appellant was not aware  of  the  presence  of  the
    officials.  It is argued that not all dogs  are  disposed  to  bark  at
    strangers. The judge is criticised for having speculated.

18. In my view  this  final  challenge  is  a  disagreement  with  findings
    rationally open to the judge on the evidence  that  does  not  identify
    legal error. Regardless of whether the  dogs  barked  or  the  employee
    shouted, I am satisfied that when read as  a  whole  the  determination
    shows that the judge gave adequate reasons  for  his  findings  on  the
    evidence that were rationally open to him.

19. Accordingly I am not persuaded that the judge erred in law on the basis
    of the challenges made and his decision stands.

20. Mr Medly-Daley explained that in the event that error was found and the
    case was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal the  appellant  wished  to
    rely on evidence that he had now converted to Christianity.  It will be
    for  the  appellant  to  decide  whether  he   wished   to   make   new
    representations to the Secretary of State about that.

21. This appeal is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date 12 November 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


