
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06160/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
| On 28th September 2015              |On 21st December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M.Trevelyen, Counsel, instructed by JD Spicer
Zeb, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr.E.Tujan, Home Office Presenting Officer.

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity  order.  This  is  because  the  appellant
claims he is at risk of a revenge attack and revealing  his  identity  could
put him at risk. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no
report of these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly  identify  the  original  Appellant.  This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born in January 1997.

    2. He made a claim to asylum on the basis he was at risk  because  of  a
       blood feud. He said this arose because of an incident  in  June  2013
       when a taxi driver was stabbed by his cousins. He claimed no involved
       in the incident. Consequently, all his male relatives over the age of
       16 left Albania, including his father. The appellant remained  behind
       because arrangements had not been made for him and it was thought  he
       would be safe given his age. However, that month he was the victim of
       a grenade attack and required hospitalisation.

    3. His application was rejected on 11 August 2014.  The  respondent  did
       not feel the index incident was likely to result in a blood feud.  If
       it did, then there was sufficiency of protection  and  the  appellant
       could reasonably relocate within Albania.

    4. His appeal was heard at Birmingham  in  January  2015  by  First-tier
       Judge Grimmet. At that stage the appellant was days short of his 18th
       birthday. He was represented, as he is now, by Mr Trevelyen.

    5. His representatives had arranged for  a  report  from  a  Dr  Francis
       Arnold. The doctor, a specialist in wound healing, concluded that the
       scarring to the appellant's lower legs and right arm  was  consistent
       with shrapnel injuries. The appellant said some of  the  wounds  were
       stitched and some were not which the doctor found consistent with the
       likely treatment and felt the  appellant  would  not  otherwise  have
       known this.  The  doctor  concluded  that  the  scarring  was  highly
       consistent with the account of an explosion.  The  doctor  dated  the
       scarring to at least one year before his examination on  13  November
       2014. This was consistent with the claim.  The  doctor  also  made  a
       diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder.

    6. His representatives had obtained a report from a country  expert,  Dr
       Antonia Young in relation to blood feuds in Albania. A similar report
       from her was considered by the Court of Appeal in MF v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 902. Lord Justice Moore-
       Bick concluded she had considerable experience of Albania  and  blood
       feuds and her evidence deserved to be given considerable weight.  She
       was criticised however for unduly straying into the areas  which  the
       Tribunal had to decide.

    7. In a decision promulgated on the 26th January  2015  his  appeal  was
       dismissed. The judge accepted that he  suffered  from  post-traumatic
       stress  disorder;  may  have  problems  recalling  and  had  shrapnel
       injuries to his legs. However, the judge  said  there  were  numerous
       inconsistencies in the evidence and that the expert reports contained
       errors  which  undermined  their  reliability.  The  judge  was   not
       satisfied that members of the appellant's family had murdered a  taxi
       driver; that the male members had all left and that he  was  attacked
       as claimed, or that he was a risk.

    8. In seeking permission to appeal it was argued that  First-tier  Judge
       Grimmet did not have an adequate basis for attaching so little weight
       to the two expert reports. Furthermore, it was  submitted  the  judge
       erred in finding the attack lacked  credibility  and  that  a  police
       report was unreliable. Finally, the judge had not properly considered
       the country guidance case of EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT
       00348.

The Upper Tribunal

    9. Mr. Trevelyen sought  an  adjournment  because  there  was  no  court
       interpreter available. The application was opposed by  Mr.  Tujan  on
       the basis of interpreter was not required on the error of  law  issue
       which  would  be  dealt  with  by  way  of   submissions   from   the
       representatives.

   10. I had regard to the  procedural  rules  which  state  the  overriding
       object of the rules is to deal  with  cases  fairly  and  justly  and
       ensuring  so  far  as  practicable  that  the  parties  are  able  to
       participate fully in the  proceedings.  It  was  desirable  that  the
       appellant have an appreciation of the arguments being  advanced  even
       though at this stage he was not an active participant.  However,  not
       to proceed would occasion delay and waste public funds. On balance  I
       decided to proceed on the understanding the hearing was  in  relation
       to the error of law issue only.

   11. Mr. Trevelyen relied upon the grounds on which leave had been sought.
       He submitted that the evidence of Dr. Young did not stray into  areas
       properly for the Tribunal to determine. He  acknowledges  there  were
       errors in the reports but these were not of substance. He did  accept
       that if the judge were correct in finding there  was  no  blood  feud
       there was no need to proceed through the various  considerations  set
       out in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012]  UKUT  00348.  However,  he
       submitted that the judge's reasoning in relation to the non-existence
       of a blood feud was flawed, particularly in relation to the treatment
       of the expert evidence.

   12. Mr. Tujan  submitted  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
       conclusions she did in respect of the  expert  report.  He  submitted
       that the errors in the report  could  not  be  simply  attributed  to
       typographical matters but went to the reliability of the  report.  He
       said that the judge also looked at other factors before reaching  the
       conclusion that the account was inconsistent. He suggested  that  the
       appeal simply amounted to a disagreement with the outcome decision.

Consideration

   13. The first observation I would make  is  that  the  appellant  was  an
       unaccompanied minor at the time of  his  appeal.  Allowance  for  his
       vulnerability as a consequence must be made as the judge acknowledged
       at paragraph 6.

   14. Expert evidence in relation to scaring was considered in detail in KV
       (scarring - medical evidence) Sri  Lanka  [2014]  UKUT  00230  (IAC).
       Amongst other matters the guidance was that doctors preparing medico-
       legal reports for asylum seekers must consider all possible causes of
       scarring. Dr Arnold had  background  information  on  the  claim  and
       carried out an examination lasting approximately 2 hours. The  doctor
       asked about any history of trauma. The doctor acknowledged there were
       other possible causes for individual  scarring  but  discounted  this
       because of the  multiplicity  of  scars  and  the  account  given  of
       treatment.

   15. The doctor went on to consider the appellant's mental state. This was
       not his area of expertise but nevertheless comment could legitimately
       be made  applying  recognised  criteria.  The  doctor  concluded  the
       appellant has post-traumatic stress  disorder  and  stated  this  can
       result from  any  life-threatening  experience,  including  childhood
       abuse. The doctor questioned the appellant  about  other  causes  and
       writes `she (my emphasis) denied,  any  such  experience  other  than
       those  described  in  the  history  above'.  There  is  a  subsequent
       repetition of the gender error.

   16. Judge Grimmet at paragraph 14 notes the doctor accepts the  cause  of
       the scarring because of its  multiplicity  and  the  account  of  the
       treatment. However in the following paragraph the  judge  found  this
       conclusion and the reference to PTSD was  seriously  damaged  by  the
       content of the last page of the report. The judge believes  this  may
       be referring to a different  appellant  altogether.  The  judge  also
       criticises the doctor for not explaining why he is of the opinion the
       appellant has severe (my emphasis) psychological damage.

   17. At paragraph 12 the judge dealt with the report from  Dr  Young.  The
       judge appears to dismiss the  report  on  the  basis  it  is  largely
       generic. Again, a reference to `twins' suggested  to  the  judge  the
       expert may be confusing the appellant with another case.

Conclusion.

   18. Looking at these matters and the decision in its entirety  it  is  my
       conclusion  that  the  judge  materially  erred   in   law   in   her
       consideration of the appeal.

   19. My impression from the decision as a whole is that the judge did  not
       believe the claimant and  was  not  open  in  her  appraisal  of  the
       evidence presented. It is of note that the refusal  letter  does  not
       question the truth of the underlying incident but takes the view that
       the circumstances would not amount to a blood feud  which  would  put
       this appellant at risk. The refusal  concluded  in  the  circumstance
       there was sufficiency of protection for this  appellant  and  in  the
       alternative he could relocate. The  immigration  judge  went  further
       than this and concluded that the index incident did not occur or that
       other family members had left the country or there was any risk  from
       another family. It seems to  me  the  judge  discounted  all  of  the
       evidence presented on behalf of the appellant frequently on the basis
       of what appear to be minor inconsistencies.

   20. The medical evidence was on  its  face  strongly  supportive  of  the
       appellant's  claim.  The  doctor  gave  reasons  for  accepting   the
       appellant's account with the injuries. The  doctor  referred  to  the
       multiplicity of injuries and what the appellant said about treatment.
       The judge accepted the appellant has a shrapnel injury  and  suffered
       from post-traumatic stress disorder and his memory is  affected.  The
       account of being  injured  by  a  grenade  was  consistent  with  the
       injuries and it is not immediately obvious what other scenarios could
       expose a 15-year-old to such injuries. Some aspects of the report may
       be pro forma, for instance, in relation to the Istanbul protocol.  It
       may well be that aspects of the final page have  been  word-processed
       and the doctor was careless in  proof  reading.  However,  I  do  not
       believe the judge was entitled  to  treat  the  report  as  seriously
       damaged because of this.  Having  accepted  the  diagnoses  of  post-
       traumatic stress disorder, rather than accepting  the  obvious  cause
       given, the judge speculates it could be attributable to the trauma of
       leaving home .The judge appears to have  attached  little  weight  to
       this medical evidence. It is my conclusion this evidence has not been
       properly dealt with.

   21. I reach the same view in relation to the  judge's  treatment  of  the
       evidence of Dr.  Young  .The  Court  of  Appeal  has  recognised  her
       expertise. The criticism was not  for  commenting  on  relocation  in
       general terms. It was because she dealt with  the  specifics  of  the
       individual claim which was a matter for  the  tribunal.   Again,  the
       judge appears to attach little  weight  to  this  report,  apparently
       dismissing it  as  generic  and  the  fact  that  at  one  point  she
       mistakenly referred to `twins'. It would seem inevitable that much of
       a country expert report will be generic. This does not undermine  the
       strength of the report. Again, I do not feel this evidence  has  been
       properly dealt with.

   22. There are similar  patterns  in  the  decision  whereby  evidence  is
       dismissed. For instance, the judge placed  emphasis  on  whether  the
       appellant was in hiding throughout or whether he was tending  animals
       prior to the hand grenade incident. The  appellant  had  submitted  a
       letter from a hospital in Albania, which was discounted on the  basis
       the injuries identified  differed  from  those  mentioned  elsewhere.
       Similarly,  the  appellant  submitted  a  police  report,  which  was
       discounted on the basis the country expert said the police would  not
       do anything to help in a blood feud situation.

   23. In summary, I find the judge in her decision did not demonstrate  the
       evidence had been adequately considered. This is particularly  so  in
       respect of the expert evidence.  Because  of  the  judges  conclusion
       consideration in turn was not given to whether the circumstances were
       likely to amount to a blood feud.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier  Judge  Grimmet  dismissing  the  appellant's
appeal materially errs in law and cannot stand. The appeal  is  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

                                                Appeal Number: AA/16160/2014


                                   MR R M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Directions.

 1. Retest as a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal. Exclude  First-
    tier Judge Grimmet.

 2. An Albanian interpreter will be required.

 3. The parties are to exchange bundles for use in the appeal no later than
    one month before a date of hearing is indicated.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

