
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06307/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd January 2014                             |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                bin chuen lin
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Rafter, instructed by Rahman & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Robson
    made following  a hearing at Bradford on 8th October 2013.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of China, born on 19 August 1972.   He  left
    China in November 1999 and claimed asylum in the UK.  He did not attend
    his screening interview and recontacted the Home Office on 27th  August
    2010.   In  October  2010  the  Secretary  of  State   wrote   to   his
    representatives,  who  replied  in  January  2011,  and  the  Appellant
    attended a screening interview in February 2011.  There was a 28  month
    delay before his substantive interview and refusal of the asylum  claim
    in June 2013.

 3. The judge concluded that there was no truth in the Appellant's claim to
    fear persecution upon return to China and there is no challenge to that
    aspect of his decision.

 4. The judge also considered the Appellant's claim that a return to  China
    would breach his Article 8  rights.   He  considered  the  evidence  of
    witnesses, friends of the Appellant, and concluded that his friendships
    could be resumed by other methods of communication were  the  Appellant
    to leave the UK, and that any interference with the Appellant's private
    life would be proportionate.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The Appellant sought permission to  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge's assessment of the Appellant's Article 8 rights  was  flawed  in
    that he had failed to take into  account  material  considerations,  in
    particular the fact that the Appellant had been resident in the UK  for
    nearly fourteen years, he had not been back to China  since  coming  to
    the UK, had not claimed public funds or been a drain on the economy  of
    the UK, and had no criminal convictions. Morever there had been a delay
    attributable to the Respondent.  The judge had not conducted a balanced
    assessment of all relevant factors and had thereby materially erred  in
    law.

 6.  Secondly, in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  the  Respondent  had
    purported to consider the Appellant's case under the  legacy  programme
    but she had not considered paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules. The
    Appellant relied on the case of Okonkwo (Legacy/ Hakemi: health  claim)
    [2013] UKUT 00401 which states:

         "It may be unfair for the Secretary of State to apply the terms  of
         a policy to a case that fell within the terms of the policy when it
         was in existence: Hakemi and Others [2012] EWHC [1967] (Admin)  and
         Muhammad [2012] EWHC 3091 (Admin) considered."

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Appleyard on  12th
    November 2013 for the reasons stated in the grounds.

Submissions

 8. Miss Rafter relied on her grounds and submitted that it  was  an  error
    for the  judge to focus only on the  Appellant's  relationships  within
    the UK.  He had not conducted a balanced assessment and  in  particular
    had not placed due weight upon the fact that he had been in the UK  for
    some fourteen years.

 9. She argued that the Respondent was under an obligation to consider  the
    Appellant's claim under the legacy  programme.   She  accepted  that  a
    significant part of the delay was attributable to the Appellant in that
    he had failed to attend  his  initial  interview  but  he  had  brought
    himself to the attention of the Respondent in 2010  thereby  attempting
    to regularise his situation.  It was his case  that  he  had  lost  the
    relevant papers.  There was no evidence that he had worked illegally or
    that he had claimed benefits or that he had been a drain  on  the  UK's
    resources in any way. Had the correct guidance been applied as  at  the
    date of the Appellant's initial contact with the Respondent in 2010  he
    might have been granted indefinite leave to remain under the policy  as
    that time.

10. Mrs Pettersen submitted that there was no error in  the  determination.
    The judge had properly recorded the evidence of the Appellant  and  his
    witnesses and there was no  indication  that  he  had  established  any
    family life in the UK  Indeed his wife and children were in China.   He
    did not meet the requirements of the new Immigration Rules with respect
    to Article 8 and the judge was entitled  to  consider  that  there  was
    nothing exceptional in his  circumstances  which  should  lead  to  his
    succeeding outside them.  It was clearly in the judge's mind  that  the
    Appellant had been in the UK for a lengthy period of time  but  he  was
    clearly sceptical about the evidence  that  he  had  not  worked  here.
    Finally given that the Appellant had been diagnosed with hepatitis B it
    was likely that he was receiving medication and assistance through  the
    NHS.

11. With respect to the legacy point, she observed  that  the  reasons  for
    refusal letter was written by a person within the Older Live Cases Unit
    who was properly applying the policy as at the time of the refusal.

Findings and Conclusions

12. There is no error of law in this decision.  The judge was plainly aware
    of the length of time that the Appellant had been in the UK and  it  is
    clear that this was  at  the  forefront  of  his  considerations.   The
    Appellant confirmed to him that he had  not  undertaken  any  voluntary
    work or charity work and had not, for most of the  time,  attempted  to
    learn English.  The judge was entitled to state that the Appellant  had
    not integrated into the UK in his private life which would clearly be a
    factor in deciding whether removal was proportionate.  He assessed  the
    evidence of the witnesses and their relationship  with  the  Appellant.
    The judge did not accept that the Appellant had not  worked  unlawfully
    whilst in the UK. Whilst the Appellant has been in the UK for a lengthy
    period of time, for most of that time was an absconder who  had  failed
    to cooperate with the authorities. The decision that removal would be a
    proportionate interference with the Appellant's private  life  was  one
    which was clearly open to the judge.

13. With respect to the legacy point, the author of the reasons for refusal
    letter is stated to be a member  of  the  Older  Live  Cases  Unit.  He
    considered whether the Appellant should benefit from a grant  of  leave
    to remain in the UK.  There is nothing  unlawful  in  the  Respondent's
    consideration of the Appellant's case.  The Secretary  of  State's  has
    not failed to apply the terms of a policy. Even if  there  had  been  a
    more generous policy in 2010 and he may have had a positive decision at
    that point it does not mean that the decision in 2013 was unlawful. The
    Appellant has received the decision which he was  entitled  to  by  the
    author of the  reasons  for  refusal  letter.   Given  the  Appellant's
    immigration history it is unsurprising that, under the present  policy,
    it was not made in his favour.  Paragraph  353B  does  not  confer  any
    entitlement to any form of leave.

Decision

14. The original judge did not err in law and  his  decision  stands.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

