
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06895/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th March 2016                           |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                                     r S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Loughran, Counsel instructed by Duncan
                  Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan  born  on  [  ]  1991.   His
    appeal against removal under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 was dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human
    rights grounds by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Suffield-Thompson  in  a
    decision dated 2nd October 2015.

2.   Permission to appeal was sought on five grounds:


    (i)  The failure to have regard to the fact that the Appellant's  claim
         was decided within the  Detained  Fast  Track  Process;  procedural
         unfairness and failure to make a finding on a matter in issue.
    (ii) The failure to adjourn which amounts to a procedural  irregularity
         and the failure to have regard to relevant evidence.
    (iii)    The failure to have regard to relevant  evidence,  speculation
         and misdirection in law.
    (iv) The failure to have regard to a letter from the Taliban or to give
         any reasons for rejecting such evidence.
    (v)  The failure to have regard to the evidence of Dr Liza Schuster and
         the letters from Eva Jolly MEP and Jean Lambert MEP and the  up-to-
         date background evidence.


3.   Permission to appeal was granted on 5th  November  2015  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge P J G White for the following reasons:


         "(a) It is arguable that there may have been procedural unfairness.
              The judge  made  adverse  comment  on  the  lack  of  medical
             evidence. However, the judge also notes that  the  Appellant's
             constant requests for adjournments  had  been  refused  and  a
             further application for adjournment was refused at the  outset
             of the hearing.  It is arguable that the judge failed to  give
             proper consideration to the difficulties arising from the fact
             this was originally a fast track case and funding  had  to  be
             secured.


         (b)  Although the judge remarks on the absence of medical  evidence
             from the time during detention the judge arguably  contradicts
             herself by referring later to the Rule 35 report.


         (c)  It is arguable that in reaching her decision  that  the  judge
             failed to take into account the evidence referred to at 28 and
             29 of the grounds seeking  permission  (the  letter  from  the
             Taliban and the expert evidence and background material)."




Submissions

Ground 1 - detained fast track procedure

4.   Ms Loughran submitted that the judge had failed to  consider  the  fact
    that the Appellant  had  been  detained  in  fast  track.  He  was  not
    interviewed and the Respondent had made a decision on the basis of  the
    Appellant's witness statement which  he  was  given  only  one  day  to
    prepare. The judge did not accept that the Appellant was too unwell  to
    attend the scheduled interview.   The  detained  fast  track  procedure
    failed to deal with vulnerable individuals and this had impacted on the
    judge's assessment of the Appellant's credibility. The judge had failed
    to make a finding that the detained fast track procedure  was  relevant
    to the assessment of the Appellant's claim.

5.   The detained fast track procedure had been  declared  unlawful  at  the
    date of hearing.  The judge failed to take this into account  and  this
    was a material error in relation to his finding that the Appellant  had
    failed to attend an interview.  It was appropriate  and  necessary  for
    the judge to find that the process was unlawful. The judge's subsequent
    findings at paragraphs 52 and 53 were not open  to  the  judge  on  the
    basis  that  the  detained  fast  track  procedure  had  been  declared
    unlawful.  Had the judge considered this point he may not have come  to
    the conclusions he did at paragraphs 52 and 53.   The  unlawfulness  of
    the detained fast track procedure was not considered at all.


Ground 2: the adjournment

6.   There was a Rule 35 report before the judge  and  the  opinion  of  the
    doctor in that report was  that  his  account  was  plausible  and  the
    Appellant had visible scars.  It was clear from paragraphs 19 and 20 of
    the decision that the Appellant would be granted legal aid  funding  if
    further evidence of his ill-health was provided. There had been written
    applications for an adjournment in order to be able to secure  funding.
    This application was renewed at the hearing. This was not a case  where
    a previous hearing had been adjourned or that there had  been  numerous
    previous  adjournments.  The  judge  concluded  that  the   Appellant's
    representatives could have instructed experts some  time  ago  but  she
    made no reference to the Rule 35 report.  There was  no  fault  on  the
    part of the Appellant in the failure to instruct experts.  It was clear
    from the Rule 35 report that the request for medical evidence was not a
    fishing exercise. There was independent evidence of torture before  the
    judge and therefore the refusal of the adjournment was  unfair  in  all
    the circumstances.


Ground 3: the Rule 35 report

7.   The medical evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal  amounted
    to a Rule 35 report and a note of a telephone conversation at L1 of the
    Respondent's bundle which stated that  the  Appellant  was  fit  to  be
    interviewed.  There was no evidence to support the judge's finding that
    the Appellant had been seen by medical  professionals  the  entire  way
    through his detention and he had been declared fit to  be  interviewed.
    The  unlawfulness  of  the  detained  fast  track  procedure  was   not
    considered.

8.   The Rule 35 report  was  completed  two  days  before  the  Appellant's
    scheduled interview. From the ruling in the detained fast  track  cases
    it was clear that vulnerable clients were  not  being  identified.  The
    judge found that the Appellant started suffering from PTSD on  the  day
    of his interview.  This was factually wrong but  also  failed  to  have
    regard to the fact that PTSD would not  have  been  identified  in  the
    detained fast track procedure.

9.   The judge rejected the Rule 35 report as proof of  torture  but  failed
    to take it into account as corroborative of  the  Appellant's  account.
    Accordingly, the judge misdirected himself in law in  failing  to  have
    regard to this evidence and it was irrational for the judge to note the
    absence of medical evidence despite the repeated requests to adjourn to
    enable medical reports to be obtained.


Grounds 4 and 5: Taliban letter and expert report

10.  There was no mention in the decision of the letter  from  the  Taliban,
    the expert report or the letters from MEPs. This was  relevant  to  the
    risk on return and the risk of indiscriminate  violence  on  return  to
    Kabul. The judge failed to consider relevant evidence and it  is  clear
    from the decision that the judge failed to consider up-to-date evidence
    on indiscriminate violence preferring older case law.


Respondent's submissions

11.  Mr Duffy relied  on  the  Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had had time to obtain medical evidence and had failed to  do
    so. There was no error of law or unfairness in refusing  to  grant  the
    adjournment. The failure to have regard to relevant evidence (grounds 4
    and 5) was not material because following country guidance  returns  to
    Kabul were safe and the new evidence relied on by the Appellant did not
    show that the situation has changed.

12.  It was at this point  that  there  was  an  expression  of  concern  in
    relation to the lawfulness of  the  fast  track  procedure  and  as  to
    whether the original decision of the  Secretary  of  State  was  lawful
    given that the Appellant was not interviewed. The judge had  found  the
    Appellant's account  not  to  be  credible  as  a  result  of  numerous
    inconsistencies.  This was of concern because of the failure to conduct
    a substantive interview in the Appellant's case.

13.  The Secretary of State had  refused  the  Appellant's  application  for
    asylum on 14th April 2015 and  made  a  decision  to  remove  him.  The
    Appellant had only been given one day in  which  to  submit  a  written
    statement and representations.


Discussion and Conclusions

14.  The Appellant's immigration  history  is  relevant  in  assessing  this
    claim. The Appellant first came to the UK in 2007.  He  claimed  asylum
    and was interviewed substantively on 25th March 2008.   His  claim  was
    refused and the Appellant was removed from the UK on 8th December 2009.



15.  On 12th February  2015  the  Appellant  was  arrested  in  the  UK  for
    possession of drugs and illegal entry.  He claimed to  have  re-entered
    the UK in a lorry the year before.  He also gave a false name and  date
    of birth and claimed to be Pakistani.

16.  The Appellant was detained and claimed asylum again  on  26th  February
    2015 claiming he had arrived in 2013.   His  screening  interview  took
    place on 3rd March  2015  and  his  substantive  asylum  interview  was
    scheduled for 13th April 2015 but he did  not  attend  because  he  was
    unwell. He was given a date to submit further representations.

17.  The judge found that the Appellant was not a credible  witness  because
    the account he had given in 2008 was inconsistent with his asylum claim
    in 2015. The judge found that he was vague and deliberately evasive  in
    answering questions and he had also failed to claim asylum  in  a  safe
    third country or soon after his arrival in the UK.

18.  In relation to the Appellant's failure to attend his interview  because
    he was ill the judge found at paragraphs 52 and 53:

         "52. I turn now to the Appellant's claim that he was ill on the day
             of his asylum interview. He had been seen by the doctor at the
             detention centre two days earlier and was passed as fit to  be
             interviewed. On the day he suddenly found he had  a  headache,
             flash backs and deafness in his ears.  He denied that  he  had
             hung up the phone  when  he  was  called  by  the  Immigration
             Officer to find out why he had not attended. He said he  could
             not hear as he had deafness in one ear.  I find that he did in
             fact do this as the officer would  have  no  valid  reason  to
             terminate the call at his/her end.


         53.  The entire way through his detention the  Appellant  has  been
             seen by medical staff and has been assessed as fit and then on
             the very day of the interview  he  starts  randomly  suffering
             from  symptoms  akin  to  PTSD.  I  find  this  to  be  highly
             implausible. A Rule 35 report was obtained by a doctor at  the
             detention centre who saw him and made a mental health referral
             saying 'he may have been a  victim  of  torture'.   I  do  not
             remotely accept the  Appellant's  representative's  submission
             that this is proof that he  has  been  subjected  to  torture.
             Despite  the  Appellant's  constant  requests   for   Tribunal
             adjournments to seek medical reports there was nothing  before
             the Tribunal from his GP or from the detention centre  medical
             staff to show that the Appellant has demonstrated any sign  of
             physical or mental health issues until the day of  his  asylum
             interview.  I find this was a cynical ploy on the part of  the
             Appellant to avoid an interview which  he  knew  would  almost
             inevitably lead to a refusal of his asylum claim  just  as  he
             has sought to continually adjourn the Tribunal proceedings  to
             give him more time in the UK."

19.  Ms Loughran challenges the judge's findings at paragraphs 52 and 53  on
    the basis that the Appellant was seen by a doctor whilst  in  detention
    and a Rule 35 report dated 11th April 2015 was before  the  judge.   It
    was clear from that report that the Appellant  had  been  diagnosed  as
    suffering from poor sleep, nightmares, anxiety and flashbacks and  that
    he had been referred to the mental health team for  this.   Accordingly
    the Appellant had not started randomly suffering from symptoms akin  to
    PTSD on the day of the interview.  These were disclosed  to  a  medical
    professional two days before the interview in the Rule 35 report.

20.  Further, at paragraph 22 the judge found  that  "there  is  also  other
    litigation under way that pertains to the fast track procedure  whereas
    the issue for me is one of asylum".  Ms  Loughran  submitted  that  the
    judge's failure to take into account the fact that  the  detained  fast
    track process had been declared unlawful, in that it failed to identify
    vulnerable clients, had affected  his  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

21.  The judge failed to acknowledge the rulings  under  the  detained  fast
    track procedure. He found that the Appellant had deliberately sought to
    avoid an interview, but it is clear from the Rule 35  report  that  the
    Appellant had been potentially identified as a vulnerable detainee  who
    may have been tortured and therefore he was  unsuitable  for  the  fast
    track procedure.

22.  Whilst I accept the Appellant was  released  on  22nd  April  2015  his
    asylum claim  was  assessed  and  refused  without  the  benefit  of  a
    substantive interview  and  without  the  benefit  of  further  medical
    evidence. The Appellant indeed was unable to submit more than  a  brief
    witness statement.

23.  There was also the failure to  adjourn  to  obtain  a  medical  report.
    Again the judge failed to take into account the fact that the Appellant
    was subject to the detained fast track procedure, although arguably his
    representatives,  given  that  there  was  five  months   between   the
    Appellant's release and the hearing, could have produced some  evidence
    from his GP to  support  the  application  for  funding  or  indeed  to
    demonstrate to the judge that it  was  likely  that  funding  would  be
    granted  if  further  evidence  of  the  Appellant's   ill-health   was
    submitted.  There was no plausible reason why  such  evidence  was  not
    submitted to obtain funding or indeed why it was not before  the  judge
    and the refusal to grant an adjournment in itself would not amount to a
    procedural irregularity.

24.  However, given the previous conduct of  the  Appellant's  asylum  claim
    and the fact that  he  was  detained  under  the  detained  fast  track
    procedure which had been declared unlawful it is another  element  that
    leads me to conclude that the judge  should  have  properly  considered
    whether the refusal of the Secretary of State was in fact in accordance
    with the law.

25.  The medical evidence which was before the judge  did  not  support  his
    finding that the entire way through his  detention  the  Appellant  had
    been seen by medical staff and assessed as fit.  Other than the Rule 35
    report and the conversation which took place on the telephone  on  13th
    April 2015 there was  no  evidence  to  show  when  or  how  often  the
    Appellant had been seen by medical professionals during his  detention.
    The telephone note states:

         "Mr Safi was due to be interviewed  about  his  asylum  claim  this
         morning but did not attend as he claimed to be unwell.  I refer  to
         my  telephone  conversation  with   Jeanette   of   Healthcare   at
         Harmondsworth at 12 noon today. Jeanette  kindly  checked  with  Dr
         Jabbar who stated  he  prepared  Rule  35  report  on  Mr  Safi  on
         Saturday,  11th  April  2015  and  considered  Mr  Safi   fit   for
         interview."

26.  The judge's conclusion that the  Appellant  had  sought  to  avoid  his
    interview and had  been  disingenuous  about  his  ill-health  was  not
    supported by the evidence which was before him and this inevitably  led
    him into error in his failure  to  consider  whether  the  Respondent's
    decision was in accordance with the law.

27.  The last two points potentially would amount to an error of law.  There
    was no mention of the letter from the Taliban threatening the Appellant
    given that the judge found the Appellant's account  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility.  It was incumbent on the judge to deal with evidence which
    potentially corroborated the Appellant's account and give good  reasons
    for why he rejected it.  The judge failed to do so.

28.  In relation to the expert report of Dr Liza Schuster, whilst  I  accept
    it does not deal specifically with the Appellant's case,  it  deals  in
    general with the situation of returns to Kabul, it was more recent than
    the country guidance and certainly  more  recent  than  the  two  cases
    relied on by the judge at paragraph 71. I therefore find that the judge
    failed to assess whether, in the light  of  the  up-to-date  background
    evidence and expert evidence which was before him, the current  country
    guidance case of AK (Afghanistan)  should  be  followed  or  should  be
    departed from.  The judge found that the Appellant  could  relocate  to
    Kabul on the basis of evidence which did not include the expert  report
    or the background material which was before him.  The  judge  therefore
    erred in law in failing to assess the current  situation  and  deciding
    whether the Appellant would be at risk on return.

29.  In relation to the last two points it is not possible  to  say  whether
    the judge could have come to an alternative conclusion had he  properly
    considered the evidence before him. I find that the judge erred in  law
    in failing to make a finding on whether the evidence of Dr Schuster and
    the background material warranted a departure from AK (Afghanistan).

30.  Accordingly, having found that the judge made an error of  law  in  the
    decision of 30th September 2015, I set it aside and re-make  it.  Given
    that the detained fast track procedure was found  to  be  unlawful  and
    that the Appellant's asylum claim was decided without the benefit of an
    interview and in circumstances where he  was  unable  due  to  lack  of
    funding to obtain medical evidence which, had he not been  detained  in
    an unlawful procedure he may well have been able to obtain, I find that
    the refusal of the 14th April 2015 was not in accordance with the  law.



31.  The expert report of Dr Schuster states that:


         "Those who return as young men to Kabul without social networks are
         also vulnerable to recruitment by insurgents.  There was a  further
         risk for those forcibly returned and criminals have been  targeting
         recent returnees from Europe and Australia assuming that they  must
         have money and refusing to believe  that  they  would  be  deported
         without resources. The withdrawal of international troops, the long
         period of uncertainty before the formation of  the  new  government
         following the election emboldened the insurgents and the  beginning
         of 2014 saw a number of spectacular  attacks  that  have  continued
         into 2015.  Currently, the Taliban/insurgents are active in 32  out
         of 34 provinces and the security forces are having  to  battle  for
         the control of many, especially in the south,  especially  Helmand,
         Kandahar, Zabul and east.  There are serious issues in  Paktia  and
         Khost where there has been an influx of refugees  from  Waziristan,
         plus the forced removal of 30,000  Afghan  refugees  from  Pakistan
         following the attack on the school in Peshawar.  However, it  makes
         little sense to single out particular provinces as almost all  have
         seen a sharp decline in security and an  increase  in  attacks  and
         casualties.   The  capital  has  not   been   immune   from   these
         developments.  For the election days in April and  June  2014,  the
         security forces put a ring around Kabul - the only way  they  could
         manage security - so that it was not possible to enter until  after
         polling had finished.  On both  days,  the  only  vehicles  on  the
         streets of the city were those of election officials.  As a  result
         of a massive security operation, the 'spectacular'  Taliban  attack
         that was expected did not materialise but the numbers of casualties
         this year have nonetheless been very high.  From 1  January  to  30
         June 2014, UNAMA documented 4,853 civilian casualties, up 24%  over
         the same period in 2013.  In summary it would be more  accurate  to
         say that Kabul is less insecure than other parts of Afghanistan, it
         cannot currently be described as secure."


32.  Given the possible change in the security situation I am  of  the  view
    that the Appellant's claim  has  not  been  fairly  processed  and  the
    refusal of 14th April 2015 is not in  accordance  with  the  law.   The
    discrepancies referred to in the refusal letter between the substantive
    interview  in  2008  and   the   screening   interview   with   further
    representations did not amount  to  anxious  scrutiny  given  that  the
    Appellant was not substantively interviewed and was  detained  in  fast
    track despite the existence of a Rule 35  report  and  the  declaration
    that the procedure was unlawful.





Conclusion

33.  I find that there is  an  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision of 2nd October 2015.  I set aside the decision and remake  it.
    I allow the Appellant's appeal insofar as the decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 14th April 2015 was not in accordance with the law.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed in so far as the Respondent's decision of  14th  April
2015 was not in accordance with the law.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                  J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 31st March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



             J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 31st March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
