
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/02563/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th June 2013                              |On 17th July 2013            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                              DAVID MUTIMUKULU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Samra, solicitor of Harbans Singh & Co
For the Respondent:    Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on  18th  March  1967.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 24th January 2001 using his own  passport
    and was granted six months' leave to remain.  On 22nd January  2002  he
    applied for leave to  remain  as  a  student  but  thereafter  made  an
    application to remain under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   He  was  granted
    discretionary  leave  until  21st  July  2007.   Thereafter  a  further
    application for leave to remain was refused on 12th February 2009.  The
    appellant claimed asylum on 11th January 2011.

2.   That was refused by the respondent under cover of the  letter  of  18th
    February 2011.

3.   The appellant sought to appeal against that decision which appeal  came
    before Immigration Judge Forrester on 21st June 2011.

4.   The appeal was dismissed in all respects.

5.   Grounds of appeal were submitted to the effect that there had  been  an
    inadequate consideration of the risk of return so far as the  appellant
    is concerned, and also a defective application  of  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted in respect  of  that  matter  on  25th
    July 2011.

7.   The appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  on  21st
    February 2012.

8.   The Judge concluded that there was no error in the  approach  taken  by
    Judge Forrester to the issue of risk  on  return,  having  applied  the
    guidance as set out in EM and Others  (returnees)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2011]
    UKUT 98 (IAC).

9.   However, the Judge identified an error in respect of Article 8  of  the
    ECHR and proceeded thereafter to rehear that aspect.

10.  The outcome of the  appeal  was,  however,  that  the  appeals  of  the
    appellant were dismissed in all respects.

11.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  submitted  against  the  decision  of  Judge
    McCarthy, essentially focused once again upon the risk of  return.   It
    is said that the Judge failed to give  weight  to  the  finding  in  RN
    (Zimbabwe) or to the decision in HJ (Iran).

12.  It seemed to me that Judge McCarthy has  not  fully  dealt  with  those
    aspects in  the  hearing  in  respect  of  asylum  and/or  humanitarian
    protection.  In the circumstances I propose to review the  decision  in
    accordance with Rule 45(a) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  I gave notice to the parties of my  intention  so  to  do,
    indicating that there should be listing in the  Upper  Tribunal  for  a
    rehearing upon that discrete issue, namely the safety of return.

13.  No objection to that course of action was raised by either party.

14.  On 14th March 2013 the matter was listed before me in pursuance  of  my
    decision.  Unfortunately the solicitors who had  been  acting  for  the
    appellant until shortly before that date were Blakemores, and they were
    made the subject of intervention.  Mr Samra of Harbans Singh & Co  most
    courteously attended the hearing but had not  had  the  opportunity  of
    considering the matter in any detail, nor did he have any  papers.   It
    was in those circumstances that it seemed to me that fairness  dictated
    an adjournment for the representatives to be better acquainted with the
    facts.

15.  I highlighted for the assistance of the parties that my  rehearing  was
    limited to the determination of the profile of  the  appellant  at  all
    material respects in Zimbabwe, and of  his  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  I indicated that it would be necessary to consider  and  make
    findings upon the appellant's profile, and put the  parties  on  notice
    that any further materials in relation to such matters should  observed
    prior to the hearing.   I  observed  that  it  would  be  necessary  to
    consider and apply the case law in particular CM (EM country  guidance;
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 0059 and  RT  (Zimbabwe)  EWCA  Civ
    1285.

16.  Thus it was the matter  came  before  me  for  determination  on  those
    issues on 4th June 2013.  Mr Samra of Harbans Singh &  Co  attended  on
    this occasion as he had done in the past.   He  was  content  that  the
    matter be determined upon the issues which I  had  highlighted  in  the
    decision and directions dated 28th March 2013.   A  number  of  further
    documents had been submitted by the appellant  in  pursuance  of  those
    directions.

17.  It may be  helpful  at  the  outset  to  summarise  the  situation  and
    circumstances of the appellant as presented to Judge Forrester and  set
    out in that determination.

18.   The  appellant  had  adopted  his   evidence-in-chief,   his   witness
    statements of 17th March and 20th April 2011 as well as  his  screening
    and asylum interviews.  His wife also gave  evidence  and  adopted  her
    statements of 22nd March and 20th April 2011.

19.  The appellant is aged 47, born and brought up in  Buhera.   He  married
    in 1994 and the couple have some eight children aged between 26 and 16,
    all of whom remain in Zimbabwe apart from one in Australia.

20.  Between 1983 and 1999 the appellant worked for  the  Barclays  Bank  of
    Zimbabwe Limited.  He was a Ndebele and was a member of  the  Patriotic
    Front ZAPU until that organisation merged with the ZANU-PF in  December
    1987.

21.  The appellant asserts that he  joined  the  MDC  at  its  formation  in
    September 1999.  He considered himself  to  be  a  grassroots  activist
    supporting the MP  in  the  2000  Parliamentary  elections  in  Harare.
    Whilst in Zimbabwe he attended a number of demonstrations and events.

22.  It was his claim that in  September  1999  whilst  attending  one  such
    event, he was detained and held in custody  for  three  days.   He  was
    charged with civil arrest and remained for a  further  three  weeks  in
    custody until released on bail.  He was required to return to the local
    magistrates' court every month and  report  to  Harare  police  station
    weekly.  At that time he and his family were living at  Msasa  Park  in
    Harare.

23.  His wife left Zimbabwe in October 2000 to come to  the  United  Kingdom
    for a holiday and three months later he also joined her.

24.  It is his case that that arrest and his  fleeing  bail  has  created  a
    profile for himself in Zimbabwe.

25.  It is his case that following his departure the authorities  have  been
    looking for him, calling at  his  home  and  asking  questions  of  his
    children.  The  authorities  took  no  aggressive  action  towards  his
    children  until  December  2008  when  his  son  was  beaten  up  after
    protesting about the police enquiries.  The family  moved  to  a  safer
    place but his daughter Karen was raped by ZANU-PF  youths  in  February
    2009.

26.  The appellant has returned to Zimbabwe on  two  occasions  to  see  his
    children, those being in 2005 and again in 2006.   His  wife  has  also
    returned  to  Zimbabwe  on  five   occasions,   the   last   being   in
    September/October 2006.  The appellant stayed at the home of a relative
    in Hatfield, Harare, and his children visited him there.  On the second
    occasion he asserts that at Harare Airport, having  passed  immigration
    control, he was questioned for  around  half  an  hour  whilst  in  the
    departure area before boarding the plane.

27.  In the reasons for refusal the  respondent  at  paragraphs  20  onwards
    indicated that it was not considered that the  appellant  had  acquired
    any significant profile or any profile in Zimbabwe.

28.  It was noted that the appellant's wife also made  an  asylum  claim  in
    2009 and subsequently has had her appeal considered by  an  Immigration
    Judge and dismissed.  It was significant to the respondent that in  her
    asylum claim she had not raised the appellant's problems  as  a  reason
    why she had left Zimbabwe.  She had come to the UK for a holiday.   The
    first  problems  she  claimed  to  have  faced  were  in  2006.   These
    statements are highlighted in the appeal determination  promulgated  on
    7th October 2009.  It is submitted therefore that,  had  the  appellant
    fled Zimbabwe in 2001 because of the reasons which were  now  advanced,
    such would have been mentioned by her at that time.

29.  It was noted that the appellant returned to  Zimbabwe  and  experienced
    no problems passing through the airport, albeit that he  had  used  his
    own passport.  It was considered  that  if  the  appellant  was  indeed
    wanted by the authorities  they would have detained him.  It of  course
    is of particular relevance, given the  interview  which  the  appellant
    claims to have had in 2006, when he was merely  asked  whether  he  was
    living abroad and no indication was given as to any  knowledge  of  the
    authorities as to past wrongdoings.   Those matters it is  a  contended
    point to the appellant not to be of any interest to the authorities  by
    reason of his profile.

30.  It was therefore not accepted that the appellant had been  arrested  in
    the circumstances as required.

31.  It is also to be  noted  that  there  were  significant  contradictions
    between the appellant's evidence and that of his wife concerning who it
    was that was raped by ZANU-PF.  It was the claim of the appellant  that
    it was his stepdaughter Karen who was raped.  This was set out  in  the
    interview and in a statement, whereas during his wife's  asylum  appeal
    he had actually testified that it was his  daughter  Ashleigh  who  had
    been raped.  At that same hearing his wife had stated that it was Karen
    who had been raped.

32.  It was this matter among others that led the  Judge  to  conclude  that
    the evidence lacked credibility.

33.  The claim that the police first visited his home in February  2001  but
    none of his family received  any  additional  problems  until  December
    2008.  It was considered to lack credibility that there would not  have
    been some adverse response by the authorities prior to that, if  indeed
    they had been actively seeking the appellant as he seeks to claim  that
    they were.

34.  Significantly it was noted in the refusal letter  that  at  his  wife's
    appeal hearing she made no reference to the  attack  on  the  son.   No
    reference had been made either in her  asylum  claim  or  that  of  her
    appeal hearing.

35.  Furthermore, at the wife's appeal hearing  she  had  raised  the  issue
    that she had been threatened by green  bombers  when  she  returned  to
    Zimbabwe in 2006.  In the  appellant's  own  asylum  interview  he  had
    stated in reply to question 102 that she had  not  faced  any  problems
    when she returned to Zimbabwe.

36.  Those issues were raised at the hearing before me by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

37.  The appellant indicated that in March 2011 his solicitors had  prepared
    a witness statement for him and  had  put  in  the  fact  that  it  was
    Ashleigh who had been raped.  The appellant had picked  up  that  error
    and rung the solicitors who advised him to stick by  what  was  in  the
    statement rather than correct it.  It was that he took that advice  and
    gave that evidence at the hearing, notwithstanding that he knew that it
    was Karen as indeed his wife had said.

38.  I am invited to find that  that  explanation  lacks  credibility.   The
    appellant had an important job in Zimbabwe and was  clearly  a  man  of
    considerable intelligence.  There is no reason why that  mistake  could
    not have been acknowledged at the hearing.  I was asked to find  indeed
    that there was a deeper significance undermining credibility,  in  that
    the appellant was prepared to give evidence as to what he  now  accepts
    was not the correct  evidence.   I  was  asked  to  find  that  if  the
    appellant was prepared to mislead the court as to one crucial aspect of
    his evidence he may well have done so on other aspects.

39.  The appellant stressed that  the  reason  that  he  left  Zimbabwe  was
    because of the difficulties.  He had a good job and therefore there was
    no reason for him to have left otherwise.  His wife did not attend  the
    hearing as he had been advised  by  his  solicitors  that  her  further
    statement would suffice.

40.  As to his ability to leave upon his own  passport  the  appellant  said
    that when he was granted bail he had declared that he did  not  have  a
    passport.  Thus the authorities would not have been on the lookout  for
    it.

41.  He insisted that  when  he  returned  in  September  2005  to  see  his
    children he did not go to his own house but slept at a relative's house
    for ten days.  The children came to see him.  In 2006 he was questioned
    at the airport as to why he had a residence  permit  in  his  passport.
    The passport was handed back to him.  Because he then had discretionary
    leave to remain he had a residency permit in his passport.

42.  It was also submitted to the appellant that he and his wife  had  scant
    regard for the truth.  In the United Kingdom his wife had been  working
    upon a false document.  The appellant said that he was unaware of  that
    false document and he said that his wife had met a man who agreed to do
    the papers for her and all had been sent to  NASS.   The  document  was
    shown to the appellant concerning the overpayment of �5,000 to his wife
    as a result of that  fraud.   The  appellant  maintained  that  he  was
    unaware of that situation.

43.  In terms  of  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom, it was noted in the reasons for  refusal  that  the  appellant
    claims to have attended the Zimbabwe Vigil demonstration  in  2003  and
    that he had been attending such vigils once or twice a  month.   It  is
    his claim that his involvement with such vigils would lead  to  adverse
    attention from the authorities in Zimbabwe because his  face  has  been
    published on the internet at  the  gatherings.   It  is  noted  by  the
    respondent in the reasons for refusal  that  there  were  thousands  of
    photographs of Zimvigil attendees on the internet, none of which appear
    to carry the names of  the  people  photographed.   It  was  considered
    therefore that his presence in such photographs would not lead  to  the
    adverse  attention  of  the  authorities  in  Zimbabwe.    Indeed   the
    respondents carried out an internet search in the appellant's name  and
    there being no results to indicate that he had attended  the  vigil  or
    had any anti-government profile.

44.  It was to be noted that at the hearing in relation to  the  appellant's
    wife it was her claim that she also attended the vigil and that she was
    also a member of ROHR.  It was the finding of the Immigration Judge  on
    that occasion that her membership was insincere and only  entered  into
    in order to create an asylum claim.

45.  Indeed at the  previous  hearing  Judge  Forrester  noted  the  limited
    nature of the appellant's sur place activities.  As there were some 3.4
    billion photographs on the Flickr website in February  2010  with  more
    added every month it was unlikely in the  extreme  that  the  appellant
    would be noticed from those photographs.

46.  The Judge also noted that it was of significance that  since  being  in
    the United Kingdom the appellant had not joined a local branch  of  the
    MDC  which  was  considered  surprising  given  his  previous   claimed
    involvement with that party.  It was noted that both he  and  his  wife
    had their photographs taken at vigils and the photographs are  viewable
    via Flickr on the internet.  They have also both  been  interviewed  by
    Zimbabwe broadcasting networks, DVDs  recordings  of  those  interviews
    were available to be viewed at the hearing.

47.  Reliance is placed upon the updated witness statement of the  appellant
    dated 29th May 2013.  It is said that his son who was beaten in 2008 is
    now in South Africa and has been granted asylum there.  He said so  far
    as his activities in the United Kingdom that he was an active member of
    the MDC having joined the party because  he  agreed  with  the  party's
    ideology and aims whilst in Zimbabwe.

48.  He said that his children are no longer living  in  Harare  because  of
    the harassment of ZANU-PF and the police.   They  were  dispersed  from
    Msasa Park, Harare to Belvedere where his stepdaughter Karen was raped.
     They then moved to Ruwa before  the  boys  dispersed  and  went  their
    separate ways.  The girls were taken in by Precious Nufahore who is  an
    MDC councillor for Ward 6 in Norton.

49.  His son Mthabis is in Gwanda with  his  maternal  grandmother  for  the
    last three years.  His son Mqobile is in Goromonzi living  with  church
    members.

50.  The appellant indicated that he attended Zimbabwe  vigils  outside  the
    Zimbabwean Embassy.

51.  He maintains his claim that he would be unable to relocate anywhere  in
    Zimbabwe.  He made reference to the green bombers who act as vigilantes
    and operate throughout the country.  He  maintains  that  there  is  no
    perceived difference between high and lower level perceived  supporters
    of the MDC.

52.  The appellant  also  makes  a  further  statement  on  6th  March  2013
    essentially repeating his claim.

53.  He said that original he was from  Msasa  Park  in  Harare  and  speaks
    Shona and Ndebele.  He says that he cannot relocate to Bulawayo as  the
    ZANU-PF are in that area and that he does not have  any  family  there.
    He has a sister in Queque with whom he speaks from time to time.

54.  As to the issue of Article  8  he  contends  that  he  has  family  and
    private life in the United Kingdom having adapted to  British  culture,
    as has his wife, three year old niece, nephews and his daughter  Alesha
    born April 2008 with whom he has contact from time to time.  She  lives
    with her mother.  He also suffers from HIV.

55.  As I indicated previously there are a substantial volume  of  documents
    in this matter.  Bundle A consists of over 430 folios  with  statements
    and other  relevant  personal  documents.   There  is  also  a  further
    supplementary bundle, bundle B, containing background material of  some
    657  folios.   The  majority  of  those  documents  were  before  Judge
    Forrester and Judge McCarthy.

56.  I note in particular the statements of the appellant of  7th  February,
    17th March and 20th April 2011 and  7th  February  2012.   I  note  the
    screening interview and the SEF interview also.

57.  In particular I note the response statement of the  appellant  of  17th
    March 2011.  In dealing with the questioning at the departure lounge at
    the airport, an interrogation which lasted half an hour.  The appellant
    indicated that he was asked questions such as "why are you in  the  UK"
    and "what are you up to there".  He was asked why he had been granted a
    UK residence permit and asked about his views regarding Mugabe.

58.  He is not a paid up member of ROHR like his wife, but that  he  attends
    the organisation fundraising functions.  He was not a paid up member of
    the MDC in the UK, the reason for that  being  that  he  was  based  in
    Leicester and when he came to the United  Kingdom  the  MDC  were  more
    active in the London area.  Unlike the MDC there is no subscription  to
    join the vigil other than the  travelling  costs.   He  says  that  the
    Zimvigil is a grouping  of  various  organisations  and  has  the  same
    objective as the smaller group.

59.  The appellant said this attendance at the vigil depended  on  his  work
    schedule and after he ceased  employment  his  ability  to  travel  was
    reduced.  It is said of his wife that she had contributed two  articles
    to the Zimbabwean, a weekly publication newspaper.  She has  also  been
    interviewed by the  Zimbabwe  Broadcasting  Network.   Those  newspaper
    articles dated 8th February 2010 and 10th December 2009 were  enclosed.



60.  There is a letter from  the  MDC  Secretary  General's  Office  of  1st
    October 2010 confirming that Precious Mufahore had given refuge to  the
    appellant's daughters and speaks of the wife's activism in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The various photographs of the appellant and his wife at  the
    demonstrations are set out as being covered on Flickr.  It is said that
    these photographs were taken using a particular camera.  The  dates  of
    4th December 2010, 11th December 2010 and 5th March 2011 are  given  as
    the dates of those photographs.  The  appellant's  wife  was  seemingly
    interviewed at one of those demonstrations.  A link to  that  interview
    is enclosed at page 191 of bundle A.

61.  Given the potential importance of details of activities in  the  United
    Kingdom to the  claim  it  is  significant  that,  notwithstanding  the
    request in the directions, little evidence has been provided as to  the
    more recent activity of  the  appellant  or  his  wife  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant in his oral evidence merely repeated  that  the
    Zimvigil was a better platform to make the protest.  He and  she  would
    attend to build up the numbers  and  to  sing  and  dance.   They  were
    participants rather than organisers of the event.   When  pressed  upon
    when such events took place the appellant said that there was  a  large
    gathering of ROHR in October 2012 and a demonstration  by  Zimvigil  in
    July 2012.

62.  As to the situation of his children, the appellant said  that  his  two
    daughters were still in Norton, one daughter was in South Africa as was
    one of his sons.  So far as his daughters were  concerned  one  was  at
    high school and the other at college.  Norton was 40km from Harare  and
    was a farming town.   He  confirmed  that  his  sons  lived  where  his
    statement had placed them.

63.  The parties made their submissions to me.  On behalf of the  respondent
    it was submitted that there were contradictions or omissions  from  the
    evidence of the appellant and his wife when compared.  For example,  no
    mention was made by the appellant of his wife's difficulties which  she
    claimed to have had in 2006.   There  is  no  mention  by  her  of  his
    difficulties.

64.  I was asked to find that the evidence given by the appellant as to  his
    situation and circumstances in Zimbabwe were not credible.  He  was  of
    no interest.

65.  Equally I was asked to find that his activities in the  United  Kingdom
    were both insincere and insignificant.  Indeed there has been a lack of
    detail as to precisely when it was that the appellant  claims  to  have
    carried out such activities.  The photographs  taken  and  put  on  the
    website were taken of the appellant in order to boost his asylum claim.

66.  On behalf of the appellant I was asked to find that  he  was  credible.
    He had a well-founded fear of returning on the grounds  of  his  having
    jumped  bail.   His  involvement  with  the  Zimbabwe  vigil  was  long
    standing.

67.  I bear in  mind  the  standard  of  proof  in  asylum  cases  namely  a
    reasonable likelihood or a serious possibility of harm for a Convention
    reason.  I bear in  mind  the  nature  of  humanitarian  protection  as
    enshrined in paragraph 339C of HC 395.  A similarly low standard is  to
    be  applied  to  an  assessment  of  the  appellant's   human   rights,
    particularly whether there  would  be  a  real  risk  of  a  breach  of
    fundamental rights.

68.  I bear in mind in assessing credibility that the whole context  of  the
    claim should be considered so as to give due weight  and  relevance  to
    individual factors.  I bear in mind also that the appellant's wife  has
    not given evidence  in  this  hearing  and  care  should  be  taken  in
    assessing what she says in her  own  application  if  it  conflicts  or
    contradicts that which the appellant has said.  Thus it is  appropriate
    in certain of the circumstances as set out above to bear those  matters
    in mind.

69.  Having considered the matter  as  a  whole  I  do  not  find  that  the
    appellant is a credible witness, neither as  to  the  events  which  he
    experienced in Zimbabwe nor as to his claim to be an  active  supporter
    of Zimvigil in the United Kingdom.

70.  As to the events in Zimbabwe I note  the  concerns  and  criticisms  as
    expressed both by Judge Forrester and indeed by the respondent  in  the
    reasons for refusal.

71.  The appellant had a responsible job in Zimbabwe and in such  a  context
    no doubt had reached an accord with the authorities.  I have  no  doubt
    that were the appellant to be  involved  in  the  activities  which  he
    claimed or indeed to be someone subject to arrest  and  enquiry  as  he
    claims, that would  have had a  significant  impact  upon  his  further
    employment.  No details have been given as to that  employment  and  no
    suggestion has been made that he lost  his  employment  otherwise  than
    voluntarily giving it up to come  to  the  United  Kingdom.   The  very
    nature of the appellant's fear is enshrined in his claim  that  he  has
    failed to attend his bail.  No evidence of any proceedings or  warrants
    addressed to him have been given and indeed I find it more likely  than
    not that, had he been subject of such interest, he would not have  been
    able to have gone back to Zimbabwe and returned on  several  occasions.
    The interview at the airport had the appearance of being a routine  one
    particularly arising from his stamp in the passport.

72.  The evidence  given  by  the  appellant  concerning  the  rape  of  his
    daughter as opposed to Karen is a significant matter as it  shows  that
    the  appellant  is  capable  of   giving   incorrect   evidence   quite
    deliberately to a Judge when an admission of error on the part  of  the
    solicitors would have been a much easier course to take.

73.  I do not find it credible that if  the  authorities  were  hunting  the
    appellant so persistently from 2001 as he claims, that they would  have
    delayed any overt  harassment of his family to 2008 as is claimed.   No
    details of any warrant or legal proceedings for evading bail have  been
    produced.  The appellant's children would seem to be able to reside  in
    various parts of Zimbabwe without difficulty,  in  particular  his  two
    daughters attending a school and college.

74.  As to the activities in the United Kingdom they would  seem  to  be  of
    limited application.  Although encouraged  in  my  directions  to  give
    further  details  as  to  more  recent  activities,   none   were   not
    forthcoming.  Though the appellant initially claimed that  he  attended
    the vigil several times a month, little evidence has been presented  of
    that frequency.  Clearly I accept, as indeed did Judge Forrester,  that
    the appellant has  attended  on  occasions,  but  such  I  find  to  be
    opportunistic and designed to bolster an asylum claim.  I bear in  mind
    that the photographs allegedly taken of  the  appellant  at  the  vigil
    seemingly were taken at his request and placed upon the website.

75.  Given the vast number of images that are upon the website I too do  not
    find that such creates any significant profile of the appellant so  far
    as the authorities are concerned.  Significantly the  appellant  claims
    to have been involved in the vigils since 2003  but  those  attendances
    created no difficulty for him on his two periods of return.   His  wife
    likewise was with him but seemingly she was able to return to  Zimbabwe
    on at least five occasions.  It is of significance and  undermining  of
    credibility that the appellant makes no reference to  the  difficulties
    which he faced in 2006 in his own account, while she made no  reference
    to his difficulties in 2001.
76.  I do not find that the appellant is a genuine activist.  Even if he  is
    I do not find that the nature and scope of his activities in the United
    Kingdom are such as to  create  any  significant  profile  for  him  on
    return.

77.  I bear in mind the submissions that have been made  together  with  the
    supplementary skeleton arguments of March 2013 as enshrined  in  bundle
    B.

78.  In considering the risk of return it is necessary to bear  in  mind  CM
    (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059  (IAC).
    This generally revisits the country guidance given in EM.

79.   It  is  recognised  that  there  is  significantly  less   politically
    motivated violence in Zimbabwe compared to the situation considered  by
    the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does not show  that,  as  a
    general matter, the return of a failed  asylum  seeker  to  the  United
    Kingdom having no significant MDC profile, would result in that  person
    facing a real risk of having to demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF.

80.  The position can likely be otherwise in a  case  of  a  person  without
    ZANU-PF  connections,  returning  to  the  United   Kingdom   after   a
    significant absence to a rural area of Zimbabwe other than Matabeleland
    North or Matabeleland South.  Such a person may well find it  difficult
    to avoid adverse attention amounting to serious ill-treatment from ZANU-
    PF authority figures.   That  adverse  attention  may  well  involve  a
    requirement to demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.

81.  The situation is not uniform across relevant rural areas and there  may
    be reasons  why  a  particular  individual,  although  at  first  sight
    appearing to fall within the category described, in reality does not do
    so.

82.  In general a returnee from the United  Kingdom  to  rural  Matabeleland
    North or Matabeleland South is unlikely to face significant difficulty.

83.  Similarly a returnee to Harare will  in  general  face  no  significant
    difficulties if going to a low density or medium density area.   Whilst
    the socioeconomic situation in high density areas is more  challenging,
    in  general  a  person  without  ZANU-PF  connections  will  not   face
    significant problems there, including a "loyalty test" unless he or she
    has a significant MDC profile or would be reasonably likely  to  engage
    in such activities but for the fear of thereby coming  to  the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF.

84.  A  returnee  to  Bulawayo  will  in  general  not  suffer  the  adverse
    attention of ZANU-PF even if he or she has a significant MDC profile.

85.  It was noted that the economy of Zimbabwe has markedly  improved  since
    the period considered in RN.
86.  The appellant and his family have lived in various  areas  of  Zimbabwe
    for much of their lives and there is no reason why the appellant cannot
    return to Harare.  Indeed there would seem to be little reason why  the
    appellant cannot live with or near to his daughters in the  area  which
    they reside.  Similarly, given the ability of  the  appellant  both  to
    speak Shona and Ndebele there is no reason why he could not relocate to
    many areas within Zimbabwe in safety.

87.  Significantly also the appellant's political profile such as he  claims
    was that he had been a member of ZAPU which merged to  ZANU-PF.   Given
    his employment I find that at the time that he was living in the United
    Kingdom he would have had an accommodation with the authorities.

88.  So far as RT is concerned it is contended that the  appellant  will  be
    forced to lie about his activities in the United  Kingdom  were  he  to
    return.  I find that they were activities designed to bolster an asylum
    claim.  For many years the appellant had been granted lawful  residence
    in the United Kingdom on account of  his  HIV  and  health  conditions.
    There is no reason at  all  why  the  appellant  could  not  give  that
    explanation where pressed upon the reason why he had been away  for  so
    long.

89.  So far as his  motivation  to  continue  his  political  activities  in
    Zimbabwe I bear in mind HJ (Iran) but have found the appellant to  lack
    credibility both as to his political activities  in  Zimbabwe  and  the
    genuine nature of his activities in the UK.  I find that he is  neither
    someone who would be compelled  to  act  politically  in  Zimbabwe  nor
    someone who would feel compelled out of fear  to  conceal  his  genuine
    political views.

90.  So far as Article 8 was concerned that was considered at  length  on  a
    previous occasion, and there was no request that I revisit  that  area.
    The only further detail which has  been  provided  in  all  the  recent
    statements does not, it seems to me, significantly alter that  position
    or the findings made therein.

91.  Overall therefore I find that the  appellant  may  return  to  Zimbabwe
    either to one of his home areas or to where his daughters now reside or
    indeed to another part to be  close  to  his  family  without  fear  of
    violence or retribution.  Clearly he is a man of  intelligence,  having
    skills which would equip him to find employment,  support  himself  and
    his wife.

Decision

The appeal in respect of asylum is dismissed.   The  appeal  in  respect  of
humanitarian protection is  dismissed.   The  appeal  in  respect  of  human
rights is also dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
