

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06170/2010


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 30th July 2014                             |On 19th November 2014        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 YUN QIN XUE
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Miss Rutherford instructed by French & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr Lister - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This appeal has a  long  history  and  returns  again  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal following remittal from the Court of Appeal  on  12th  April
       2011 by Lord Justice Sullivan. The Statement of Reasons  accompanying
       that Courts order is in the following terms:


       1.  Since  the  determination  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  which   was
           promulgated on 19th October 2010, the Supreme  Court's  judgment
           in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4 was  handed  down  on  1st
           February 2011.  In light of this judgment  and  the  Appellant's
           fresh evidence concerning her purported  children,  the  parties
           agree that it is appropriate to remit the Appellant's appeal  to
           the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the  case  to  be  reheard  and   for
           submissions to be made on ZH (Tanzania).


       2. Further, no  submissions  were  made  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
           concerning HJ (Iran) [2010] 3  WLR  386,  judgment  having  been
           handed down by the Supreme Court on 7th July 2010. The Appellant
           has submitted fresh evidence concerning her religious belief and
           now seeks to rely on this judgment. A rehearing will  allow  the
           fresh evidence to be considered and for submissions to  be  made
           on HJ (Iran).


    2. Thereafter the case has been before the Upper Tribunal on a number of
       occasions to allow confirmation of the Appellant's representative, to
       await the promulgation of the country guidance case relating  to  the
       risk to Christians in China of QH (Christians - risk) China CG [2014]
       UKUT 00086 (IAC), and as a result of the failure  of  the  Appellants
       representatives to comply with directions relating to the  filing  of
       documents which would have resulted in a  wasted  costs  order  being
       made against them but for the failure of the administration to served
       the required 'show cause' notice upon French and Co.



Background


    3. The Appellant was born in China in 1984 and  has  filed  six  witness
       statements in support of her case in addition to giving oral evidence
       and being cross  examined.   The  core  of  her  claim  is  that  she
       graduated from primary school in 1997 and from  secondary  school  in
       2000. At that time her  mother  started  to  believe  in  Jesus.  The
       Applicant would read the bible to her mother as a result of which she
       too became interested.  In  June  2004  the  Appellant  travelled  to
       another village to  collect  bibles  and  on  3rd  October  2004  was
       baptised.  In 2005 the Appellant states she was asked  to  travel  to
       other villages to preach and  distribute  leaflets  although  as  her
       knowledge of the bible was not as detailed as it  needed  to  be  she
       attended classes to study  the  bible.   In  March  2006  the  Police
       arrested those attending the bible class. The  Appellant  states  she
       was detained and sentenced to three years education through a  labour
       camp.  She was transferred to such a camp  although  bailed  on  30th
       March 2008 as she required medical treatment.  On 25th December  2008
       the Appellant attended a church  meeting  which  was  raided  by  the
       Police although she claims she managed to escape. The Appellant  also
       claims that the Police went to her house and that a wanted notice was
       issued against her. She left China with the help  of  the  Snakeheads
       and travelled to Moscow where she met a man who became  her  partner,
       Wei Jie Chen. On 5th June 2009 she left Moscow for an unknown country
       before entering the United Kingdom on 15th August  2009.  The  asylum
       claim was made four months later on 7th December 2009.


    4. On 30th January 2010 the Appellant gave birth to  her  son.  In  June
       2011 the Appellant separated from her son's father, Sheng Zeng Chen.


    5. In her statement of the 26th January 2012  the  Appellant  claims  to
       have given birth to a daughter on 15th February 2006 in China out  of
       wedlock. The Appellant claims that as  the  child  was  born  out  of
       wedlock she will not be permitted to attend school or  receive  state
       medical assistance. The child is being cared for by  the  Appellant's
       parents in China as her father has abandoned her. It is also  claimed
       there have been attempts to resolve the child's status which have not
       proved successful as a result of demands for  what  are  descried  as
       'exorbitant fees' by the officials concerned.


    6. In her statement dated 10th December 2010, prepared for  the  purpose
       of the hearing before the Court of Appeal, the Appellant  claims  not
       to have a birth certificate for her daughter  in  China  as  she  was
       unable to obtain a child-bearing certificate in accordance  with  the
       law.  The Appellant asserts she is  in  breach  of  the  'one  child'
       policy as a result. DNA tests were commissioned.  The Appellant  also
       refers to a perceived risk on return as a  result  of  her  Christian
       beliefs under the Ministry of  Watchman  Nee  and  Witness  Lee.  She
       claims followers of this Ministry  are  often  known  as  'The  Local
       Churches' or 'The Lords Recovery' outside China.


    7. In her witness statement dated 20th May 2010 the Appellant claims  to
       be a member of the Christian underground church as a result of  which
       she was arrested and sentenced to three years 'education'.  She  fell
       pregnant whilst in Moscow and has never  been  to  an  official/state
       church in China and so does not appreciate  the  differences  between
       her chosen religion and that practiced  in  other  churches.  Further
       comments upon the content of the reasons for refusal letter are  made
       which do not need to be set out but which  have  been  considered  in
       detail by the Tribunal  as  has  all  the  available  evidence,  both
       written and oral.


    8. In her witness statement dated 29th July 2013  the  Appellant  blames
       her reduced attendance at  church  in  the  period  between  her  two
       statements upon the need to attend English classes,  her  son  having
       asthma, together with help given to  a  friend  who  is  ill.  It  is
       claimed this made it difficult for  the  Appellant  to  maintain  her
       commitment  to  the  church  during   that   time,   although   since
       February/March 2013 her son's health has improved and  the  Appellant
       claims  she  is  able  to  attend  church  regularly.  The  Appellant
       specifically states that she has asked the leader of  her  church  to
       support her in her case but that he has been reluctant to do so.


    9. The Appellant claims to attend the church  and  related  meetings  as
       much as possible and that if returned to China she will not  be  able
       to  openly  practice  her  religion  as  the  only  State  sanctioned
       religions are Catholicism and Protestant which she  states  she  will
       not want to attend because they are not the  same  denomination.  The
       Appellant also claims she will be unable to practice her religion  at
       home as she will be persecuted and that she  practiced  in  a  'house
       church' by choice.


   10. In her most recent  witness  statement,  dated  9th  July  2014,  the
       Appellant states that in China they  held  meetings  in  unregistered
       local house churches. It is also stated that  the  church  cannot  be
       registered as it is viewed as a cult and so the  meetings  cannot  be
       open. The Ministry is not based upon any name or denomination.    The
       term 'The Lords Recovery' is said to be one of the  names  attributed
       to this Christian  Ministry  by  the  Chinese  Government  and  other
       denominations. The Appellant states the  Ministry  believe  that  the
       Lord is moving today to recover the proper testimony of the church in
       this age, based upon the truths revealed in the bible.


   11. The Appellant also states she meets with  fellow  followers  of  this
       church every Sunday in Nottingham and tries to attend  as  many  home
       meetings as possible held in member's house on a  weekly  basis.  The
       Appellant repeats her belief that she will be at risk on  return  for
       her beliefs and  states  that  the  Chinese  government  regards  the
       Christian Ministry of Watchman Nee and Witness Lee as 'The Shouters',
       and therefore a cult in China, as a result  of  the  calling  of  the
       Lord's name. She accepts that the Ministry she follows are  not  part
       of 'The Shouters' although the Ministry is viewed as a threat by  the
       government as a result of its rapid growth in popularity.


   12. The Appellant summarises the elements of her case which give rise  to
       a real risk as being (a) her illegal departure from China in February
       2009, (b) her entering the United Kingdom and claiming  asylum  based
       upon a fear from the Communist Party thereby tarnishing the good name
       of China (c) breaching the 'one child policy' and (d) being a  member
       of a Ministry that is banned and  unregistered  and  which  has  been
       associated with the Church of Almighty God.


   13. In her oral evidence the Appellant claimed that if returned to  China
       she will not want to go to another church as it will not be the  same
       as her faith. She stated that her son born in the UK may be prevented
       from attending school and that if she is  arrested  on  return  there
       will be no one to care for the child. The child is  said  to  receive
       medication for his asthma. The child also  speaks  both  English  and
       Mandarin.


   14. The Appellant was asked in cross-examination about her  comment  that
       she had asked a leader of her church to support her in evidencing her
       attendance but that he had refused to do so. When asked why this  was
       so the Appellant claimed that it was because she had  not  asked  and
       that this person was not the leader in any event, but a fellow of the
       church which had no leaders. When the Appellant asked him  to  assist
       her and come to court she stated he did not say he would help her and
       so in the end she did not ask him. The explanation  given  for  there
       being no letters in support written  by  others  pre  July  2014  was
       because the Appellant claims not to have asked for them although this
       reply appears to contradict her claim in her 2013 statement that  she
       had asked the leader before that time, who was  hesitant.  When  this
       was put to the Appellant she claimed to have been baptised  in  2013,
       to have asked them then, but not since until 2014 as she was aware of
       her appeal hearing.


   15. The Appellant repeated her claim to attend church  regularly  and  to
       have last attended the Sunday before the  hearing  which  would  have
       been the 27th July 2014. The Appellant was asked when she last missed
       a meeting but claimed not to  be  able  to  remember,  although  when
       further questioned on the point claimed it was five or six weeks  ago
       when she did not attend  the  church  as  one  of  the  children  had
       'something else on'. The Appellant stated that her son  attended  the
       church with her.


   16. The Appellant stated she has known Mr Wan Bo Chen since February 2012
       who does not attend her church, although she  claims  to  have  asked
       him. When asked the last time he attended the church she  stated  she
       could not remember but that it was quite a  along  time  ago,  a  few
       months, but that she could not remember. When asked why  he  had  not
       been for a few months she stated it was because of medical procedures
       undertaken in December 2012.


   17. The Appellant claims to have attempted to contact her family in China
       via the internet and through friends but when it was put to her  than
       no evidence of the same, such as copy e-mails, had been  provided  in
       the bundle she accepted this was so.


   18. The Appellant was asked clarification questions  from  the  Bench  in
       light of her oral and written evidence. In relation to  Watchmen  Nee
       and Witness Lee and their role in the church, the Appellant stated as
       far as her church were concerned they follow  the  figures  who  have
       gone before and that the bible they use was  written  by  both  these
       men.


   19. When asked to name the chapter of the bible that was important to the
       Church the Appellant stated it was Paul: Chapter 6.  When  asked  the
       significance of the book of Mathew, the Appellant stated this was  an
       important gospel but could not say why this was to them, but that the
       New Testament is important.


   20. The Appellant was then asked  whether  The  Lords  Recovery  was  her
       church to which she replied it was not called that, that  the  church
       did not have a name and  that  it  was  called  'One  Church'.  Lords
       Recovery means the bible and is not interpreted in any way. When  the
       Appellant was told this response appeared surprising as Watchmen  Nee
       and Witness Lee were credited with  a  lot  of  work  for  The  Lords
       Recovery and that she was claiming to be  involved  in  a  church  of
       which she appears not to know much about, the Appellant's  reply  was
       that she did not have any comment.


   21. The Appellant was asked what the two things are that the Lord  wished
       to recover. The Appellants reply was that it is  that  God  wants  to
       lead us to a  new  world.  When  asked  whether  they  discussed  the
       enjoyment and experience of  the  riches  of  Christ  in  church  the
       response was that they do witness something but do not discuss it  or
       argue about it. They  believe  what  Witness  Lee  stated  about  the
       trinity of god, three in one.  I comment  upon  this  aspect  of  the
       evidence further below.


   22. The Appellant was assisted by a witness Mr Chen who met the Appellant
       in February 2012 when they were both reporting  at  the  Loughborough
       Reporting Centre.  He claimed in  his  witness  statement  dated  8th
       November 2013 to have attended a 'sisters meeting' at the  Appellants
       house in April or May 2012 and thereafter attended her church  around
       June/July 2012 when he  stopped  going  due  to  health  issues.   He
       started to attend again in September 2014 and has attended  regularly
       since with the Appellant.


   23. Mr Chen is still receiving medical  treatment.  When  asked  when  he
       attended church, he claimed he still attended on Sundays.  When asked
       when he last went he stated it was  the  previous  Sunday  27th  July
       2014. At this point in the evidence the Appellant had  to  be  warned
       not to speak to  the  witness  as  she  was  observed  to  be  saying
       something to him.  When asked for clarification he then claimed  that
       as the Appellant was not at the church he just went there but that it
       was the most recent Sunday, three days before the hearing.


   24. When asked what he did at the church  Mr  Chen  stated  he  read  the
       bible, the children played together, although he was only there for a
       short period of time and did not stay long.  When asked how  long  he
       remained he stated it was  for  five  to  ten  minutes.   When  asked
       whether he saw the Appellant in church he claimed  he  only  saw  the
       children and that he was there to take the children, which  he  later
       stated was a reference to the Appellant's child. When the  issue  was
       further pursued by Mr Lister Mr Chen  then  stated  he  went  to  the
       church for five to ten minutes to see the  Appellant's  son  who  was
       playing with the other children. He then stated that on  that  Sunday
       he  went  to  a  friends  place  'to  fetch  her'.  When  asked   for
       clarification he stated he went to see his friend and on the way back
       went to the church for five minutes after which he had  something  to
       do and so went to a friend's. When asked when he last attended a full
       service at the church he claimed it was when there was a big meeting.
       He was unable to remember when this was but thought it was  in  2013.
       His evidence is that he sometimes went to church after that  meeting,
       sometimes  not,  and  that  it  was  not  fixed.   Mr  Lister  sought
       clarification for when Mr Chen  last  attended  church  to  which  he
       stated it was the previous Sunday and before then  a  week  prior  to
       that.


  Expert evidence


   25. The Appellant also relies upon the  reports  of  her  country  expert
       Jackie Sheehan formerly of Nottingham University. The  first  report,
       dated 8th August 2013,  is  to  be  found  at  pages  41-113  of  the
       Appellants trial bundle. The report is detailed  and  refers  to  the
       specific instructions given which are to  comment  upon  whether  the
       Appellant would be likely to be at detained on return  to  China  for
       having left China illegally and if so, what would happen to her young
       son born in the UK whilst she was in  detention;  on  the  Appellants
       position under the one-child policy as the mother  of  two  children,
       including the risk of her compulsory sterilisation,  and  on  whether
       relocation away from her home area would be possible and  reduce  the
       risk; and on whether continuing to practice her faith  known  as  the
       Local Church or the Lord's Recovery Church would put her at  risk  in
       China, as well as the risk  in  her  being  a  practicing  Protestant
       Christian in general and not worshipping in a state-approved  church.
       There is also comment upon the authenticity of the wanted notice.


   26. Jackie Sheehan's conclusions are as follows:


       4. My conclusions, in summary, are that Ms Xue would be  detained  as
           someone who had left China illegally on return to the PRC.  Such
           detention can be for up to one year, but as far as we  can  tell
           from rather old sources of information  (in  COIS  China  Report
           October 2012, paragraph 32.04, and previous COIS China Reports),
           it is more usually  for  a  much  shorter  period  for  ordinary
           migrants  as  opposed  to  organisers  of   illegal   migration.
           However, even short-term detention (e.g.  for  15  or  30  days)
           would involve Ms Xue being separated  from  her  three-year  old
           son, as children cannot stay with  their  mother  in  detention.
           The police would expect relatives to take care of the  boy,  and
           if none could be  found  he  will  be  placed  in  a  state  run
           orphanage. Recent evidence of conditions of detention for  women
           in china has revealed that  the  kind  of  facilities  shown  to
           outsiders are often just for show, and do not reflect  the  real
           and much harsher living conditions  of  inmates  away  from  the
           public view.  I will say more about this below in my  discussion
           of the risk Ms Xue would face from continuing to worship  in  an
           unregistered Protestant church in China.


       5. My conclusions with regard to the one-child  policy,  in  summary,
           are that Ms Xue has violated family  planning  regulations  with
           the births out of wedlock of both of her children, as well as by
           not having a birth permit for the second child, and would be the
           subject of a large fine  (social  compensation  fee)  set  at  a
           multiple of average annual earnings in rural  Zhejiang.   Unless
           this fee was paid in full within three years, the children would
           not be entered onto her hukou  register  and  could  not  attend
           state schools, as well as being barred from other services,  and
           relocation away from Zhejiang would not help, as although  fines
           etc.  are  assessed  and  set   at   local   level,   compulsory
           sterilisation for parents of two or more children is a  national
           policy.


       6. My conclusion  with  regard  to  Ms  Xue's  Christianity  are,  in
           summary, that if she joined a  congregation  of  any  unofficial
           Protestant church in China, she would be at risk of  harassment,
           detention  and  persecution  because  of  it,  as  the   Chinese
           authorities are presently engaged in a major crackdown which  is
           intended to force all unofficial church-goers to join the state-
           controlled  faith  organisations,  the   Three-Self   Protestant
           Movement (TSPM), and to destroy any churches  that  resist.   If
           she continued to worship with the Local Church,  also  known  as
           the Lord's Recovery Church, which the PRC classes  as  an  "evil
           cult", this  would  put  her  at  greater  risk  of  longer-term
           detention, not only the maximum of three years  of  Re-education
           Through Labour (RETL), but possibly a prison  sentence  of  more
           than three years' duration. The fact she has been  abroad  would
           bring her under greater suspicion of acting  as  a  conduit  for
           illegal  religious  materials  from  aboard  and  for  continued
           contact with foreign co-religionists, the avoidance of which  is
           a condition for legal Christian worship in China.


       7. Finally, I have examined the wanted circular  issued  for  Ms  Xue
           (discussed in more detail in the relevant  section  below),  and
           have found nothing in it which suggest it is not authentic.  Its
           wording indicates that of Ms Xue came to the  attention  of  the
           police again, her case would be treated as a relatively  serious
           one, and the wording of such document is significant, as if  the
           effect a prior announcement by the police of  the  charges  they
           will  bring,  and  in  the  Chinese  system,  99.9%of   criminal
           defendants are found guilty once charged (as noted in  the  2010
           and 2011 US State Department Human Rights Report, citing Chinese
           government statistics). Ms Xue will have to present  herself  to
           her local police to resume her  hukou  registration,  and  could
           expect to be  detained  and  questioned,  at  the  least,  about
           possible religious  links  with  believers  overseas  and/or  in
           connection  with  the  2009  wanted  notice.   Even  short  term
           detention in China carries with it the risk of torture,  and  in
           cases involving  "cult  evil"  designated  churches,  the  extra
           judicial 6-10 office set up  to  suppress  Falun  Gong  activity
           could also be involved, which would mean Ms Xue would not  enjoy
           even the limited rights allowed  to  suspects  detained  by  the
           regular police.


   27. In addition to the publication of the recent  country  guidance  case
       concerning Chinese Christians there has been, in the interim  period,
       an announcement by the Chinese government of a change to its policies
       relating to family size as a result of the  need  to  encourage  more
       children to be born in China due to  the  shrinking  population.  The
       Standing  Committee  of  the  National  People's  Congress  passed  a
       resolution allowing couples to have two children if either parent  is
       an only child. A proposal  to  abolish  re-education  through  labour
       camps has also been approved. The changes in  policy  were  announced
       following a meeting of top Communist Party officials in November  and
       the reforms, which came at the  end  of  a  six-day  meeting  of  the
       congress, have already been tested in parts of the country.


   28.  China's  population-control  policy  was  introduced  in  1979   and
       restricted couples in urban areas to only one child. In rural  areas,
       families are allowed to have two children if the  first  is  a  girl.
       Other exceptions include ethnic minorities and couples who both  lack
       siblings themselves.  The policy has meant that  about  one-third  of
       China's 1.3 billion citizens were  unable  to  have  a  second  child
       without incurring a fine which has been said to have  led  to  forced
       abortions, female infanticide,  and  the  under-reporting  of  female
       births and is also implicated as a cause of China's gender imbalance.
        The reforms need formal legislative approval to be put  into  effect
       and  it  is  expected  they  will  be  rolled   out   gradually   and
       incrementally  around  the  country,  with   provincial   authorities
       entrusted to make their own decisions on implementation according  to
       the local demographic situation.


   29.  An  addendum  report  from  now  Professor  Jackie  Sheehan  of  the
       University of Cork was commissioned to address the  impact  of  these
       changes upon Ms Xue, in relation to which Professor Sheehan states:


       4. My conclusion. In summary, are that the changes  brought  in  from
           November  2013,  which  have  yet  to  be  adopted  as  part  of
           provincial regulations in all part of China, would not make  any
           difference to Ms Xue as they are not retrospective  and  do  not
           apply to births out of wedlock or to births after the first  for
           which a birth permit is not obtained before conception.


   30. Professor Sheehan notes that at the time of writing  her  report  the
       only provinces which have brought the new policy into force are those
       she names, which includes Ms Xue's home province. It is said the  new
       policy only applies to qualifying married couples and does not  apply
       to birth out of wedlock which remain  a  breach  of  family  planning
       regulations in any event



Discussion


   31. There are a number of  preserved  findings  which  are  the  starting
       pointing in this appeal as follows:


           i. The Respondent accepts that Appellant is a Christian


           ii.    There was at the date  of  the  determination  of  Deputy
                Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Garratt  evidence  to  support   her
                attendance at a Baptist Church in the United Kingdom.


           iii.   The identity of the father of her son is not disputed.


           iv.    The Appellant did not suffer persecution in China and  is
                an economic migrant.


           v. The Appellant was not arrested,  detained,  or  sentenced  to
                three years education through labour.


           vii.   Judge Garratt was not satisfied that the  wanted  posters
                could be relied upon.


           viii.  Judge Garratt has not rejected her claim to be  a  member
                of a house church.


           ix.    It is accepted the Appellant left  China  illegally  with
                false documents     obtained for her by a Snakehead.


           x. The Appellant may be subject to prosecution for illegal exit.


           xi.    The Judge was not satisfied the Appellant had shown  that
                she had a second child in China, but proceeded on the  basis
                she had, but found she would not be at risk because couple's
                from rural China are allowed to have a second child if their
                first is a girl.


   32. It is submitted that subsequent to the above  findings  DNA  evidence
       has been produced establishing that  the  Appellant  has  a  daughter
       whose date of birth is 15th February 2006 and evidence from a country
       expert has been provided in relation to the wanted poster.


  Risk on return due to religion


   33.  The  Appellant  claims  to  attend  the  Lords  Recovery  Church  in
       Nottingham. She claims to have attended this church  since  2010  and
       will wish to attend the same  church  on  return  to  China.   It  is
       accepted that a religious group by this name exists and that Watchmen
       Nee and Witness Lee were part of this church  which  they  formed  in
       Shanghai  but  were  the  subject  of  adverse  attention  from   the
       authorities as a result of which Witness Lee emigrated to America.


   34. In her evidence, and despite claiming to have been a follower of this
       church for a number of  years,  the  Appellant's  knowledge  of  core
       elements of the beliefs of this  group  was  markedly  lacking.  This
       included a lack of clear knowledge of fundamental elements of belief.


   35. The assertion by the Appellant that the  Lords  Recovery  is  a  name
       attributed by the Chinese government, when this is the  name  of  the
       church group reflecting what they believe in and appearing  on  their
       own website, raises further issues regarding the credibility  of  her
       claim to be a genuine follower.


   36. The Applicants evidence regarding attendance at church in  Nottingham
       and that of Mr Chen was also unsatisfactory  and  it  was  noticeable
       there was a clear contradiction in the  evidence  regarding  when  Mr
       Chan attended the church, which Ms  Xue  stated  was  some  time  ago
       whereas he said it was the Sunday before the hearing. It was at  this
       point it was noticed Ms Xue had said something to Mr Chen, and had to
       be warned about not speaking to the witness, after which his evidence
       became confused and incredible regarding when he visited that church,
       why, for how long he stayed, and whether he saw the Appellant there.


   37. The Appellant has also been found  by  Judge  Garratt  not  to  be  a
       credible witness as  a  result  of  inconstancies  in  her  evidence,
       including that in  relation  to  her  detention  for  alleged  church
       related activities in China, and is therefore a person  shown  to  be
       willing to rely upon matters which are not true for the  purposes  of
       gaining that she seeks in relation to immigration matters; a right to
       remain in the United Kingdom. The Appellant has been found to  be  an
       economic migrant and no more. It is necessary to treat her subsequent
       evidence with care, whist still maintaining an open mind,  as  it  is
       accepted that whilst some elements of a case can be  untrue  not  all
       may be.


   38. Judge Garratt accepted the Appellant attended a church in the  United
       Kingdom which he described as a local  Baptist  Church.   Within  the
       bundle is a letter from a Mr Peter Breen who describes himself  as  a
       Responsible Brother. The letter is dated 25th January 2012, after the
       hearing before Judge Garratt, and states the  Appellant  attends  the
       Lords Day (Sunday) meetings a couple of times a month, that  she  has
       not been to the prayer meeting , and that his wife occasionally takes
       her to the sisters meeting. The church in Nottingham is said to still
       follow the  Christian  Ministry  of  Watchman  Nee  and  Witness  Lee
       according to the New Testament Teaching.  A  letter  from  Mrs  Breen
       states she has known the Appellant since May/June 2010 shortly before
       the earlier hearing.


   39. Whilst a persons religious self identity comes  from  within  and  is
       based upon what an individual believes in or not, as the case may be,
       and that even in a Christian country like the UK it is  a  fact  that
       whilst not all those stopped and questioned in  the  street  will  be
       able to  provide  details  of  the  core  beliefs  of  the  Christian
       churches, it is reasonable to expect a person  who  claims  to  be  a
       devout follower of a church and to attend  regular  services  over  a
       number of years to be aware of fundamental core beliefs.


   40. Whist the Appellant correctly referred to the importance of  the  New
       Testament for this church, when asked about important  books  of  the
       bible she referred to Paul  and  gave  an  inconclusive  response  in
       relation to a specify question relating to the Gospel of Mathew. This
       text is of importance as the principle of recovery is said to be seen
       in Mathew 19:3-18.  The Appellant was also asked what it was the Lord
       was seeking to recover and  gave  an  incomplete  and  unsatisfactory
       answer. The correct answer being that the Lord is working to  recover
       two items central to the achievement of his  external  purpose  which
       are (a) the enjoyment and experience of the riches of Christ and  (b)
       the practice of the church life in oneness.


   41. The question whether the claimed religious identity is genuine  needs
       to be established for the judgment  in  HJ  (Iran)  was  specifically
       referred to by the Court of Appeal in the order remitting this  case.
       Although this case was specifically considering a gay  appellant  the
       principles arising are equally applicable to religious and  political
       cases.  In HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
       [2010] UKSC 31 Lord Rodgers  said  "When  an  applicant  applies  for
       asylum on the ground of a well-founded fear of persecution because he
       is gay, the tribunal must first ask itself whether it is satisfied on
       the evidence that he is gay, or that he would be treated  as  gay  by
       potential persecutors in his  country  of  nationality.  If  so,  the
       tribunal must  then  ask  itself  whether  it  is  satisfied  on  the
       available evidence that gay people who lived openly would  be  liable
       to persecution in the applicant's country of nationality. If so,  the
       tribunal must go on to consider what the individual  applicant  would
       do if he were returned to that country. If  the  applicant  would  in
       fact  live  openly  and  thereby  be  exposed  to  a  real  risk   of
       persecution, then he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even if
       he could avoid the risk by living  "discreetly".  If,  on  the  other
       hand, the tribunal concludes that the applicant would  in  fact  live
       discreetly and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself  why
       he would do so. If the tribunal concludes that  the  applicant  would
       choose to live discreetly simply because  that  was  how  he  himself
       would wish to live, or because of social pressures, e g, not  wanting
       to  distress  his  parents  or  embarrass  his  friends,   then   his
       application should be rejected. Social pressures of that kind do  not
       amount to persecution and the Convention does  not  offer  protection
       against them. Such a person has no well-founded fear  of  persecution
       because, for reasons that  have  nothing  to  do  with  any  fear  of
       persecution, he himself chooses to adopt a way of  life  which  means
       that he is not in fact liable to be persecuted because he is gay. If,
       on the other hand, the tribunal concludes that a material reason  for
       the applicant living discreetly on his return would be a fear of  the
       persecution which would follow if he were to live  openly  as  a  gay
       man, then, other  things  being  equal,  his  application  should  be
       accepted. Such a person has a well-founded fear  of  persecution.  To
       reject his  application  on  the  ground  that  he  could  avoid  the
       persecution by living discreetly would be to defeat  the  very  right
       which the Convention exists to protect - his right to live freely and
       openly as a gay man without fear of persecution. By admitting him  to
       asylum and allowing him to live  freely  and  openly  as  a  gay  man
       without fear of persecution, the receiving state gives effect to that
       right by affording the applicant a surrogate for the protection  from
       persecution which his country of  nationality  should  have  afforded
       him".  Lord Hope said "It is necessary to proceed in stages. (i)  The
       first stage, of course, is  to  consider  whether  the  applicant  is
       indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of that orientation he
       will    not be entitled to be treated as a member of  the  particular
       social group. But I would regard this part of the test as having been
       satisfied  if  the  applicant's  case  is  that  he  is  at  risk  of
       persecution because he is suspected of being gay, if his past history
       shows that this is in fact the  case.  (ii)  The  next  stage  is  to
       examine a group of questions which are directed to what his situation
       will be on return. This part of the inquiry is directed to what  will
       happen in the future. The question is how each applicant,  looked  at
       individually, will conduct himself if returned and  how  others  will
       react to what he does. Those others will include everyone  with  whom
       he will come in contact, in private as well as in public. The way  he
       conducts himself may vary from one situation to another, with varying
       degrees of risk. But he cannot and must not be  expected  to  conceal
       aspects of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling  to  conceal,
       even from those whom he knows may  disapprove  of  it.  If  he  fears
       persecution as a result and that fear is  well-founded,  he  will  be
       entitled to asylum however unreasonable  his  refusal  to  resort  to
       concealment may be. The question what is reasonably tolerable has  no
       part in this inquiry. (iii) On the other  hand,  the  fact  that  the
       applicant will not be able to do in the country  of  his  nationality
       everything that he can do openly in the country whose  protection  he
       seeks is not  the  test.  As  I  said  earlier  (see  para  15),  the
       Convention was not directed to reforming the level of rights  in  the
       country of origin. So it would be wrong to approach the issue on  the
       basis that the purpose of  the  Convention  is  to  guarantee  to  an
       applicant who is gay that he can live as freely and as  openly  as  a
       gay person as he would be able to do if he were not returned. It does
       not guarantee to everyone the human rights standards that are applied
       by  the  receiving  country  within  its  own  territory.  The  focus
       throughout must be on what will happen in the country of origin. (iv)
       The next stage, if it is  found  that  the  applicant  will  in  fact
       conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is to consider
       why he will do so. If this will  simply  be  in  response  to  social
       pressures or for cultural or religious reasons of  his  own  choosing
       and not because of a fear of persecution, his claim for  asylum  must
       be rejected. But if the reason why he will resort to  concealment  is
       that he genuinely fears that otherwise he will be persecuted, it will
       be necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded. (v)  This
       is the final and conclusive question: does  he  have  a  well-founded
       fear that he will be persecuted? If he has, the  causative  condition
       that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi v Secretary of State for  the
       Home Department [2006] 2 AC 426, para 5 will have  been  established.
       The applicant will be entitled to asylum.


   42. The starting point in this case must be to ask the question,  is  the
       Appellant a Christian? This has been accepted as being the  case  and
       is a preserved finding. The second question has to be a consideration
       of her situation on return. As such  the  first  of  these  questions
       cannot be answered in a generalised manner as being  a  Christian  in
       China will not, per se, place a person at risk on return.  The  claim
       of risk is, however, more specific. It is based upon a following of a
       particular sect within  Christianity,  The  Lords  Recovery.  In  her
       report Jackie Sheehan states that the Lord Recovery is not affiliated
       with the state-controlled TSPM Church which means it is an illegal or
       'house church'. It is also a church which is categorised as being  an
       evil cult and subject to severe suppression in China. The numbers  of
       followers of the church are not known but were believed to be in  the
       region of 800,000 in the late  1990's  with  ongoing  membership  not
       thought to be a problem.


   43. The Appellant claimed to have been a follower of a  Christian  church
       in China and to have been arrested and sentenced as a result  of  her
       beliefs and activities, which was not found to be a  credible  claim.
       Her evidence is that from August 2010  she  has  attended  The  Lords
       Recovery church in Nottingham yet in addition to the issues  referred
       to above there is the fact no senior  representative  of  the  church
       chose to attend the Tribunal to support her. Whilst it  cannot  be  a
       requirement in a case for there to be corroboration of a claim, in  a
       case where an Appellant has been shown to be dishonest,  the  absence
       of such support does not assist.


   44. The Upper Tribunal has also published  the  recent  country  guidance
       case of QH (Christians - risk) China CG [2014] UKUT 00086 (IAC),  14
       March 2014, in which the Tribunal held (i) In general,  the  risk  of
       persecution for Christians expressing and living their faith in China
       is very low, indeed statistically virtually negligible.  The  Chinese
       constitution  specifically  protects  religious   freedom   and   the
       Religious Affairs Regulations 2005 (RRA) set out the conditions under
       which Christian churches and leaders may operate within  China;  (ii)
       There has been a rapid growth in numbers of Christians in China, both
       in the  three  state-registered  churches  and  the  unregistered  or
       'house' churches. Individuals move  freely  between  State-registered
       churches  and  the  unregistered   churches,   according   to   their
       preferences as to worship; (iii) For Christians  in  State-registered
       churches (a)  Worship in State-registered churches is  supervised  by
       the Chinese government's State Administration for  Religious  Affairs
       (SARA) under the RRA; (b) The measures of control set out in the RRA,
       and their implementation, whether by the Chinese  state  or  by  non-
       state actors, are not, in general, sufficiently severe as  to  amount
       to persecution, serious harm, or ill-treatment engaging international
       protection; (c) Exceptionally, certain dissident bishops or prominent
       individuals who challenge, or  are  perceived  to  challenge,  public
       order and the operation of the RRA may be  at  risk  of  persecution,
       serious harm, or ill-treatment engaging international protection,  on
       a fact-specific basis; (iv) For Christians in unregistered or 'house'
       churches (a) In general, the evidence is that the  many  millions  of
       Christians worshipping within unregistered churches are able to  meet
       and express their faith as they wish to do; (b) The evidence does not
       support a finding that there is a consistent pattern of  persecution,
       serious harm,  or  other  breach  of  fundamental  human  rights  for
       unregistered churches or their worshippers; (c) The evidence is that,
       in general, any adverse treatment of  Christian  communities  by  the
       Chinese authorities is confined  to  closing  down  church  buildings
       where planning permission has not been obtained for use as a  church,
       and/or preventing or  interrupting  unauthorised  public  worship  or
       demonstrations; (d) There may be a risk of persecution, serious harm,
       or  ill-treatment  engaging  international  protection  for   certain
       individual Christians who choose to worship in unregistered  churches
       and who conduct themselves in such a way  as  to  attract  the  local
       authorities' attention to them or their political, social or cultural
       views; (e) However, unless such  individual  is  the  subject  of  an
       arrest warrant, his name is on a black list,  or  he  has  a  pending
       sentence, such risk will be limited to the local area  in  which  the
       individual lives and  has  their  hukou;  (f)  the  hukou  system  of
       individual registration in rural and city areas, historically a rigid
       family-based structure from which derives entitlement to most  social
       and other benefits, has been significantly relaxed and  many  Chinese
       internal migrants live and work in cities where they do not  have  an
       urban hukou, either without registration or on a temporary  residence
       permit (see AX (family planning scheme) China CG  [2012]  UKUT  00097
       (IAC) and HC & RC (Trafficked women) China CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00027);
       (g) In the light of the wide variation in local  officials'  response
       to unregistered churches, individual  Christians  at  risk  in  their
       local areas will normally be able to  relocate  safely  elsewhere  in
       China.   Given  the  scale  of  internal  migration,  and  the   vast
       geographical and population size of China, the lack of an appropriate
       hukou alone will  not  render  internal  relocation  unreasonable  or
       unduly harsh.


   45. The Appellant's personal evidence reflects the views  of  the  expert
       but it has been found that in general, the evidence is that the  many
       millions of Christians worshipping within unregistered  churches  are
       able to meet and express their faith if they wish to  do.   The  fact
       the church the Appellant claims to follow is a house church  is  not,
       per se, determinative.   The  finding  that  the  evidence  does  not
       support a finding that there is a consistent pattern of  persecution,
       serious harm,  or  other  breach  of  fundamental  human  rights  for
       unregistered churches or their  worshippers  also  suggests  no  real
       risk, although the finding  there  may  be  a  risk  of  persecution,
       serious harm, or ill-treatment engaging international protection  for
       certain individual Christians who choose to worship  in  unregistered
       churches and who conduct themselves in such a way as to  attract  the
       local authorities' attention to them or their  political,  social  or
       cultural views, may assist the Appellant if such views are  genuinely
       held and part of her personal identity and represent a genuinely held
       fundamental belief.


   46. Whether the claimed belief and following is genuinely held is for the
       Appellant to establish on the facts.  Attendance  at  church  is  one
       element but the evidence of this is not of regular  attendance  every
       Sunday and of attendance  which  appears  to  have  started  at  this
       particular church just prior to the hearing before Judge Garratt,  to
       have lapsed in the interim, and increased or become more  regular  as
       this  hearing  has  approached.  There  is  an   apparent   lack   of
       understanding despite  a  long  period  of  attendance  and  workable
       understanding of English of core elements of this faith group.  I  am
       not persuaded on  the  basis  of  the  available  evidence  that  the
       Appellant has substantiated her claim that her following of The Lords
       Recovery is as a result of a genuinely held fundamental belief in the
       teachings of this church. I find it is more likely, even to the lower
       standard applicable to appeals of this nature,  to  be  a  sur  place
       activity undertaken by the Appellant as part of her  attempts  to  be
       permitted to remain in the United Kingdom; a  claim  that  has  again
       been one tainted by dishonesty and an attempt by her to influence her
       witness in court when she  must  have  realised  the  reply  he  gave
       regarding the occasions  he  attended  church  contradicted  her  own
       evidence.  The Appellant may be a follower of Christ and  believe  in
       the Christian teachings but it has not been proved that  her  conduct
       on return will be such that she will wish to attend a  banned  church
       or that she will be required to act in a manner inconsistent with the
       principles of HJ (Iran).


  The wanted poster


   47. I mention the wanted poster at this stage as Miss Rutherford  made  a
       specific submission in her supplementary skeleton argument  that  the
       wanted  poster  relied  upon  before  Judge  Garratt  has  now   been
       authenticated by Jackie Sheehan. The findings of Judge  Garratt  were
       not challenged before the Court of Appeal in relation to  this  issue
       and are preserved findings. They were reached for reasons set out  at
       paragraph 48 - 61 of that determination and by the application of the
       Tanveer Ahmed principle and the finding the evidence was inconsistent
       with the background information.   It  was  found  such  a  means  of
       detection was not likely to be used for  a  person  with  no  profile
       other than as a congregational member (although this element was also
       not found to be credible for  sustainable  reasons).  The  report  of
       Jackie Sheehan refers to the format of the document which appears  to
       her to be original but this aspect was commented upon in paragraph 50
       of the determination where the Judge noted that wanted posters  could
       easily be forged or obtained from  corrupt  police  officers.  Having
       considered the submissions made and the evidence in the expert report
       I do not find it appropriate to go behind the preserved  unchallenged
       finding of Judge Garrett on this matter. The  current  material  does
       not arguably show such findings were beyond those  available  to  the
       Judge on the evidence or that a  grave  injustice  will  be  done  by
       maintaining the same.


  Breach of the family planning policy


   48. There is reference in the Appellants material to the hukou system. In
       QH (Christians - risk) China the Tribunal held the  hukou  system  of
       individual registration in rural and city areas, historically a rigid
       family-based structure from which derives entitlement to most  social
       and other benefits, has been significantly relaxed and  many  Chinese
       internal migrants live and work in cities where they do not  have  an
       urban hukou, either without registration or on a temporary  residence
       permit (see AX (family planning scheme) China CG  [2012]  UKUT  00097
       (IAC) and HC & RC (Trafficked women) China CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00027).
       In the light of the wide variation in local  officials'  response  to
       unregistered churches, individual Christians at risk in  their  local
       areas will normally be able to relocate safely  elsewhere  in  China.
       Given the scale of internal migration, and the vast geographical  and
       population size of China, the lack of an appropriate hukou alone will
       not render internal relocation unreasonable or unduly harsh.


   49. The country guidance case of AX (family  planning  scheme)  China  CG
       [2012] UKUT 00097 (IAC) was decided  prior  to  the  reforms  in  the
       scheme referred to above.  In this case the Tribunal held that (i) In
       China, all state obligations and benefits depend on the area where  a
       person holds their 'hukou', the name given to the  Chinese  household
       registration system. There are different provisions for those holding
       an 'urban hukou' or a 'rural hukou': in particular, partly because of
       the difficulties experienced historically by peasants in  China,  the
       family planning scheme is  more  relaxed  for  those  with  a  'rural
       hukou'; (ii) It is unhelpful (and a  mistranslation  of  the  Chinese
       term) to describe the Chinese family planning scheme as a  'one-child
       policy', given the current vast  range  of  exceptions  to  the  'one
       couple, one child' principle. Special provision is made for  'double-
       single' couples,  where  both  are  only  children  supporting  their
       parents and their grandparents. The number of children authorised for
       a married couple, ('authorised children') depends on  the  provincial
       regulations  and  the  individual  circumstances   of   the   couple.
       Additional children are referred as  'unauthorised  children';  (iii)
       The Chinese family planning scheme expects childbirth to occur within
       marriage.  It encourages 'late' marriage  and  'late'  first  births.
       'Late' marriages are defined as age 25 (male)  and  23  (female)  and
       'late' first births from age 24.   A  birth  permit  is  not  usually
       required for the first birth, but must be obtained before  trying  to
       become  pregnant  with  any  further  children.  The  Chinese  family
       planning scheme also originally included a requirement for  four-year
       'birth spacing'. With the passage of time,  province  after  province
       has abandoned that requirement. Incorrect birth spacing,  where  this
       is still a requirement, results in a financial penalty;  (iv)  Breach
       of the Chinese family planning  scheme  is  a  civil  matter,  not  a
       criminal matter. Single-child  families:  (v)  Parents  who  restrict
       themselves to one child qualify for  a  "Certificate  of  Honour  for
       Single-Child Parents" (SCP certificate), which  entitles  them  to  a
       range of enhanced benefits  throughout  their  lives,  from  priority
       schooling, free medical treatment, longer  maternity,  paternity  and
       honeymoon leave, priority access to housing and to retirement  homes,
       and enhanced pension  provision;  Multiple-child  families  (vi)  Any
       second child, even if authorised, entails the loss  of  the  family's
       SCP certificate. Loss of a family's SCP results in loss of privileged
       access  to  schools,  housing,  pensions   and   free   medical   and
       contraceptive  treatment.  Education  and  medical  treatment  remain
       available but are no longer free; (vii) Where an  unauthorised  child
       is born, the family will encounter  additional  penalties.  Workplace
       discipline for parents in employment is likely to include demotion or
       even loss of employment. In addition, a 'social upbringing charge' is
       payable (SUC), which is based on income, with a down payment  of  50%
       and three years to pay the balance;  (viii)  There  are  hundreds  of
       thousands of unauthorised children born every year.  Family  planning
       officials  are  not  entitled  to  refuse  to  register  unauthorised
       children and there is no real risk of a refusal to register a  child.
       Payment for birth permits, for the registration of children, and  the
       imposition of SUC charges for unauthorised births are  a  significant
       source of revenue for local family planning authorities.  There is  a
       tension between that profitability, and enforcement of the nationally
       imposed quota of births for the town, county and province,  exceeding
       which can harm officials' careers; (ix)  The  financial  consequences
       for a family of losing its SCP  (for  having  more  than  one  child)
       and/or of having  SUC  imposed  (for  having  unauthorised  children)
       and/or suffering disadvantages  in  terms  of  access  to  education,
       medical treatment, loss of employment, detriment to future employment
       etc will not, in general, reach the severity threshold to  amount  to
       persecution or serious harm or treatment in breach of Article 3;  (x)
       There are regular national campaigns to bring down the birth rates in
       provinces and local areas which have exceeded  the  permitted  quota.
       Over-quota birth rates threaten the employment and future careers  of
       birth control officials in  those  regions,  and  where  there  is  a
       national campaign, can result in large scale unlawful  crackdowns  by
       local officials in a small number of provinces  and  areas.  In  such
       areas, during such large scale crackdowns, human  rights  abuses  can
       and do occur, resulting in women, and sometimes men,  being  forcibly
       sterilised and  pregnant  women  having  their  pregnancies  forcibly
       terminated. The last such crackdown took place in spring  2010;  Risk
       factors (xi) In general, for female returnees, there is no real  risk
       of forcible sterilisation or forcible termination in China.  However,
       if a female returnee who has  already  had  her  permitted  quota  of
       children is being returned at a time when there is a crackdown in her
       'hukou' area,  accompanied  by  unlawful  practices  such  as  forced
       abortion or sterilisation, such a returnee would be at real  risk  of
       forcible sterilisation or,  if  she  is  pregnant  at  the  time,  of
       forcible termination of an unauthorised pregnancy.  Outside of  these
       times, such a female returnee may also be able to show an  individual
       risk, notwithstanding the absence of a general risk, where  there  is
       credible evidence that she, or members of  her  family  remaining  in
       China, have been threatened with, or have suffered,  serious  adverse
       ill-treatment by reason of her breach of the family planning  scheme;
       (xii)  Where  a  female  returnee  is  at  real  risk   of   forcible
       sterilisation or termination of pregnancy in her 'hukou'  area,  such
       risk is of persecution, serious harm and Article 3 ill-treatment. The
       respondent accepted that such risk would be by reason  of  a  Refugee
       Convention reason, membership of a particular  social  group,  'women
       who gave birth in breach of China's family planning  scheme';  (xiii)
       Male returnees do not, in general,  face  a  real  risk  of  forcible
       sterilisation, whether in their 'hukou' area or elsewhere, given  the
       very low rate of sterilisation of males overall, and the  even  lower
       rate of forcible sterilisation; Internal  relocation  (xiv)  Where  a
       real risk exists in the 'hukou' area, it may be possible to avoid the
       risk by moving to a city. Millions of Chinese internal migrants, male
       and female, live and work  in  cities  where  they  do  not  hold  an
       'urban hukou'.  Internal migrant women are required to stay in touch
       with their 'hukou' area and either return for  tri-monthly  pregnancy
       tests or else send back test results.  The country evidence does  not
       indicate a real risk of effective pursuit of internal  migrant  women
       leading  to  forcible  family  planning  actions,  sterilisation   or
       termination,     taking     place     in      their      city      of
       migration. Therefore, internal relocation will, in almost all cases,
       avert the risk in the hukou area.  However, internal  relocation  may
       not be safe where there is credible evidence of individual pursuit of
       the returnee or her family, outside the 'hukou' area. Whether  it  is
       unduly harsh to expect an  individual  returnee  and  her  family  to
       relocate in this way will be a question of fact in each case.


   50. The above case undermines a number  of  elements  of  the  Appellants
       case. It is accepted the Appellant already has a child in China cared
       for by her parents and the child born in the UK. As  such  she  is  a
       multiple child family which  it  is  said  will  result  in  loss  of
       privileged access to schools, housing, pensions and free medical  and
       contraceptive  treatment.  Education  and  medical  treatment  remain
       available but are no longer free. It  has  to  been  shown  that  the
       impact upon the Appellant or her child of the  same  is  such  as  to
       place the United Kingdom in breach of any of its international treaty
       obligations. Such a claim has not been substantiated.  The  Appellant
       mentions the fine which appears to be  a  reference  to  the  'social
       upbringing charge' which is based on income, with a down  payment  of
       50% and three years to pay the balance, although the Appellant has no
       income at present. It has not been substantiated that if returned she
       will be unable to meet such a fine within  the  permitted  period  or
       that she has no contact with family members who may be able to assist
       with child care or in meeting any financial obligation she may  have.
       The assertion she has not been able to contact per  parents  has  not
       been substantiated on the evidence. It has  not  been  shown  that  a
       failure to pay the fine within the permitted period  will  result  in
       consequences that create a real risk of a breach Article 3 or 8  ECHR
       for her or her child. To suggest the same is speculative.


   51. There are a considerable number of unauthorised children  born  every
       year and the claim the Appellant  will  be  unable  to  register  her
       children is also incorrect  as  family  planning  officials  are  not
       entitled to refuse to register  unauthorised  children.  Payment  for
       birth permits, for the registration of children, and  the  imposition
       of SUC charges for unauthorised births are also a significant  source
       of revenue for local family planning authorities.


   52. The financial consequences for a family of  having  SUC  imposed  for
       having unauthorised children and/or suffering disadvantages in  terms
       of access  to  education,  medical  treatment,  loss  of  employment,
       detriment to future employment etc will not, in  general,  reach  the
       severity threshold to  amount  to  persecution  or  serious  harm  or
       treatment in breach  of  Article  3.  The  Appellant  has  failed  to
       substantiate her claim that this does not hold true for her.


   53. It has not been established there is a large scale crackdown  in  her
       hukou area such as to create a real risk of  forcibly  sterilisation.
       As found  in  the  country  guidance  case,  in  general  for  female
       returnees there is no real risk of forcible sterilisation or forcible
       termination in China. No credible real risk  of  the  same  has  been
       substantiated for the Appellant on return.


  Relocation


   54. In HC & RC  (Trafficked  women)  China  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00027  the
       Tribunal found amongst other things  that,  due  to  reforms  of  the
       Chinese household registration system known as the "hukou" system, it
       was unlikely that a returned trafficked single woman would be obliged
       to return to the place where she was  registered.  The  reforms  have
       made it relatively easy for ordinary migrant workers  to  get  legal,
       albeit temporary, urban registration and there is no reason why  this
       should not extend to returned single women.  The Tribunal also  found
       that pre-marital sex is now commonplace in China and women's  earning
       power is growing, particularly in the wealthy cities of the east.  As
       a result, the number of single mothers in China  is  growing,  albeit
       from a small base and although a birth permit may  not  be  obtained,
       nonetheless it is possible for hukou for the child of a single mother
       to  be  obtained  depending  upon  where  the  application  is  made.
       Moreover, the Tribunal found that the Chinese state has an obligation
       to house the homeless and will not allow their  citizens  to  starve.
       Therefore a returned woman without family support will not be allowed
       by the authorities to fall into a state of destitution.


   55. Also, in the event a real risk exists in the Appellants 'hukou' area,
       it may be possible to avoid the risk by moving to a city. Millions of
       Chinese internal migrants, male and female, live and work  in  cities
       where they do not hold an 'urban hukou'.  Internal migrant women are
       required to stay in touch with their 'hukou' area and  either  return
       for tri-monthly pregnancy tests or else send back test results.   The
       country evidence does not indicate a real risk of  effective  pursuit
       of  internal  migrant  women  leading  to  forcible  family  planning
       actions, sterilisation or termination, taking place in their city  of
       migration. Therefore, internal relocation will, in almost all  cases,
       avert the risk in the hukou area.  However, internal  relocation  may
       not be safe where there is credible evidence of individual pursuit of
       the returnee or her family, outside the 'hukou' area. No such risk of
       this nature has been substantiated for the Appellant  on  the  facts.
       Whether it is not reasonable to expect the Appellant to  relocate  in
       this way will be a question of fact in each case.  I find it has  not
       been substantiated on the evidence that it will  be  unreasonable  in
       all the circumstances for the Appellant and the children to  relocate
       internally if she faces a real risk in her home area.


  Failed asylum seeker


   56.  The  claim  to  be  at  risk  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker  is  not
       substantiated. The Appellant's evidence is noted as are the penalties
       that are available if the authorities wish to  apply  the  same.  The
       Appellant has not been shown to be anything other  than  an  economic
       migrant and has not created a profile for herself that will place her
       at risk on return, actual or perceived. The Appellant does  not  have
       to reveal her attendance at the church as this has been found not  to
       represent a genuine fundamentally held  belief  that  she  cannot  be
       expected to lie about to avoid persecution. Is has been found to be a
       cynical sur place activity and no more.


   57. In WC (Illegal Departure- Failed Asylum Seeker) China CG [2002] UKIAT
       03295  it was argued  that  the  treatment  of  the  appellant  as  a
       returned failed asylum seeker who may illegally have left  China  was
       such that it would amount to an interference with her  human  rights.
       The Tribunal noted the objective evidence.  At paragraph 6.115 of the
       Country report it was recorded that the act of exiting mainland China
       without permission is an offence and if this is the only unlawful act
       committed by the immigrant then they are punished under Article 14 of
       the Law of the People's Republic of China on the Exit  and  Entry  of
       Citizens (1986).  The prescribed penalties for this offence are  that
       they "may be given a warning, or placed in  detention  for  not  more
       than 10 days by a public security organ".  Paragraph 6.116 points out
       that there are certain  overlapping  provisions  under  which  it  is
       possible for fines to be levied and that the  rate  may  depend  upon
       where they have come from.  At paragraph 6.117 it is said "one expert
       noted  that  the  Chinese  government  does  not  generally  mistreat
       returnees unless the person has been  deported  to  China  more  than
       once.  If a  returnee  is  held  to  be  involved  in  the  smuggling
       operation, then they are subject  to  the  criminal  procedure  law."
       Paragraph 6.161 onwards referred to a range of opinion amongst  those
       experts, one of whom said that the offence may lead to administrative
       sentence of three months, although most of the  experts  agreed  that
       for a first offence only a fine was likely to be imposed.  Either way
       the Tribunal concluded that this would  not  breach  the  Appellant's
       human rights.  The Tribunal also appeared to accept that there are no
       long-term repercussions for returnees or any evidence that  they  are
       treated differently depending on where they are returned to.


   58. The Appellant is a first time  offender  and  it  is  therefore  more
       likely that she will receive a fine in  the  absence  of  aggravating
       circumstances of which none that are credible have been made  out  in
       this matter.


   59. As did the Judge  of  the  First  -tier  Tribunal  and  Deputy  Upper
       Tribunal  Judge  Garratt,  I  find  the  Appellant  has   failed   to
       substantiate her claim to be at risk on return to the extent that she
       is entitled to be recognised as a refugee, to a grant of humanitarian
       protection, or to succeed under Articles 2 or 3 ECHR.


  Article 8


   60.  It  is  not  suggested  Appellant  is  able  to  succeed  under  the
       Immigration Rules in relation to her family or private  life  in  the
       United Kingdom.  Her only family life appears to be with her son  who
       will be returned with her  to  China  where  their  family  life  can
       continue. The child's father returned to China during the  course  of
       the proceedings.


   61. When considering whether there are elements that warrant  the  appeal
       being allowed outside the Rules it is necessary to  consider  whether
       there are any elements which make the decision disproportionate.  The
       Secretary of State's case is set out in the refusal  letter  although
       as this hearing is after 28th July 2014 it is necessary  to  consider
       section 117 of the NIAA 2002 as amended by the Immigration Act  2014,
       which I have done


   62. There is a child born in the UK but it is accepted the child in not a
       'qualifying child' under the  current  legislation.  Miss  Rutherford
       submitted section 55 is relevant and ZH  (Tanzania)  is  specifically
       mentioned in  the  remittal  order.   A  summary  of  the  principles
       established in case law can be found in the judgement of the  Supreme
       Court in Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 in which it was found that:


           10.    In their written case counsel for Mr Zoumbas set out
                legal principles which were relevant in this case and which
                they derived from three decisions of this court, namely ZH
                (Tanzania) (above), H v Lord Advocate 2012 SC (UKSC) 308 and
                H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian Republic [2013] 1 AC
                338.   Those principles are not in doubt and Ms Drummond on
                behalf of the Secretary of State did not challenge them. We
                paraphrase them as follows:
                (1)    The best interests of a child are an integral part of
                    the proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
                (2)    In making that assessment, the best interests of a
                    child must be a primary consideration, although not
                    always the only primary consideration; and the child's
                    best interests do not of themselves have the status of
                    the paramount consideration;
                (3)    Although the best interests of a child can be
                    outweighed by the cumulative effect of other
                    considerations, no other consideration can be treated as
                    inherently more significant;
                (4)    While different judges might approach the question of
                    the best interests of a child in different ways, it is
                    important to ask oneself the right questions in an
                    orderly manner in order to avoid the risk that the best
                    interests of a child might be undervalued when other
                    important considerations were in play;
                (5)    It is important to have a clear idea of a child's
                    circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests
                    before one asks oneself whether those interests are
                    outweighed by the force of other considerations;
                (6)    To that end there is no substitute for a careful
                    examination of all relevant factors when the interests
                    of a child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and
                (7)    A child must not be blamed for matters for which he
                    or she is not responsible, such as the conduct of a
                    parent.
           11.    These principles arise from the United Kingdom's
                international obligations under the United Nations
                Convention on the Rights of the Child, and in particular
                article 3.1 which provides:
              "In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by
                public or private social welfare institutions, courts of
                law, administrative authorities or legislative bodies, the
                best interests of the child shall be a primary
                consideration."
              That general principle of international law has influenced
                the way in which the Strasbourg court has interpreted the
                ECHR: Neulinger v Switzerland (2010) 28 BHRC 706, para 131.
           12.    Mr Lindsay for Mr Zoumbas also founded on a statement in
                the judgment of Lord Kerr of Tonaghmore in ZH (Tanzania) at
                para 46 in support of the proposition that what is
                determined to be in a child's best interests should
                customarily dictate the outcome of cases and that it will
                require considerations of substantial moment to permit a
                different result. In our view, it is important to note that
                Lord Kerr's formulation spoke of dictating the outcome of
                cases "such as the present" and that in ZH (Tanzania) the
                court was dealing with children who were British citizens.
                In that case the children by virtue of their nationality had
                significant benefits, including a right of abode and rights
                to future education and healthcare in this country, which
                the children in this case, as citizens of the Republic of
                Congo, do not. The benefits of British citizenship are an
                important factor in assessing whether it is reasonable to
                expect a child with such citizenship to live in another
                country. Moreover in H(H) Lord Kerr explained (at para 145)
                that what he was seeking to say was that no factor should be
                given greater weight than the interests of a child. See the
                third principle above.
           13.    We would seek to add to the seven principles the
                following comments. First, the decision-maker is required to
                assess the proportionality of the interference with private
                and family life in the particular circumstances in which the
                decision is made. The evaluative exercise in assessing the
                proportionality of a measure under article 8 ECHR excludes
                any "hard-edged or bright-line rule to be applied to the
                generality of cases": EB (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for
                the Home Department [2009] AC 1159, per Lord Bingham at para
                12. Secondly, as Lord Mance pointed out in H(H) (at para 98)
                the decision-maker must evaluate the child's best interests
                and in some cases they may point only marginally in one,
                rather than another, direction. Thirdly, as the case of H(H)
                shows in the context of extradition, there may be
                circumstances in which the weight of another primary
                consideration can tip the balance and make the interference
                proportionate even where it has very severe consequences for
                children. In that case an Italian prosecutor issued a
                European arrest warrant seeking the surrender of a person
                who had earlier broken his bail conditions by leaving Italy
                and ultimately seeking safe haven in the United Kingdom and
                had been convicted of very serious crimes. This court held
                that the treaty obligations of the United  Kingdom to
                extradite him prevailed over his children's best interests.
                The third principle in para 10 above is subject to the first
                and second qualifications and may, depending on the
                circumstances, be subject to the  third. But in our view, it
                is not likely that a court would reach in the context of an
                immigration decision what Lord Wilson described in H(H) (at
                para 172) as the "firm if bleak" conclusion in that case,
                which separated young children from their parents.
   63. The child is young and it has not been shown his life is  other  than
       focused upon his mother. He is not a British national  and  shall  be
       returned with his mother to  China  within  the  family  unit  he  is
       familiar with. His extended family is in China, as is his father, and
       it has not been shown he will be unable to access education, even  if
       it has to be paid for, or other essential services. Having considered
       the childes best interests with the required degree  of  weight  they
       deserve and require in law, I find it has not  been  hsown  that  the
       decision is not proportionate when the fifth of the Razgar  questions
       was being considered, even if the child may have a better  future  in
       the United Kingdom. As such, there  is  no  basis  for  allowing  the
       appeal outside the Rules. The Respondent has shown the decision to be
       proportionate to the legitimate aim relied upon by the Respondent.


Decision

   64. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been found to have materially erred
       in law and her determination set aside. The original determination of
       the Upper Tribunal was set aside by the Court of Appeal and the  case
       remitted. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


  Anonymity.


   65. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005. The Upper Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  order  in  2010.
       Having reviewed the need for such an order I make that order pursuant
       to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure        (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
       2008 but only in respect of the naming of the Appellants child.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 17th November 2014



