
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06269/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 5th February 2016                 |On 23rd February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                  Between:

                                   MR S S
                           (Anonymity Order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant      Mr Lay (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms Fijawala (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Symes promulgated on the  21st  September  2015,  in
         which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on  Asylum,  Humanitarian
         Protection and Human Rights grounds.

      2. Within the Grounds of Appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge had accepted  at  [24]  that  the  Appellant's  home
         province of "Kunar was, and remains, a centre of Taliban  insurgent
         activity and that the Appellant's basic account is  plausible".  It
         is stated the judge then correctly cited Immigration Rule paragraph
         351 and the correct approach to the  credibility  of  the  accounts
         given by children, given that the Appellant was only aged 13  years
         old at the time when he left Afghanistan  and  he  gave  his  first
         account soon after arriving in the United Kingdom. It is said  that
         he is now aged 19 years old. It is argued, however, that the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  reaching  an  adverse  view  of  the
         Appellant's credibility on the basis of paragraphs [25  to  27]  of
         the determination,  in  that  what  were  said  to  be  significant
         discrepancies and  the  vagueness  of  the  account  had  not  been
         particularised, nor had the Judge integrated into his analysis  the
         fact that the Appellant was only aged  13  when  he  underwent  his
         problems in Afghanistan. It is further argued that  the  Judge  was
         not entitled to state judicial knowledge of the likely actions  and
         motivations  of  a  local  village  Headman  in  a  rural  area  of
         Afghanistan, as a basis for casting doubt upon the  provenance  and
         veracity of recently obtained documents, and further  in  order  to
         cast doubt upon the original account.

      3. It is further argued that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  finding
         at [26]  that  "I  consider  it  intrinsically  unlikely  that  the
         Appellant's mother would not have made some arrangements  for  them
         to keep in touch"  failed  to  take  account  of  the  age  of  the
         Appellant at the time, the likelihood  of  population  moving  away
         from Kunar in the 6 years since flight and was based upon a general
         contention  that  "Diaspora  communities  across  the  world   have
         developed means of contacting one another".

      4. Within the third Ground of Appeal it is argued that the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge failed to have regard to the case of R (Naziri)  and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] UKUT 437
         and that on the 21st August 2015, Lord Justice Clark had put a stay
         on removal of the Appellants in that case until the outcome of  the
         appeal in the Court of Appeal, on the basis of  individuals  facing
         forced removal from "dangerous provinces" and who fell  within  the
         (disputed) Memorandum of Understanding  between  Kabul  and  London
         which also  included  "women,  unaccompanied  women  and  children,
         people with mental illness and/or physical health  issues".  It  is
         argued the Court of Appeal had granted permission to the  Claimants
         to seek to argue that an Article 15 (C) situation  prevailed  in  a
         number of provinces such as Kunar.

      5. Finally, within the Grounds of Appeal it is argued  in  respect  of
         the Judge's consideration of Article 8, that in  the  case  of  the
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) and  Others
         [2015] EWCA Civ 387, the Court of Appeal had not endorsed the Upper
         Tribunal's approach in the case of AM (Section 117B) Malawi  [2015]
         UKUT 260 (IAC) and that it is argued that AM (Section 117B)  Malawi
         is wrong in law and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed
         to assign an appropriate weight to the Appellant's private life  in
         the UK and the fact that the Appellant had been a child for 6 years
         of the 7 years lawful leave in the UK, at a critical stage  in  his
         personal, social and emotional development.

      6. Permission to appeal has been granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Holmes on the ground that "the Appellant's age was not  in  dispute
         before the Tribunal and so care was required in the  assessment  of
         the weight that could be given to his evidence. Paragraph 25 of the
         decision suggests that the Judge may have lost sight of both  that,
         and the correct standard of proof.  Moreover,  it  is  an  arguable
         error to refer to the existence of significant discrepancies in the
         evidence without then detailing them. In the circumstances  all  of
         the grounds may be argued".

      7. In the Respondent's Rule 24 reply, it is argued that the First-tier
         Tribunal Judge directed himself appropriately  and  had  considered
         all the evidence and concluded that the Appellant was not  the  son
         of a Taliban commander, or that the Afghanistan authorities had any
         current interest in him. It is argued that this was a finding  that
         was open to the Judge on the totality the evidence.  It  is  argued
         that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  adequate  regard  to  the
         Appellant's age in assessing his credibility and  the  weight  that
         could be given to his evidence, and that  the  Judge  had  provided
         adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  there  were   significant
         discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence  and  had  detailed  such
         discrepancies between paragraphs [24 and 27] of the  determination.
         It is further argued that irrationality is  an  elevated  threshold
         and that the Respondent submits that the Judge's  conclusions  were
         rational and open to him. It  is  further  argued  that  the  Judge
         correctly referred to the Country Guidance case of AK  (Article  15
         (C)) Afghanistan v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2012] UKUT 00163 and that the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal
         in the case of AM Malawi, said to  be  clarified  in  the  case  of
         Deelah and Others (Section 117B-ambit) [2015] UKUT 00515, indicated
         that the adjective 'precarious' in Section 117 B (5)  of  the  2002
         Act does not contemplate only, and is not restricted to,  temporary
         admission to the United Kingdom or a grant of Leave to Remain in  a
         category which permits no expectation of a  further  grant.  It  is
         argued that there were no material errors.

      8. In his oral submissions, Mr Lay of Counsel argued  that  the  Judge
         had not given adequate reasons between [24] and [27], as to why the
         historic account had not been accepted, and that the Judge had  not
         explained what the  discrepancies  were,  but  even  if  they  were
         discrepancies, why this should be taken to mean  that  his  account
         should not be accepted, given he was a 13-year-old boy whose  basic
         account was said to have been plausible. He argued that  the  Judge
         had not considered whether  or  not  the  account  was  "reasonably
         likely to be true". He  further  argued  that  in  considering  the
         Appellant's private life claim  under  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules, the Judge had been wrong in finding that it  was
         intrinsically unlikely that the Appellant's mother would  not  have
         found a way of keeping in contact with  him,  and  that  the  Judge
         could not use Judicial Knowledge  of  that  fact.  It  was  further
         argued that in any event, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not
         considered the fact that Kunar was rife with Taliban  activity  and
         that there would therefore be very  significant  obstacles  to  the
         Appellant returning to Kunar, given he had never lived as an  adult
         and  in  circumstances  where  the  Appellant  himself  had  become
         westernised during his time in the UK.

      9. Mr Lay recognised that the Naziri issue had not  been  put  to  the
         Judge, but further argued that the Judge  has  not  detailed  which
         "human rights reports" he had actually referred to and  taken  into
         account at [31] of the Judgement.

     10. Finally, Mr Lay argued that AM Malawi was wrong in setting out that
         anyone with limited leave should be deemed  to  be  precarious  and
         that leave granted in circumstances such as the Appellant's to a 13-
         year-old boy should not be deemed to be precarious. He  argued  the
         case of Deelah had "reined back in" the case of AM Malawi.

     11.  Ms  Fijawala  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent  relied   upon   the
         Respondent's Rule 24 response dated  the  29th  October  2015.  She
         argued that the Judge  had  properly  directed  himself  in  having
         referred to paragraph 351, did not need to refer to the  fact  that
         the  Appellant  was  a  child   when   he   came   throughout   the
         determination. She argued the Judge was entitled to find  that  the
         account was vague and that there had been discrepancies. She argued
         that what was contained  within  paragraph  [7B]  did  reflect  the
         contents of the 2009 Refusal Notice. She argued that in respect  of
         [27] the Judge had not imposed his own views but had made  findings
         in accordance with  the  country  background  information  and  was
         entitled to find that the village Headman, had he truly informed on
         a Taliban commander and their family members would not  have  given
         that information freely to a person he hardly knew, in  the  person
         the Appellant's friend Omar.

     12. Ms Fijawala further argued that the  Judge  was  entitled  to  take
         account of diaspora  contact  and  that  people  can  now  maintain
         contact throughout the world and that the  Appellant's  mother  did
         have a 6 day window in order to put a  means  of  communication  in
         place. She argued that there was no material error and  that  there
         were no significant obstacles to the Appellant  returning  back  to
         Afghanistan for the purpose  of  paragraph  276  ADE.  She  further
         argued that the Judge had not made any findings in respect  of  the
         "Human Rights reports" that he had looked  at  and  the  Judge  had
         properly made findings based upon the Country Guidance case of  AK.
         She further argued that there was no material error in any event as
         the Appellant could safely internally relocate.

     13. Ms Fijawala  further  argued  that  the  case  of  SS  (Congo)  was
         considering  family  life  in  respect  of  spouses  and  not   the
         circumstances of children and did not cover circumstances in  which
         private life should be considered precarious. She  argued  that  AM
         Malawi remained good law.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

     14. I do find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes has erred in law  at
         [25] in his finding that "there have been significant discrepancies
         such as those itemised in the refusal letter even within its narrow
         parameters". Although the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to
         detail a further  discrepancy  that  had  materialised  during  the
         giving of evidence regarding different explanations as to where the
         documents said to be from Afghanistan were posted,  in  respect  of
         the other significant discrepancies he refers to at [25] these  are
         not explained within the determination or set out within  [25],  to
         explain, in a manner that the Appellant can understand,  the  basis
         upon which he has lost. The reasoning in this regard is inadequate.
         The Judge cannot  simply  rely  upon  the  refusal  letter  without
         actually considering the evidence in the case. Although the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge had set out at [7B] that the Appellant's  claim
         originally had been refused in September 2009  on  the  basis  that
         "there were inconsistencies in his account, for example that in his
         statement he had said that he and  his  mother  had  not  told  his
         father of the objections to joining the Taliban but at interview he
         had said that both he and his mother had told him; and he had  said
         that he did not want to join the Taliban because they  harm  people
         but  had  also  said  he  was  unaware  of  the  detail  of   their
         activities", this was reference  simply  to  the  contents  of  the
         refusal letter in 2009, and is unclear from the reasoning  at  [25]
         whether it was  said  to  be  these  matters  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge was taking account of or others. In this regard, the
         explanation that at [7(B)] that there was purporting a  discrepancy
         between the Appellant not wanting to join the Taliban because  they
         harm  people  but  also  being  unaware  of  the  detail  of  their
         activities, in my judgement, does not amount to a discrepancy,  and
         if the Judge was purporting to rely upon the same as a discrepancy,
         he was wrong to do so without further explanation. The fact that he
         may  not  have  known  the  details  of  their  activities  is  not
         inconsistent or discrepant with a statement that he was aware  that
         they harmed people.

     15. Further, the summary at [7(B)] of the September 2009 refusal letter
         in which it is said that "in his statement he said that he and  his
         mother had not told his  father  of  his  objections  to  join  the
         Taliban, but at interview he said that both he and his  mother  had
         told him", is again not particularised or explained in light of the
         actual evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  The  2009
         refusal letter is not in itself evidence of what the Appellant  had
         said, that evidence comes from his interviews  or  any  statements.
         That evidence has not been analysed by the Judge.

     16. To  the  extent  that  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  sought  to
         summarise  the  September  2009  refusal  letter's   reasoning   at
         paragraph 7(B) and that it is said that "in his  statement  he  had
         said that he and  his  mother  had  not  told  his  father  of  his
         objections to joining the Taliban, but at  interview  he  had  said
         that both he and his mother had told him", if this is purporting to
         be a summary of paragraphs 28 and 29 of the refusal dated the  28th
         September 2009, and it does not accurately record in  summary,  the
         contents of those paragraphs. At [28]  of  the  2009  refusal,  the
         answers given by  the  Appellant  in  interview  from  question  28
         onwards was set out, but then in  [29],  it  was  stated  that  the
         Appellant in his witness statement had said  that  his  mother  was
         also too afraid to tell his father that the Appellant did not  want
         to join the Taliban, but that when asked  at  interview  "did  your
         mother tell him she didn't want  you  to  join  the  Taliban?",  he
         answered "as I refused, the same way my mother told  him  that  she
         didn't want me to join". This is not  therefore  an  inconsistency,
         given that in the witness statement  that  it  was  said  that  the
         Appellant's mother was too afraid to tell  the  Appellant's  father
         that the Appellant did not want to join, but in  interview  he  was
         saying that his mother had said that she did not want him to  join.
         These are very different matters, and to the extent that the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge has sought  to  summarise  that  at  [7(B)]  as
         reading "in his statement he had said that he and  his  mother  had
         not told his father of his objections to join the Taliban,  but  at
         interview he had said that both he and his mother  had  told  him",
         this is not an accurate reflection of what is recorded  within  the
         2009 refusal letter, nor the answers  given  by  the  Appellant  in
         interview. The Judge in this regard has therefore clearly failed to
         take account of and misinterpreted material evidence.  However,  if
         in fact these are not the alleged discrepancies relied upon by  the
         Judge at [25],  then  he  has  failed  to  adequately  explain  his
         findings in this regard.

     17. Next, at [26] the  First-tier  Judge  found  that  "I  consider  it
         intrinsically unlikely that the Appellant's mother would  not  have
         made some arrangements for them to keep in touch.  This  is  not  a
         case where he fled the family home without notice, and she  clearly
         sought to secure his welfare, and had a 6 day window before he left
         to put those arrangements in place. Whatever the local availability
         of power  sources,  diaspora  communities  across  the  world  have
         developed means of contacting one another and it  is  fundamentally
         implausible that this would not  have  been  done  here.  The  Home
         Office are unable to make  effective  family-tracing  enquiries  in
         Afghanistan, and I treat their inability to do so as a neutral fact
         in this appeal."

     18. I find that it is not open for the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
         simply find  that  "diaspora  communities  across  the  world  have
         developed means of contacting  one  another  and  is  fundamentally
         implausible that this would not have been done here."  Irrespective
         as to whether or not there is a 6 day window, without any  analysis
         as to the means of postal or telephone  communication,  whether  by
         means of landline or mobile, between  the  Barabt  village  in  the
         Kunar province where the Appellant lived  and  the  UK,  I  do  not
         consider that it is a matter of sufficiently common knowledge  that
         communication can be maintained for the Judge to rely uon "judicial
         knowledge" in his regard. The Judge  has  to  look  at  the  actual
         individual locations, and the security state of the Kunar province,
         given that it is said to be an area of Taliban insurgency, in order
         to determine the likelihood of being able to maintain contact,  and
         also as to whether or not in light of the security  situation,  his
         relatives may had moved. The Judge has failed to do  so.  The  bold
         assertion  that  "diaspora  communities  across  the   world   have
         developed means of contacting one another" is inadequately reasoned
         and is insufficient as a reason for her finding that the  Appellant
         is in contact with his mother, and  using  this  as  a  reason  for
         disbelieving the Appellant's core account.

     19. I do find that given credibility has to be considered holistically,
         taken  into  account  all  of  the  relevant  facts,  evidence  and
         findings, that the Judge's errors in respect  of  the  evidence  in
         this regard, are material errors, such as to mean that the decision
         of First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes should  be  set  aside  and  the
         matter remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  hearing  de
         novo on the evidence.

     20. In respect of the other arguments I do consider that it was open to
         the Judge and he has entitled to find that the village Headman, had
         he truly informed on a Taliban commander and their  family  members
         would not have given that information freely to a person he  hardly
         knew, in the person the Appellant's friend Omar. The  reasoning  in
         respect of this issue is adequate and sufficient.

     21. In respect of the submission made by Mr Lay that the  Judge  failed
         to have regard to the case of R (Naziri and Others) v Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department  [2015]  UKUT  437,  given  that  the
         complaint in this regard is that Lord Justice Clarke, on the appeal
         from the Upper Tribunal to the  Court  of  Appeal,  granted  asylum
         removal of the appellants until the outcome of their appeal  before
         the Court of Appeal, given that First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes was
         not referred to this case, and in any event, the  Court  of  Appeal
         has yet to publish its final decision on the appeal, such  that  at
         present, the case of AK (Article 15 C) Afghanistan CG  [2012]  UKUT
         163 (IAC) remains presently good law, there was no error on part of
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge referring to the Country Guidance  as
         it was as at the date of his decision.

     22. Further, I do not consider that the Court of Appeal in the case  of
         Secretary of State for the Home Department v SS (Congo) and  Others
         [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraphs 36 and 37 was seeking  to  define
         "precariousness" for purpose of Section 117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended. The Court of Appeal in
         those paragraphs, was simply  trying  to  distinguish  between  the
         circumstances of a case involving someone  outside  of  the  United
         Kingdom who applies to come here to take up or resume  family  life
         established in ordinary and legitimate circumstances from some time
         in the past, and someone who from the United Kingdom who marries  a
         foreign national and establishes a family life with them at a stage
         when they are contemplating trying to live together in  the  United
         Kingdom, but when they know that their  partner  does  not  have  a
         right  to  come  to  the  UK.  This  is  very  different   to   the
         consideration by the Upper Tribunal in the case of AM (Section  117
         B) Malawi v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015]  UKUT
         26 which was simply seeking to determine how "precarious" should be
         interpreted for the purpose of that section of the Act, as amended.
         I do not consider that First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes was wrong in
         therefore relying upon the Upper Tribunal case of AM  (Section  117
         B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 26.

     23. However, for the reasons set out above, I do find that  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge's analysis of the evidence in his  findings  in
         respect of credibility are vitiated by material errors of law, such
         that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes is set  aside,
         and the case is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
         heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Symes.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Symes  is  set  aside,  the  same
containing material errors of law. The case is remitted back to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be heard before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes;

The First-tier Tribunal having made an anonymity order in this  case,  given
the age of the Appellant,  I  do  maintain  the  anonymity  order  that  was
previously made. The Appellant is thereby granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family.  This  direction  applies  to  both  the  Appellant  and  the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
Court proceedings.


Signed      Dated 6th February 2016

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
