
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06598/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Date Sent                            |
|On 31 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                    MR RT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajothy, legal representative, Linga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Naith, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


    1. This is  an  appeal  against  a  decision  of  FTTJ  Richards-Clarke,
       promulgated on 12 May 2015, in which she  dismissed  the  appellant's
       appeal against a decision to refuse to grant him asylum.

       Background


    2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 April  2010,  having
       been granted leave to enter as a Tier 4 migrant  from  1  March  2010
       until 3 September 2012. His leave was  curtailed  on  8  August  2011
       owing to his poor attendance. The appellant was arrested  on  22  May
       2012 working at a shop in Ipswich and he was served with notification
       that he was liable to removal as an overstayer. He applied for asylum
       on 23 May 2012.

    3. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that he  is  of  adverse
       interest to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  owing  to  assistance  he
       rendered to the LTTE between the year 2000 and 2004. That  assistance
       included supplying furniture, fuel and pharmaceutical  items.  During
       2004 the appellant heard that his name was on an army search list and
       his father sent him to Dubai. The appellant's  brother  was  sent  to
       South Korea the following year owing to continued  army  interest  in
       the appellant's whereabouts. The appellant returned to Sri  Lanka  in
       September 2007 and returned to his family  in  Kalmunai.  Around  two
       months later the appellant was abducted by a  paramilitary  gang  and
       taken to a camp in the jungle. There he was repeatedly tortured until
       he signed a blank piece of paper. After he did so, the appellant  was
       asked to work in the  camp  by,  for  example,  digging  bunkers  and
       chopping wood. After 25 months of captivity  the  appellant  escaped.
       The appellant contacted his father who came and took him to  Colombo.
       An agent assisted the appellant with obtaining a student visa. On  29
       November 2010 the appellant attended a protest held in Terminal 4  of
       Heathrow Airport against the arrival of the president  of  Sri  Lanka
       and was photographed. On 19 May 2012 the appellant  took  part  in  a
       Remembrance Day event in Trafalgar Square and was chased by  a  group
       who told him that they had already sent his  photograph  to  the  Sri
       Lankan authorities.  The appellant also heard  that  his  father  had
       been beaten and abducted in April 2012.

    4. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the
       appellant  and  a  witness  gave  evidence.  The  FTTJ  rejected  the
       appellant's claim in its entirety on credibility grounds.

       Error of law


    5. The  grounds  of  appeal  submit  that  the  FTTJ  failed  to  attach
       sufficient weight to a  medical  report,  which  concluded  that  the
       appellant was a victim of torture. It was also argued that  the  FTTJ
       had misdirected herself by failing to apply the  case  law  of  GJ  &
       Others [2013] UKUT 00319.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted on 5 June 2015, as it was considered
       arguable that the FTTJ attached insufficient weight  to  the  medical
       opinion that the appellant's scars were,  alternately,  "diagnostic",
       "typical" or  "highly  consistent"  with  the  manner  in  which  the
       appellant said they were obtained. In addition it was  said  that  it
       was  not  "wholly  clear"  whether  the  FTTJ  rejected  all  of  the
       appellant's account.

    7. The Secretary of State's response of 12 June  2015  stated  that  the
       respondent opposed the application for permission to appeal as it was
       considered  that  the  FTTJ  appropriately  directed  herself,   that
       credibility was not accepted and that the  FTTJ  had  considered  the
       claim in the alternative but found that the appellant's circumstances
       did not fall within the risk categories outlined in GJ & Others.

  The hearing


    8. Mr Naith asked to address the panel first. He took a pragmatic  view,
       submitting that there was no real reference to the  medical  evidence
       in the FTTJ's decision and in general, the findings  were  brief.  He
       therefore accepted that the FTTJ had materially erred,  a  view  with
       which the panel concurred. We therefore had no need to hear  from  Mr
       Lingajothy.

    9. Included in the documentary evidence before the FTTJ  was  a  medico-
       legal report from Dr F J  Gilmurray,  a  volunteer  doctor  with  the
       Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture.  Dr  Gilmurray
       examined the appellant on four occasions between 4 November 2014  and
       28 January 2015. The said doctor qualified in 1973 and has  extensive
       relevant experience in treating  physical  injuries  and  significant
       training in diagnosing psychiatric  disorders.  In  addition  to  the
       scarring referred to in the grant of permission, Dr  Gilmurray  found
       evidence  of  the  appellant  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress
       disorder, anxiety and depression and  referred  him  to  the  Medical
       Foundation's psychotherapy service.

   10. The decision of the FTTJ did not disclose that she had considered the
       medical evidence in a substantial way. The sole comment made  on  the
       report was that she had  "attached  some  weight"  to  it.  This  was
       manifestly insufficient and we find that she erred  in  law  in  this
       regard. In addition, it was unclear from  the  decision  whether  all
       aspects of the appellant's account were rejected.

   11. In these circumstances we are satisfied that there are errors of  law
       such that the decision be  set  aside  to  be  remade.  None  of  the
       findings of the FTTJ are to stand.

   12. Further directions are set out below.

   13. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ.  In  view  of  sensitive
       aspects of the appellant's case, we consider it appropriate  to  make
       the following anonymity direction:

       "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) we make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings
       or any form of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
       identify the original appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
       others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction  could
       give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "




Conclusions


  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
  making of an error on a point of law.

  We set aside the decision to be re-made.

       Directions


         . This appeal is remitted to be heard de novo by any First-tier
           Tribunal Judge except FTTJ Richards-Clarke.

         . The appeal should be listed for a hearing at Hatton Cross.

         . A Sri Lankan Tamil interpreter is required.

         . Time estimate is half a day.



Signed      Date: 1 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
