
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06425/2013
     AA/06426/2013
     AA/06427/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Sent           |
|On 10 June 2014                               |On 7 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     M P
                                     M K
                                     M P
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Nowaparast of Duncan Moghal Solicitors &
Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. These appeals are subject to anonymity orders made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the orders and I continue them pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Background

 2. The three appellants are citizens of Iran who were born respectively on
    22 September 1970, 12 June 1979 and 20 June 2008.  The first and second
    appellants are married and the third appellant is their daughter.

 3. The appellants initially arrived in the UK together as visitors  on  24
    March 2013 with leave valid until 24 July 2013.  The second  and  third
    appellants left the UK for Iran on 14 May 2013 and returned to  the  UK
    on 19 May 2013.

 4. On 30 May 2013, the first appellant claimed asylum with the second  and
    third appellant as his dependants.  The basis of  his  claim  was  two-
    fold.

 5. First, he claimed that he had written two e-books on his work  computer
    which were critical of Islam.  Whilst in the UK, the appellant was told
    that the e-books had been discovered on his works computer.  The  first
    appellant's wife and daughter returned to Iran.  Whilst  they  were  in
    Iran, the family house was raided on 15 May 2013 and searched.   During
    that search, the first appellant claimed  that  incriminating  material
    was discovered and taken away.  The first appellant claimed that he has
    been charged with compromising national  security,  distributing  false
    articles and insulting Islam.  His wife and daughter returned to the UK
    bringing with them a flash drive (or  memory  stick)  which  the  first
    appellant claimed contained the e-books that he had written.

 6. Secondly, the appellant claimed that he was in the process of  becoming
    a Christian and would as a result be at risk on return to Iran.

 7. On 19 June 2013, the Secretary of State refused the  first  appellant's
    claim for asylum and that of the second  and  third  appellant  as  his
    dependants.  The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account that he had written two e-books critical of Islam and that  his
    house  had  been  searched  when  incriminating   material   had   been
    discovered.  Further, the Secretary  of  State  did  not  accept  that,
    although  the  first  appellant  was  in  the  process  of  becoming  a
    Christian, he had converted to Christianity and would be at risk  as  a
    result.  The Secretary of State also refused the appellants' claims for
    humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
    promulgated on 13 August 2013, Judge  Whiting  dismissed  each  of  the
    appellants'  appeals.   Judge  Whiting  did  not   accept   the   first
    appellant's evidence that he had written two e-books critical of  Islam
    which had been discovered by the Iranian authorities  and  which  would
    put him at risk on return to Iran.  In addition, Judge Whiting did  not
    accept  that  the  first  appellant  had  genuinely  converted  to  the
    Christian faith from Islam and would be at risk on  that  basis  as  an
    apostate  if  he  returned  to  Iran.   Judge  Whiting  dismissed   the
    appellants' appeals on asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds  and
    under Arts 2, 3 and 8 of the EHCR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellants sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    challenging the judge's  adverse  finding  in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant's claim based upon authorship of the two e-books critical  of
    Islam.  No challenge was  made  to  the  judge's  adverse  findings  in
    relation to any risk to the first appellant based upon  his  conversion
    to Christianity or to the judge's finding that the appellants'  removal
    would not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

10. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on 6 September 2013.  However, on 2 October 2013, UTJ  Perkins  granted
    the appellants' applications for permission to appeal.   The  principal
    basis upon which he did so was that the judge had arguably erred in law
    in failing  to  take  into  account  an  expert  report  assessing  the
    authenticity of a document relied upon by the first appellant which  he
    claimed was an official document showing  an  inventory  of  the  items
    discovered when his family home was searched by the Iranian authorities
    on 15 May 2013.  The grant of permission was in the following terms.

         "2.  I have to give permission to appeal  because  it  seems  clear
             that an expert  report  tending  to  give  some  weight  to  a
             document produced by the appellants was not considered at  all
             by the First-tier Tribunal.  The document is  in  a  paginated
             bundle placed incongruously at the end  of  a  section  marked
             "Case  Law"  under  the  heading   "Appendix   A".    I   have
             considerable sympathy with the First-tier Tribunal Judges  who
             have missed it.  It was expressly brought to my  attention  in
             the grounds.  It  is  arguable  that  it  would  have  made  a
             difference.

         3.   Otherwise the grounds do not impress me  although  each  point
             can be argued.

         4.   My own reading suggests that ground 6 is quite wrong  and  the
             letter, read as a whole, supports  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
             finding that the first appellant voluntarily gave up  his  job
             before travelling to the United  Kingdom.   This  is  why  the
             former employer looked forward to  the  possibility  of  their
             working together in the future.

         5.   Grounds  9.  10  and  11  will  require  careful  explanation.
             Presently I do not see how the memory sticks can show that the
             critical documents were  ever  on  a  computer  owned  by  the
             appellant's employers, but that is a matter  for  argument  at
             the appropriate time.

         6.   For a case rooted in an alleged conversion to Christianity the
             supporting evidence from the Church is very weak.

         7.   However, as indicated above, I am quite satisfied that  it  is
             arguable that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law by  failing
             to  consider  an  expert  report  that  was  before  it.   The
             appellants must be astute to show that  any  error  that  they
             establish is material."

11. Thus, the appeals came before me.



The Submissions

12. On behalf of the appellants, Ms Nowaparast relied upon the  grounds  of
    appeal.  In particular she relied upon the judge's failure to  consider
    an expert report provided by Mr Hedayati-Kakhki  dated  2  August  2013
    which considered the document relied upon by the first appellant as  an
    inventory issued by the Teheran Revolutionary  Court  relating  to  the
    search of his home by officials on 15 May 2013.   In  that  report,  Mr
    Hedayati-Kakhki states that:

         "This Inventory consists of a list of seized items confiscated from
         the address, including a satellite receiver  and  its  accessories,
         three photograph albums, a computer with  its  accessories,  camera
         and CDs, as well as seven prohibited books.  The document specifies
         that the search took place on 15  May  2013  (25/2/1392)  and  [the
         first appellant's wife] was  present  during  the  search.   I  can
         confirm that all necessary legal attributes as well as elements  of
         procedure  expected  of  an  inventory  are  observed  within  this
         document ...."

13. Mr Hedayati-Kakhki goes on in his report to analyse the contents of the
    document and concludes as follows:

         "From what can be observed, the document is procedurally consistent
         as such inventories are common to be  produced  at  the  end  of  a
         search and handed over to persons present at the  premises  at  the
         relevant time.  The search warrant itself which authorises  a  raid
         will only be shown  to  individuals  present  at  the  premises  to
         justify their actions but will not be served upon  them  as  it  is
         regarded as  an  internal  correspondence  between  the  court  and
         officials undertaking the search."

14. Having stated that, Mr Hedayati-Kakhki concludes:

         "In view of the above analysis, I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the
         authenticity of this inventory.  I must mention that  I  have  only
         been instructed to comment on the authenticity of this document and
         for this reason the report is restricted to  this  aspect  of  [the
         first appellant's] case."

15. Ms Nowaparast submitted that the judge had erred in law by  failing  to
    take this expert opinion into account.  She submitted that it was clear
    that the document had been relied upon before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and was specifically mentioned in para 30 of the skeleton argument.

16. In addition,  Ms  Nowaparast  submitted  that  the  judge  had  wrongly
    assessed the evidence which the first appellant  provided  of  a  flash
    drive on which he claimed the two e-books which  he  had  written  were
    stored.  Ms Nowaparast referred to the screen print-out  of  the  flash
    drive at page 8 of the bundle.  She submitted that the judge  had  been
    wrong to infer that the  PDF  files  of  the  two  documents  had  been
    transferred to the flash drive on 17 May 2013 and 2 July  2013  on  the
    basis of the stated "date created".  As a result, the  judge  had  been
    wrong to doubt the first appellant's account that these documents could
    not have been obtained by the first appellant from  his  work  computer
    (where he said that he wrote the books in his lunchtime) since  he  had
    left his employment with  his  employer  on  20  March  2013  when  his
    contract had been terminated.  Ms Nowaparast  submitted,  relying  upon
    the grounds, that the judge had failed to take into  account  that  the
    screen print-outs showed both of these  documents  in  Word  format  as
    having been created and last saved at a time when the  first  appellant
    was indeed employed.  Ms Nowaparast's argument is helpfully  summarised
    at paras 9-14 of the grounds as follows:

         "9.  The IJ makes reference firstly to the  Cinema  Rex  properties
             document which states that the date created was 17  May  2013.
             The IJ has failed to note that the first box on this  page  is
             also entitled 'rex'.  The first document is a 'Word' document,
             the other a 'PDF'.  The IJ has failed to  note  that  both  of
             these documents are likely to contain the same  content.   The
             IJ has further failed to note that one document  is  saved  in
             the 'Word' format which is editable and  the  other  in  'PDF'
             format which is not editable.  The IJ has  stated  that  given
             that the appellant's contract was terminated  in  March  2013,
             the appellant would not have had access to the work  computer,
             and therefore could not have transferred the book to  his  USB
             after March 2013.  The IJ has failed to see  that  the  'Word'
             document was clearly on the USB prior to the appellant leaving
             work as the content was created on 6 February 2013.  It is the
             PDF document of the rex book which states that it  is  created
             17 May.  The IJ has failed to note that the modification  date
             of this document is 18 February 2013.  From As  PDF  documents
             cannot be amended, once  resaved,  the  date  the  content  is
             created in the properties will change again to the date it  is
             saved.  Therefore if the  appellant's  wife  opened  the  word
             document in Iran, and resaved it in the PDF format on the same
             USB this would have been the date it was created.


              The appellant was not given the opportunity to  address  these
             issues at the appeal hearing.


         10.  The IJ further states at paragraph 33 that  another  file  was
             created/saved onto the USB on 2 July 2013, after the appellant
             and his spouse left  Iran.   Again  this  refers  to  the  PDF
             document for the book entitled 'Crossing the  Dark'.   The  IJ
             has again ignored the word document for the  same  book  which
             states that the content was created in November 2012, and last
             saved  in  January  2013,  which  is   consistent   with   the
             appellant's  evidence  that  he  last  added   to   the   book
             approximately 6 months ago.


         11.  In any case the UK has ignored the fact that the PDF  document
             states that it was last modified in December 2012.   Again  we
             submit that the date that the content was created on  the  PDF
             was the date on which it was resaved, not the date on which it
             was saved onto the USB itself.  All other  properties  in  the
             USB point to the content already being present.


         12.  Furthermore, it is submitted that the UK  failed  to  consider
             further evidence in the same document namely the Word document
             of the  book  entitled  Crossing  the  Dark  states  that  the
             'Company' is ODCC which is  the  appellant's  employer.   This
             content clearly states that it was created in November 2012.


         13.  Furthermore the IJ  has  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
             document entitled 'Osool e Kafi' which the appellant states he
             used as a reference to write his  book.   The  document  shows
             that this was last modified on 22 April 2012.  It is submitted
             that the existence of this document goes to the credibility of
             the appellant who stated that  he  had  been  researching  his
             books for some time, and this in particular  was  one  of  the
             references used.  It is submitted that the IJ erred in failing
             to take this into consideration and  make  a  finding  on  the
             same.


         14.  At paragraph 35 the UK makes the finding  that  the  appellant
             has created the files in anticipation of  claiming  asylum  in
             the UK.  It is submitted that the IJ has  failed  to  consider
             the above evidence in the round."

17. Ms Nowaparast submitted that there was nothing peculiar about the dates
    on which the Word files were created and saved and, even putting  aside
    the PDF document, it was clear  that  the  documents  which  the  first
    appellant  claimed  generated  the  adverse  interest  of  the  Iranian
    authorities were on the memory stick.

18. Ms Nowaparast sought to put forward her  instructions  from  the  first
    appellant at the hearing that the entry for "date created" for the  PDF
    file was no more than reflecting a date when they were  last  saved  as
    such which had nothing to do, therefore, necessarily with the date they
    were first put on the memory stick itself.  The judge  had,  therefore,
    she submitted, been wrong to draw the inference that he did in paras 32-
    33 that these  dates  were  inconsistent  with  the  first  appellant's
    account that he had obtained the documents on the memory stick from his
    employment computer which was, of course,  only  available  to  him  up
    until his employment ended on 20 March 2013.

19. In addition, Ms  Nowaparast  placed  some  weight  upon  the  remaining
    grounds.  She submitted that the judge had been wrong to infer in  para
    21  of  his  determination  that  the  first  appellant's  contract  of
    employment had been ended by mutual agreement on 20 March 2013 and that
    therefore, it counted against the first appellant's  credibility,  that
    he had severed his employment links in Iran before  travelling  to  the
    UK.  She submitted that the appellant  had  not  been  aware  that  his
    contract was to be terminated and, in any  event,  he  had  obtained  a
    visit visa prior to its termination in January 2013.

20. Finally, she submitted that the judge was wrong to find at para 26 that
    it was not plausible that the  first  appellant  would  distribute  ten
    copies of his e-books to his friends  given  the  increased  risk  this
    would create of their discovery and of the authorities' tracing back to
    him as the author of the books.

21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Wilding submitted that  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the "date created" for the PDF file  was  the
    date that the documents were created and saved to the memory stick.  Mr
    Wilding pointed out that the  first  appellant  had  not  provided  any
    evidence as to the proper meaning of "date created".  He submitted that
    the judge was entitled to conclude that this was inconsistent with  the
    first appellant's claim to have put the documents on the  memory  stick
    whilst in  employment  which  had  terminated  by  the  relevant  "date
    created" for each file.  In addition, he pointed out that  in  relation
    to the "Crossing the Dark Properties" book the  "date  created"  was  2
    July 2013 when neither the first appellant  nor  the  second  appellant
    were in Iran.  Mr Wilding accepted that  the  "date  created"  for  the
    other book, namely the "Cinema Rex" document of 17 May 2013 was a  date
    when the second appellant was in Iran but that still  did  not  explain
    how the document could have been obtained at that date from  the  first
    appellant's work computer to which there was no access at that date.

22. In relation to the expert report,  Mr  Wilding  accepted  that  it  was
    regrettable that the judge had not made reference to the expert  report
    but he relied on the fact that the expert only stated that  there  was:
    "no reason to doubt the authenticity of this  Inventory".   Mr  Wilding
    submitted that the judge gave  a  number  of  sustainable  reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's account.  He submitted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to take into account that the first  appellant's  contract  of
    employment had been ended by mutual agreement shortly before he came to
    the UK.  The judge was entitled to infer that the  first  appellant  by
    leaving his employment before coming to the UK demonstrated that he had
    no intention of returning to Iran.  Mr Wilding submitted that the judge
    was simply not impressed with the first appellant as a witness, nor the
    chronology of the claim.  That, Mr Wilding submitted, was  not  limited
    to the dates relating to the creation of the PDF file but also that the
    first appellant allowed his wife and child to return to  Iran  when  he
    was aware that (as he claimed) the books had  been  discovered  on  his
    works computer.

23. Mr Wilding submitted that the judge gave ample reason for  his  adverse
    credibility finding and his failure to take  into  account  the  expert
    report was not a material error.  That evidence did not relate  to  any
    other aspect of the first appellant's evidence.    Mr  Wilding  invited
    me to uphold the judge's adverse credibility finding.

Discussion

24. Dealing first with the judge's failure to take into account Mr Hedayati-
    Kakhki's report, there is no doubt that the judge was wrong not  to  do
    so.  It was clearly relied upon by the appellant  in  para  38  of  the
    skeleton argument which was before the First-tier Tribunal.

25. That report provided material support for a core aspect  of  the  first
    appellant's claim, namely that his family home had been searched by the
    Iranian authorities on 15 May 2013 and  a  number  of  items  had  been
    seized including seven prohibited books.  It also supported  the  first
    appellant's account that his wife, the second appellant, was present at
    that search.  Whilst Mr Hedayati-Kakhki states his conclusion as  being
    that he has "no reason to doubt the authenticity" of the inventory,  it
    is clear from reading his report that, having given the document a most
    thorough analysis, it is in his view authentic.  It may well be, as UTJ
    Perkins pointed out when granting permission to appeal, that the  judge
    explicably missed the report as it was "incongruously"  placed  at  the
    end of the appellant's bundle of  documents  apparently  in  a  section
    headed "Case Law".  The fact, nevertheless, remains that the appellants
    relied upon this document and the judge was under an obligation to take
    it into account.  His failure to do so amounted to an error of  law  in
    reaching his adverse credibility findings.  I  did  not  understand  Mr
    Wilding strenuously to argue to the contrary rather,  he  argued,  that
    error was not material.  I will consider that argument in  the  context
    of the second principal ground relied upon by Ms Nowaparast to which  I
    now turn.

26. That ground relates to the judge's assessment of the screenshot of  the
    contents of the first appellant's memory stick.  The judge  dealt  with
    this at paras 32-33 of his determination as follows:

         "32. In the appellant's bundle is to be found a document upon which
             are recorded the properties of a USB stick upon which  are  to
             be found e-copies of documents entitled Cinema Rex;  'rex',  a
             single page document;  Crossing  the  Dark  and  Crossing  the
             Dark2.  That document has been created and submitted solely in
             order to demonstrate the properties of the documents found  on
             that stick, and that the stick upon which those documents were
             stored was brought to the UK by the appellant's  spouse.   The
             first such document is recorded as being  created  on  17  May
             2013 and modified on 18 February 2013.  The second document is
             recorded as being created on 11 December 2012 and  last  saved
             on 13 January 2013.  The third document is recorded  as  being
             created on 17 May 2013 and last modified on 18 February  2013;
             the fourth document  is  created  on  17  May  2013  and  last
             modified on 18 February 2013; the fourth document is  recorded
             as being created on  2  July  2013  and  last  modified  on  8
             December 2012.  Although where the date of creation appears to
             postdate the last saving or modification  date,  the  creation
             date would be the date on which the document is transferred to
             a memory stick from  another  source.   Revision  numbers  and
             editing time recorded are not of particular assistance in that
             such information exists in consequence  of  each  addition  or
             amendment made and also the length of time a document is  left
             in an opened state on a computer.  The  dates  utilised  by  a
             computer can be altered at will and are not locked within  the
             operating system.  What does emerge is  that  those  documents
             were last amended either shortly before the appellant  applied
             for entry clearance as a visitor to the UK  or  shortly  after
             the appellant was granted his visa on 24 January 2014.

         33.  In his asylum interview the appellant recorded  that  a  flash
             drive/USB stick which he then  produced  and  upon  which  the
             incriminating documents had been stored had  been  brought  to
             the UK at his request by his wife when she travelled to the UK
             on the last occasion to rejoin him.  That journey was made  by
             her on 19 May 2013.  The appellant left Iran on 24 March  2013
             following the termination of his employment on 20 March  2013,
             after which latter date he would not have had  access  to  any
             work computer.  Three of those files were  transferred  to  or
             created upon that stick on 17 May 2013 and 2  July  2013  from
             another source.  Given that the appellant left his  employment
             in March 2013 those files could not have been  transferred  to
             that USB stick from his works computer.  One of those files on
             the USB stick was created/transferred to that stick on 2  July
             2013, some six weeks after the appellant's spouse  left  Iran.
             it is clear that file could not have  been  on  that  computer
             stick at the date she finally travelled to the UK."

27. In their submissions, both Ms  Nowaparast  and  Mr  Wilding  sought  to
    unpack the proper meaning of the screenshot and, in particular, whether
    the judge was entitled to conclude that the "date created" for the  two
    PDF files was correctly understood to mean "first saved on  the  memory
    stick".  In truth, there was no evidence before Judge Whiting as to the
    proper meaning of the phrase "date created".  It was not  a  matter  on
    which he could take judicial notice.  Mr Wilding might be  correct,  in
    principle, that it was for the first appellant to establish its  proper
    meaning.  However, the flaw in that argument in these appeals  is  that
    it is entirely unclear whether the meaning of this phrase was raised at
    the hearing.  Mr  Wilding  did  not  seek  to  argue  that  the  ground
    misrepresented the factual position when it is  stated  at  para  9  of
    those grounds that:  "The appellant was not given  the  opportunity  to
    address these issues at the appeal hearing."

28. There is certainly nothing in Judge Whiting's determination to  suggest
    that this matter was raised and that he invited  submissions  upon  it.
    That, in itself, creates considerable difficulties  in  sustaining  the
    judge's reasoning and findings in relation to  the  screenshot.   As  I
    have said, it cannot be a matter of judicial knowledge that the  phrase
    necessarily bears the meaning that the judge attributed to it.  But, in
    addition, in assessing the evidence of the screenshot,  the  judge  did
    not take into account,  as  Ms  Nowaparast  submitted,  that  the  Word
    document had clearly been  "last  saved"  on  a  date  when  the  first
    appellant was in employment, namely 17 February  2013  and  13  January
    2013.  One of the documents refers to "ODCC" under the "Company"  name.
    That, Ms Nowaparast told me without contradiction by Mr Wilding, is the
    name of the company where the first appellant  was  employed  until  20
    March 2013.

29. In my judgment, therefore, the judge's reasoning in paras 32-33 leading
    him to doubt a core aspect of the appellant's  claim  is  not  properly
    sustainable in law.

30. What, then, is the effect of these  two  errors  in  law?   There  were
    undoubtedly difficulties with the appellant's account including that he
    had allowed his wife and child to return to Iran at a time when he knew
    that the authorities were interested  in  him.   It  also  was,  in  my
    judgment, properly open to the judge to take into account the timing of
    the termination of the first appellant's employment and  also  that  he
    had distributed e-copies of  the  books  to  his  friends  despite  the
    increasing risk of discovery that that created.  I  do  not  accept  Ms
    Nowaparast's submissions that the judge was not entitled to take  these
    matters into account.  There were  also  other  difficulties  with  the
    evidence, including some inconsistencies between the  evidence  of  the
    first appellant and his wife.  Nevertheless, the judge did, in my view,
    fall into error in two significant respects.  The issue of whether  his
    family home was searched on 15 May 2013 was a centrepiece of his  claim
    as was the existence of the documents on  the  memory  stick  which  he
    claimed to have authored.  It may well be,  as  Mr  Wilding  submitted,
    that the mere existence of these documents did not establish the  first
    appellant's authorship.  However, there is no doubt  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the screenshot (erroneous for the reasons I have  already
    given) was an important part of his  reasoning  that  led  him  to  not
    accept the appellant's evidence.

31. Reading the determination as a whole and the totality  of  the  judge's
    reasoning, I cannot be confident that had he  taken  into  account  the
    expert's report and had he not fallen into error in his  assessment  of
    the screenshot, he would nevertheless have  reached  the  same  adverse
    credibility finding.  For those  reasons,  those  errors  were,  in  my
    judgment, material to his findings and ultimate decision to reject  the
    appellant's evidence and to find that  he  was  not  at  risk  on  that
    account on return to Iran.

32. For these reasons, the judge's adverse credibility finding in  relation
    to this aspect of the appellant's account  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.

Decision and Disposal

33. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals on asylum grounds involved the making of an error of law.  That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

34. Both representatives invited me to remit the appeal to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.  It was accepted that Judge Whiting's  findings
    that the first appellant had not converted to Christianity and was  not
    at risk on return to Iran as a consequence were unchallenged and should
    stand.  That is also the case in relation to his  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellants' appeals under Art 8 of the ECHR.

35. Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding required, applying para
    7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  it  is  appropriate
    that this appeal should be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing  limited  to  remaking  the  decision  in  respect   of   the
    appellants' claim to be at risk on return to Iran because of the  first
    appellant's claimed authorship of material critical of Islam.

36. To that extent, the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    heard by a judge other than Judge Whiting.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
