
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06115/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 March 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                         Miss vipithra amirthalingam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Jegarajah, Counsel instructed by A & P
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  whose  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 20 March 2015 to refuse to  grant  her
    asylum was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan.

2.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    Judge  Chohan  on  grounds  which  argued  that  his   conclusions   on
    credibility in respect of the bribe paid in order to be  released  from
    custody and exiting Sri Lanka without coming to the  attention  of  the
    authorities arguably contradicted the findings of the Upper Tribunal in
    JG (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319 (  IAC).  It was  also  arguable  that
    the judge's findings on the appellant's delay in claiming  asylum  were
    based on an inaccurate assessment of the evidence.  The judge  appeared
    not to have addressed the evidence given by the appellant's  mother  in
    her statement dated 1 December 2015.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15 December 1986.   She
    entered the UK on 29 August 2010 with a  student  visa.   She  did  not
    claim asylum until 17 December 2013.

4.   She claimed that from  April  2002  until  January  2005  she  was  the
    secretary of the student wing of the LTTE.  In her role  she  organised
    pro-Tamil demonstrations, protests and other programmes.  She had  been
    employed as a reporter by the Uthayn Newspaper Company from 21 May 2006
    until November 2009.  Her job was to inform  the  newspaper  of  events
    involving the army in her area.

5.   She claimed that a cousin, Thevian, was a member of the  LTTE  and  was
    the security guard to the leader of the LTTE.  Thevian  introduced  the
    appellant to another LTTE member, Karikalan.  Between 2003 and 2004 the
    appellant provided Karikalan and two other LTTE members  with  food  on
    five or six occasions and with accommodation on three  occasions.   She
    also allowed the two members who accompanied Karikalan  to  hide  their
    weapons in bushes in her village on two occasions in 2004.

6.   She claimed that on 10 August 2010 she was arrested by the  army  at  a
    checkpoint.  Karikalan was at the checkpoint with the army and had told
    them that the appellant had assisted the LTTE.  The  appellant  claimed
    that Karikalan had begun working for the army.  The appellant was taken
    to Joseph Army Camp where she was interrogated.  During  her  detention
    she was subjected to torture.  Her father paid an agent, Mohammad,  who
    organised the appellant's release from the camp on 16 August  2010  and
    arrangements were then made for her to leave Sri Lanka.

7.   The appellant has a daughter who was born  in  the  UK  on  16  January
    2014.  The appellant's partner Ramanathan Nirujan, entered the UK on 30
    September 2008.  He made an asylum claim which was refused on 7 October
    2008.  His appeal against that decision was heard on 16  December  2008
    and dismissed.  The appellant claimed that she is culturally married to
    Mr Nirujan and not legally.

8.   She claimed that whilst in the UK she has been a member of the  British
    Tamil Forum and has taken part in four pro-Tamil events.  She now fears
    returning to Sri Lanka because she believes she will  be  arrested  and
    detained by the Sri Lankan authorities and will be persecuted.

9.   In support of her claim that she was tortured  when  she  was  detained
    between 10 August 2010 and 16 August 2010,  the  appellant  produced  a
    medical report by Mr Martin dated 20 August 2015.  He noted four  scars
    - two on her hands and two on her legs.  Mr Martin concluded that  "the
    individual's scars are consistent of injuries intentionally caused by a
    third party, then [sic] other possible explanations are  also  possible
    such as an accidental mechanism of injury".

10.  The judge found that the appellant was a low-level  student  member  of
    the LTTE in Sri Lanka who appears to have assisted  them  between  2003
    and 2004.  He also accepted that the appellant worked for  a  newspaper
    for a period of over three years. He found however that she had  simply
    provided information to the newspaper and there was nothing to  suggest
    that she wrote any articles against the Sri Lankan authorities.

11.  The judge considered the appellant's claim to  have  actively  assisted
    the LTTE between 2003 and 2004.  He found it quite incredible that  the
    authorities would have any interest in her  six  years  later  in  2010
    despite her claim that Karikalan had begun working  for  the  army  and
    informed on her.  Whilst the judge accepted that the  appellant  worked
    for a newspaper for three years, between  2004  and  the  time  of  her
    claimed arrest in 2010, he found that for the authorities to  have  had
    no  interest  in  her  prior  to  August   2010   was   not   credible.
    Consequently, the judge found that the appellant was never arrested  by
    the authorities for the reasons given by her.

12.  The judge considered the appellant's claim that she was  released  from
    custody by the payment of the bribe.  Whilst he acknowledged, based  on
    the objective material that corruption is prevalent in  Sri  Lanka,  he
    did not find the appellant's account to be credible.  This was  because
    if the authorities had considered the appellant to be a serious  threat
    to the security of Sri Lanka, he did not  find  it  credible  that  any
    official would take a risk, even by the payment of a bribe  to  release
    the appellant.  He found that the appellant's credibility  was  further
    undermined by the fact that she was able to leave Sri Lanka  using  her
    own passport and with a student visa.  The appellant was released  from
    custody on 16 August 2010 and she left Sri Lanka  on  29  August  2010.
    During this time the appellant experienced  no  difficulties  from  the
    authorities.  The judge then went on to say that the  appellant  cannot
    have it both ways in the sense that if her account were to be  accepted
    and that she was released by the payment  of  a  bribe,  then  official
    records would not state that she was released by the payment of a bribe
    but released for other reasons.  Therefore, if she were to be  returned
    to Sri Lanka there was nothing to suggest  that  her  name  was  on  an
    official stop list or that there was an  outstanding  warrant  for  her
    arrest.

13.  The judge considered the appellant's evidence that she  has  undertaken
    sur place activities.  He noted that the appellant is a member  of  the
    British Tamil Forum  and  that  is  confirmed  by  a  letter  from  the
    organisation  dated  28  May  2014.   The   appellant   had   submitted
    photographs to support her claim that she has attended  four  pro-Tamil
    events in the UK.  During her oral evidence the appellant  stated  that
    photographs had been loaded on YouTube and  that  her  friends  in  Sri
    Lanka and the United Kingdom had seen  the  photographs  and  therefore
    others will have seen them too.  The judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would be at risk by virtue of this because there was  nothing
    to suggest that she was a high profile activist.

14.  The judge relied on the letter from  the  British  High  Commission  in
    Colombo dated 25 July 2014.   The  letter,  acknowledged  that  sixteen
    Tamil Diaspora organisations, including the British Tamil  Forum,  have
    been proscribed by the Sri Lankan authorities.  The letter went  on  to
    say:

         "There have been no reports in local press of anyone being arrested
         because of their membership of, or association  with,  one  of  the
         proscribed Tamil Diaspora organisations.  Members of civil  society
         had not raised this as an issue with the High Commission."


15.  The judge also relied on the country guidance case of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). GJ said  that  the  focus  of  the  Sri  Lanka
    Government's concern has changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.
     If a person is detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security  forces  there
    remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring  international
    protection.  In respect of  journalists,  GJ  states  that  journalists
    (whether in print or other media) or human rights  activists,  who,  in
    either case, have criticised the Sri Lankan Government,  in  particular
    its human rights  record,  or  who  are  associated  with  publications
    critical of the Sri Lankan Government remain at risk.

16.  The judge noted the submissions by the parties, the HOPO claiming  that
    the appellant had not written any articles for the newspaper she worked
    for and there was no evidence to that effect.   While  the  appellant's
    Counsel submitted  that  it  was  the  perception  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities  that  mattered  and  that  there  was  continuing  adverse
    interest in the appellant and therefore she will be at risk on  return.
    The judge  preferred  the  former  argument  finding  that  she  simply
    provided information to  the  newspaper,  that  there  was  nothing  to
    suggest that she wrote any articles against the Sri Lankan authorities.

17.  The judge said it was interesting  to  note  that  the  appellant  only
    joined the British Tamil Forum after claiming asylum in December  2013.
    He  found  it  incredible  that  she  delayed  undertaking  sur   place
    activities for many years and only undertook them following  her  claim
    for asylum.  He found that she was simply  undertaking  the  sur  place
    activities in order to enhance her asylum claim and nothing  more.   He
    found that those activities would not put her at risk were  she  to  be
    removed to Sri Lanka.

18.   The  judge  considered  the  medical  evidence  which  said  that  the
    appellant suffers from serious psychiatric  disorder,  including  major
    depression and PTSD most probably secondary  to  the  post  trauma  the
    appellant claimed.  The judge noted that Dr  Persuad  who  had  written
    that report made no mention of the proceedings taken against him before
    the General Medical Council.  Nevertheless it was not clear to him  why
    this particular report has been submitted as part  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  There were no significant submissions made in  respect  of  the
    appellant's mental health  and  certainly  no  argument  had  been  put
    forward that the appellant could not return due to  her  mental  health
    problems.  In any event, it was difficult  to  see  how  the  appellant
    could meet the high threshold as set out in the case of N v UK.

19.  At the hearing before me Ms Jegarajah drew my  attention  to  paragraph
    288 of GJ wherein the Upper Tribunal said that the  UNHCR  had  revised
    its guidelines issued on 21 December 2012 to reflect the  post-conflict
    changes in Sri Lanka.  Previous UNHCR guidelines were  issued  in  July
    2010.  Ms Jegarajah relied on paragraph 289 of GJ  which  identified  a
    list of groups which require "particularly careful examination" who may
    be, and in some cases are  likely  to  be,  in  need  of  international
    protection.  The list included journalists.  Ms Jegarajah  argued  that
    the judge failed to consider  and  apply  GJ.   His  finding  that  the
    appellant had not been arrested before was unlawful because  there  was
    no objective risk prior to 2012.

20.  She also challenged the judge's finding that  it  was  incredible  that
    the appellant would be released from custody by payment of a bribe  and
    able to leave Sri Lanka without experiencing any difficulties from  the
    authorities.  She relied on paragraph 146 of GJ which recorded evidence
    from  Mr  Punethanayagam  regarding  information  held  on  his  client
    database about the use of bribery.  He had said that  bribery  is  very
    common in the IDP camps as well as the  detention  centres  from  which
    even known LTTE leaders have managed to escape on  payment  of  bribes.
    Hence it cannot be argued that only  people  of  low  interest  to  the
    authorities are able to secure their release through a bribe.   In  his
    opinion it is plausible that the detainee was  released  following  the
    payment of a bribe, even if of  significant  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities.  It is unlikely that the  person  who  accepts  the  bribe
    would access the detainee's record and change them as  released  or  no
    longer wanted.  Hence such cases would normally be recorded as  escaped
    from  detention  in  the  database  of  the  police.   Subsequently  an
    absconder action will be commenced and the detainee's details  will  be
    passed to the National Intelligence Bureau.

21.  Ms  Jegarajah  relied  on  Mr  Punethanayagam's  evidence  that  it  is
    possible to leave the country using bribery with the help of an  agent.
    The security officers and Immigration  Officers  at  the  international
    airports are no exception to the widespread bribery and  corruption  in
    Sri Lanka.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the Upper Tribunal  found  that
    Mr Punethanayagam was an expert whose evidence they found reliable.

22.  Ms Jegarajah challenged the judge's finding that  the  appellant  would
    not be at risk on account  of  her  evidence  that  she  worked  for  a
    newspaper.  She argued that the judge did  not  look  at  the  evidence
    contained in the appellant's interview.  At question 22  the  appellant
    had been asked what kind of reporting she did, and she replied that for
    example, if the army arrested someone, she would go  to  the  newspaper
    and report this.  If there was something she would give the newspaper a
    call; if there is any protest in an area she will call and report it to
    her company and photographs would be taken of the event and the company
    will then publish it.  If there were any incidents involving  the  army
    she would report them e.g. if the army shot someone such as the LTTE or
    LTTE supporters she would report it.   Ms  Jegarajah  argued  that  the
    appellant was a regional  and  roving  reporter  and  reported  various
    incidents.  She disclosed human rights abuses by the Sri  Lankan  army.
    These were  post-conflict  matters  which  have  become  important  and
    because of this, the newspaper would be seen as  a  nationalist  paper.
    There was no real engagement with this evidence by the judge.

23.  Mr Clarke submitted  Ms  Jegarajah  failed  to  pursue  the  two  other
    matters upon which the appellant had been granted permission to  argue.
    These were the judge's findings on the appellant's  delay  in  claiming
    asylum and the judge's failure to address the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant's mother.  He submitted  that  her  failure  to  pursue  them
    indicated that the judge did not err in law on those matters.

24.  Mr Clarke submitted that it was accepted by the Secretary of State  and
    the judge, in accordance with head note 7(b) of  GJ  that  "journalists
    (whether in print or other media) or human rights  activists,  who,  in
    either case, have criticised the Sri Lankan Government,  in  particular
    its human rights  record,  or  who  are  associated  with  publications
    critical of the Sri Lankan  Government"  remain  at  risk.   Mr  Clarke
    submitted that looking through the appellant's bundle he  struggled  to
    see what evidence there was that the articles written by the  appellant
    were in fact anti-government.  In the  absence  of  evidence  that  the
    editorial  presentation  of  events  which  they  reported  were  anti-
    government, the judge's finding that whatever  she  had  done  did  not
    bring her to the adverse attention  of  the  authorities  disclosed  no
    error of law.

25.  Ms Jegarajah submitted that the judge accepted that the  appellant  was
    a journalist and an LTTE supporter and had been secretary to the  Tamil
    union.  The argument that  she  had  not  written  articles  that  were
    expressly anti-government was misconceived because  there  was  massive
    censorship prior to 2012 and if journalists had reported  human  rights
    abuses in government controlled territory, they would have  been  shot.
    That is why it was from December 2012 because of  the  changes  in  the
    country that the UNHCR revised their guidelines.

26.  I find that Ms Jegarajah's arguments did not disclose an error  of  law
    in the judge's decision.

27.  I accept that the  UNHCR  has  revised  its  guidelines  issues  on  21
    December 2012 to reflect the post-conflict changes  in  Sri  Lanka.   I
    also accept Ms Jegarajah's submission that prior to 2012 no  journalist
    would have taken the risk of criticising the government's human  rights
    abuses for fear of being shot.  However, this evidence does not  assist
    the appellant.   It  rather  supports  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant simply provided  information  to  the  paper  and  there  was
    nothing to suggest that she wrote any articles against the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.  Indeed there was no evidence that the  appellant  herself
    had written any articles.  She said her job was to inform the newspaper
    of events involving the army  in  her  area.   That  was  the  evidence
    contained in answer  to  question  22  which  the  judge  had  properly
    considered.   There  was  no  evidence  from  the  appellant  that  the
    newspaper was seen as a nationalist paper or  anti-government  or  that
    the newspaper company and its reporters came to the  adverse  attention
    of the authorities on account  of  their  views,  their  reporting  and
    editorial content.  Indeed the judge had applied GJ, paragraph 7(b)  of
    its head note and his findings in this respect disclosed  no  error  of
    law.

28.  The other issue challenged by Ms  Jegarajah  was  the  judge's  finding
    that it was not credible that the appellant would have been released on
    payment of a bribe and would have left the country without experiencing
    any difficulties.  I have noted the   evidence of Mr Punethanayagam  in
    GJ.  The judge's findings have to be seen  in  the  round.   The  judge
    found that by her own evidence she had assisted the LTTE  between  2003
    and 2004.  She had also worked for  a  newspaper  company  for  over  a
    period of three years, from 21 May 2006 until November  2009.   Because
    the judge found that she had  not  been  of  adverse  interest  to  the
    authorities up until that point,  he  did  not  believe  that  she  was
    detained in August 2010.  That was his  primary  finding.   It  was  in
    light of this primary finding that the judge did not believe  that  she
    would have been released by payment of a bribe and noted,  furthermore,
    that between her claimed release from custody on 16 August  2010  until
    she left Sri Lanka two weeks later,  she  experienced  no  difficulties
    from the authorities.  In reaching his findings, the  judge  took  into
    account the objective evidence that  corruption  is  prevalent  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Indeed that was what Mr Punethanayagam said in GJ.

29.  Accordingly I find that the judge did not  err  in  law.   The  judge's
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed







Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

