
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06397/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 September 2013                           |On 24 September 2013         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     S A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Litchfield instructed by Jinnah Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).   Neither  party  invited  me  to
    rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

 2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  in  January  1984.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 23 October 2008 with a  valid  student
    visa.  His leave as a student was extended on a  number  of  occasions,
    ultimately until 30 May 2012.  On that date, he applied for asylum.  On
    22 June 2012, the Secretary of State refused  to  grant  the  appellant
    asylum under para 336 of HC 395 (as amended).  On that date  also,  the
    Secretary of State decided first, to refuse  to  vary  the  appellant's
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and, secondly decided  to  remove
    him by way of directions under s.47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    dated 10 August 2012, Judge Boardman dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    on asylum humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.  On  8  May
    2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hemingway) granted  the  appellant
    permission on the following grounds:

         "5.  The determination is certainly very full with respect  to  its
             setting out of the relevant history, points of contention  and
             evidence.  However, it is arguable that the Judge erred in his
             assessment   of   credibility   by   impermissibly   requiring
             independent corroboration and by seeming to reject aspects  of
             the Appellant's evidence solely on the basis of  the  lack  of
             it."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The First-tier Decision

 5.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  appellant  was  not   legally
    represented.  At para 7 of the determination, Judge Boardman noted that
    the Tribunal had received a letter from the appellant's solicitor on 24
    July  2012  (that  is  approximately  two  weeks  before  the  hearing)
    enclosing witness statements for the appellant and his wife but stating
    that they would not be attending the hearing and that the appellant was
    to represent himself.  That was, indeed, what occurred at  the  hearing
    on 6 August 2012.  The  appellant  indicated  that  he  was  ready  and
    prepared to represent himself.

 6. Before the judge (as in his  application  for  asylum),  the  appellant
    claimed that his family was the subject of a land dispute  in  Pakistan
    with a number of his relatives.  This dispute had  begun  in  1989  and
    they wished to take possession of his family's land which  was  in  his
    father's name.  The appellant claimed that the relatives had registered
    a number of First Incident Reports (FIRs) against him between  November
    2003 and August  2005.   The  appellant  produced  those  FIRs  at  the
    hearing.  The appellant claimed that he had been detained by the police
    as a result but had been released  when  it  was  determined  that  the
    accusations made against him were false.  The  appellant  also  claimed
    that on a number of occasions weapons had been fired at his home and in
    2005 his mother had been hit in the head and arm when shot at  and  had
    been taken to hospital.  He also said that on one occasion  his  mother
    and brother were attacked and beaten and his brother's leg was  broken.
    The appellant said that he had registered an FIR in one incident or had
    tried to do so in another but nothing had been done by the police.

 7. In support of his claim, the appellant submitted,  as  I  have  already
    indicated, a number of FIRs and also statements and letters in  support
    from his mother, his sister-in-law and friends.  At  the  hearing,  the
    appellant also sought to rely upon x-rays of his mother and brother and
    hospital and doctors' reports which, he said, supported his claim  that
    they had been injured.  However, those documents were not found in  the
    Tribunal's file nor in the respondent's bundle  or  HOPO's  file.   The
    appellant told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that these  documents  had
    been sent  to  the  respondent  by  the  appellant's  solicitors.   The
    appellant told the judge that he did not have copies of the documents.

 8. Before the judge, the Presenting Officer (on behalf of the Secretary of
    State) conceded that the  FIRs  were  genuine  (see  para  60b  of  the
    determination).   Further,  the  judge  accepted  in  para  68  of  the
    determination that the appellant had had difficulties in the past  with
    his family and that there had been accusations to  the  police  by  the
    appellant and his  family  as  evidenced  by  the  FIRs.   Despite  the
    acceptance of the FIRs  and  the  acceptance  by  the  judge  that  the
    appellant had had problems with his family, the judge nevertheless went
    on to find, giving detailed reasons in para 69  of  the  determination,
    that it had not been established that the appellant had in the past, or
    would be in the future, at risk of serious ill-treatment  or  of  being
    killed (as he claimed) by a relative as a  result  of  a  land  dispute
    within his family.

 9. Although the judge's reasoning is somewhat lengthy, it  is  helpful  to
    set it out in full:

         "69. However, I find that:

             a.   the contents of the FIRs are accusations only,  and  have
                  not been independently verified by the  police  or  anyone
                  else

             b.   indeed, the Appellant's own evidence is that although the
                  police arrested him on the strength of at least one of the
                  FIRs, they released him on learning that  the  accusations
                  against him were untrue

             c.   there is no independent evidence before me to corroborate
                  the Appellant's evidence that his mother was shot by their
                  enemies, that  his  brother's  leg  was  broken  by  their
                  enemies, or that his father  was  kidnapped  by  them,  in
                  that:

                    . the references in at least one of  the  FIRs  to  the
                      injuries to the Appellant's mother and  brother  are,
                      again, accusations only, and not independent evidence
                      that the events occurred

                    . the  statement  by  the  Appellant  himself  in  that
                      respect (at page A23 of the Respondent's  bundle)  is
                      by its very nature, not independent evidence

                    . the statement by [N A] in that respect (at  page  A29
                      of  the  Respondent's  bundle)  is  not   independent
                      evidence as such, in that the Appellant's evidence is
                      that [N A] is the Appellant's mother's brother

                    . the medical reports and x-rays  referred  to  by  the
                      Appellant in that respect are not before me,  despite
                      the large number  of  documents  in  the  Appellant's
                      bundle, and I accept Mr  Bond's  statement  that  the
                      documents were not in his papers either

                    .  there  is  not  even  an  FIR  in  relation  to  the
                      Appellant's father being kidnapped

             d.   there is no independent evidence before me to corroborate
                  the Appellant's evidence of any threats to his life  while
                  he was living in Pakistan, or during his period in the  UK
                  up to his mother's letter dated 10 May 2012, in that:

                    . the FIRs do not themselves contain any threats to his
                      life

                    . there is no independent evidence  before  me  of  any
                      threats to his life between 30 September 2005, namely
                      the date of the last incident alleged in the FIRs and
                      the  statement  of  [N  A]  and  the  date  when  the
                      Appellant left Pakistan, namely in October 2008

                    . there is no independent evidence  before  me  of  any
                      threats to his life between his arrival in the UK  in
                      October 2008 and his mother's  letter  dated  10  May
                      2012, and I find that Appellant's  evidence  that  he
                      received threatening  letters  and  messages  between
                      those dates but that the letters were stolen from his
                      previous address and that he destroyed  his  previous
                      Sim card to be entirely unpersuasive

             e.   although there is a reference in at least one of the FIRs
                  and in the statements of the Appellant's mother (at  pages
                  A26 and 31 of the Respondent's bundle) to threats to  kill
                  her, the Appellant's evidence is that she is still  living
                  in the same place in Pakistan now, despite  those  alleged
                  threats

             f.   the Appellant's assertion that the alleged threats to his
                  life stem from a land dispute is unpersuasive, in that:

                    . he was only 4 or 5 when the 1989 incident referred to
                      in the first of the FIRs allegedly took place

                    . according to the Appellant's own  evidence  the  land
                      referred to was not  in  the  Appellant's  name,  but
                      belonged  either  to  the  government   or   to   the
                      Appellant's father

                    . there is no independent evidence  before  me  of  any
                      incidents concerning  the  land  dispute  between  30
                      September 2005, namely the date of the last  incident
                      alleged in the FIRs and the statement of [N  A],  and
                      the date when the Appellant left Pakistan in  October
                      2008

                    . the Appellant's mother, father and brother still live
                      in the same place in Pakistan now, despite his father
                      still owning the part of the land not  owned  by  the
                      government

             g.   the Appellant's evidence that he was in fear of his  life
                  when he arrived in the UK in October 2008 is  inconsistent
                  with:

                    . his failure to claim asylum on  arrival  in  the  UK,
                      and, instead, his  presentation  to  the  immigration
                      authorities on arrival of his student visa papers;  I
                      find the Appellant's explanation that he  [had]  been
                      so frightened that he had not known the procedure  to
                      be  inconsistent  with  his   academic   ability   as
                      demonstrated by his BA from the University of Punjab,
                      and entirely unpersuasive

                    . his failure to claim asylum on any of the 3 occasions
                      on which he then applied, in the UK, for an extension
                      of his student visa; again, I  find  his  explanation
                      that he did not know the  procedure  to  be  entirely
                      unpersuasive

             h.   the Appellant's evidence that he has received threats  to
                  kill him in the UK to be inconsistent with  his  admission
                  that he has not reported any such threats to the police in
                  the UK

             i.   I do not regard the letters and  messages  starting  with
                  the  letter  from  his  mother  dated  10  May   2012   as
                  independent evidence of any  threats  to  the  Appellant's
                  life, in that:

                    . they are all from his mother, his sister-in-law,  and
                      his friends, who will quite naturally wish to support
                      the Appellant's stated wish to remain in the UK

                    . they  have  all  been  written  after  the  Appellant
                      decided to apply for asylum in the UK, rather,  as  I
                      find,  than   being   evidence   of   a   change   of
                      circumstances leading  him  to  make  the  claim  for
                      asylum

             j.   I do not regard the evidence  of  [S  A]  as  independent
                  evidence of any threats to the Appellant's life, in that:

                    . she, as the Appellant's wife,  will  quite  naturally
                      wish to support the Appellant's case

                    . in any event, I  find  that  it  is  clear  from  her
                      evidence that her only knowledge of the substance  of
                      the Appellant's account is from what he  himself  has
                      told her, and from the recent letters  and  messages,
                      starting with the letter from his mother dated 10 May
                      2012

             k.   I find that there is  no  evidence  before  me  that  the
                  Appellant  is  at  risk  from  the  police  or  any  other
                  authorities in Pakistan, in that, on his own evidence:

                    . the  police  in  Pakistan  released  him  after  each
                      arrest,  on  being  informed  that  the   accusations
                      against him were false

                    . he has never been ill-treated by the police

             l.   I accordingly reject the Appellant's  account  of  having
                  been, or of now being, at risk in Pakistan."

The Submissions

10. On behalf of the appellant, Ms Litchfield submitted  that  the  judge's
    adverse factual finding was legally flawed.

11. First, she submitted that the judge had failed to give proper weight to
    the FIRs given that they were conceded to be  genuine.   She  submitted
    that the judge had been wrong to repeatedly doubt the evidence  in  the
    FIRs and given by the other witnesses on the basis that there  was  "no
    independent evidence before me to corroborate ...".   In  one  respect,
    she submitted that the judge had simply been mistaken, namely  when  in
    para 69c at bullet point 5 he stated that there was no FIR dealing with
    the appellant's allegation that his father  had  been  kidnapped.   She
    drew my attention to a translation  of  an  FIR  at  page  156  of  the
    appellant's  bundle  which  referred  to  the   accusation   that   the
    appellant's father had been kidnapped.  She pointed out there was  also
    evidence in the statement of the appellant's uncle at page 123 to  that
    effect.

12. Secondly, she submitted that the judge had been wrong, as a  matter  of
    fairness, not to give the appellant an opportunity to obtain copies  of
    the medical reports and x-rays given that they were not provided by the
    respondent and given the appellant's evidence that they had  been  sent
    by his former solicitors to the respondent.  She reminded me  that  the
    appellant was unrepresented and that this  was  relevant  in  assessing
    whether fairness required an adjournment.  At the  hearing  before  me,
    the appellant produced a number of documents which,  Ms  Litchfield  on
    instructions informed me, were the original documents, copies of  which
    had been sent to  the  UK  and  forwarded  by  the  appellant's  (then)
    solicitors to the respondent.

13. Thirdly, Ms Litchfield submitted that the judge  had  wrongly  rejected
    the evidence of the appellant's family and friends simply on the  basis
    that it was "self-serving" and not independent.  She submitted that the
    appellant had provided as much evidence as he could to support his case
    and the circumstances were such that he would not necessarily  be  able
    to provide any further independent evidence beyond the FIRs.

14. Finally, in  relation  to  the  appellant's  refugee  and  humanitarian
    protection  claim,  Ms  Litchfield  submitted  that   the   judge   had
    misunderstood the appellant's claim.  The judge had failed to deal with
    the issue of whether the repeated false accusations and  FIRs  followed
    by detention by the police  was  itself  persecution  or  serious  ill-
    treatment.  She pointed out that the appellant had  been  detained  for
    two  months  on  a  false  accusation.   It  was  not,  she  submitted,
    sufficient for the judge to state  that  the  appellant  had  not  been
    mistreated whilst detained.

15. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Everett submitted that  the  judge  had
    not erred in dismissing the appeal.

16. The judge was entitled to find that the FIRs only contained accusations
    and were not necessarily indicative of any action having actually  been
    taken against the appellant in the past or the future.

17. As regards the "missing" documents, Ms Everett submitted that  she  did
    not have those documents and there was no proof that they had ever been
    sent by her solicitors to the respondent.  She  pointed  out  that  the
    judge noted at para 7 that the solicitors had sent a witness statement.



18. Ms Everett accepted that it was perhaps unfortunate that the judge  had
    used the term "corroboration" in the  determination  and  she  accepted
    that, in principle, there was no need for corroborative evidence in  an
    asylum case.  Nevertheless, the judge was entitled, she  submitted,  to
    take into account the absence of independent evidence  which  it  could
    reasonably be expected to be available.

19. Ms Everett submitted that the judge had provided ample reasons for  his
    adverse finding, many of which were not challenged in the grounds.

20. Finally, as regards the issue  of  the  "constant  harassment"  of  the
    appellant, she submitted that the  judge  had  simply  disbelieved  the
    appellant and the police had not harmed him.

Discussion

21. In my judgment, despite the length of the judge's reasons and the  fact
    that a number of those reasons are  not  challenged,  nevertheless  the
    judge fell into error in a number of respects.

22. First, the judge's repeated reference in para 69  to  there  being  "no
    independent evidence before  me  to  corroborate"  particular  evidence
    raises the very real spectre that the judge was  impermissibly  seeking
    corroboration of the evidence  of  the  appellant,  his  mother,  other
    witnesses and the FIRs as a prerequisite to  accepting  that  evidence.
    This has to be seen against the backcloth of the  acceptance  that  the
    FIRs were genuine.  They were not, as the respondent  had  asserted  in
    her refusal letter dated 22 June 2012, forgeries.  They  were  accepted
    as genuine  documents  either  speaking  to  accusations  falsely  made
    against the appellant or (on the appellant's claim) truthfully made  by
    him and his family against his relatives for actions taken as  part  of
    the claimed dispute over the family land.  It  is  not  entirely  clear
    what "independent evidence" the judge was anticipating could reasonably
    have been provided by the appellant.  Ms Everett is undoubtedly correct
    in her submission that the absence of evidence that could reasonably be
    expected is a matter which a judge can take into account  in  assessing
    the reliability of other evidence, in particular the  appellant's  (see
    TK (Burundi) [2010] EWCA Civ 40).  However, here it is far  from  clear
    to me what that evidence might be.  One possible category  of  evidence
    might be medical reports and documents supporting the claimed  injuries
    to the appellant's brother  and  mother.   The  appellant,  of  course,
    claimed to have such evidence and that it was sent to  the  respondent.
    That leads me to the second error by the judge.

23. At the hearing, the appellant sought to  rely  on  x-rays  and  medical
    reports in relation to injuries he claimed had  been  suffered  at  the
    hands of his relatives by his mother and brother.  Those documents were
    not available at the hearing.  The judge dealt with this at para 46  of
    his determination as follows:

         "He had produced all the necessary evidential documents,  including
         his mother's x-rays, hospital reports,  and  the  doctor's  report.
         When I said that the only medical documents in the papers before me
         were those concerning his wife's pregnancy, the Appellant said that
         he had submitted to the Respondent x-rays and medical reports about
         the injuries inflicted on his family in Pakistan by their  enemies.
         When I said that no such documents were in the Respondent's  bundle
         or in the Appellant's bundle, he said that he had given them to his
         solicitors and asked for them to be sent on to the  Respondent.   I
         asked if he had copies.  He produced an iPhone  on  which  he  said
         there was a doctor's report about his brother [G M].   I  indicated
         that I was unable to admit evidence that was available only  on  an
         iPhone.  Mr Bond said that there were no such medical documents  in
         his papers."

24. The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing, his  solicitors  having
    only withdrawn approximately two weeks earlier.  The judge was,  in  my
    judgment, required to proceed cautiously given what the  appellant  was
    saying about these documents.  It was, of course, a matter  which  only
    became apparent to the appellant at the  hearing.   He  would  have  no
    reason to believe, if  the  documents  had  indeed  been  sent  to  the
    respondent, that they would not be available at the  hearing  until  it
    was discovered at the  hearing  that  they  were  not  available.   The
    appellant did attempt to rectify the absence of the documents by asking
    the judge to look at a report in relation to his brother  that  was  on
    the appellant's iPhone.  Even if the judge was correct (and  I  express
    no concluded view on this) that the  evidence  on  an  iPhone  was  not
    admissible, he was on notice that there was a medical report  that  the
    appellant wished to rely upon.  The judge did not give the appellant an
    opportunity to produce  that  report  in  an  admissible  form  on  the
    assumption (which is not a fortiori correct) that it  was  inadmissible
    simply because it was only available on the appellant's  iPhone.   That
    did undoubtedly present practical difficulties at the hearing both  for
    its  perusal  and  retention  by  the  judge   and   the   respondent's
    representative but, if relevant, as a matter of fairness the  appellant
    should have  been  given  an  opportunity  to  produce  it  in  a  more
    accessible form.  Indeed, I have considerable  unease  in  the  judge's
    decision  to  proceed  without  more,  given  that  the  appellant  was
    unrepresented and taken by surprise in finding that relevant  documents
    that he wished to rely upon were not available.  As I have said,  those
    documents were, I was  told  by  Ms  Litchfield  on  instructions,  now
    available in their original form.  The  risk  that  the  appellant  was
    unfairly denied an opportunity to produce  relevant  evidence  is  only
    emphasised by the judge's repeated reliance  upon  the  fact  that  the
    appellant  had  failed  to  provide  any  "independent   evidence"   to
    corroborate his account.  It was evidence of that very type  which  the
    appellant was potentially denied an opportunity to produce  before  the
    judge.

25. Whilst I accept, as Ms Everett submitted, that the judge gave a  number
    of other reasons for not accepting that the appellant was at  any  risk
    from his relatives as a result of a land dispute, I cannot be satisfied
    that the judge would  necessarily  have  reached  the  same  conclusion
    despite  the  errors  that  I  have  identified.   In  particular,  the
    unfairness to the appellant in denying him an  opportunity  to  produce
    the relevant supporting evidence (which the  judge  went  on  to  count
    against the appellant in assessing his  credibility)  warrants,  in  my
    judgment, that the First-tier Tribunal's decision be set aside.

26. In the light of  that  conclusion,  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to
    determine whether the judge misunderstood the nature of the appellant's
    case and that part of his claim was that the constant harassment by his
    relatives leading to FIRs and detention was persecution or serious ill-
    treatment in itself.  That aspect of the case, if it  is  relied  upon,
    will be a matter for the judge rehearing the appeal.

27. Both representatives indicated  that  if  I  accepted  Ms  Litchfield's
    submissions that the judge's decision could not stand, there would have
    to be a de novo rehearing and that the appeal should be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal.  That, in my judgment,  is  the  correct  approach
    applying paragraph 7.2 of the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement
    given the nature and extent of the fact-finding required.

28. Ms Litchfield also challenged the judge's adverse decision in  relation
    Art 8.  In particular, she submitted that the judge had been  wrong  to
    find that there was no interference  with  the  appellant's  family  or
    private life (in paras 75 and 76 of the determination respectively) and
    that therefore Art 8 was not engaged.  In effect, the judge had  failed
    to consider the issue of proportionality.  That submission  undoubtedly
    has merit in relation to the appellant's private life although  it  has
    less force in relation to his family life given that his wife and child
    could return to Pakistan with him.  Albeit with some hesitation,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge's decision in relation to Art 8  cannot  stand
    and should also be remade by the judge at the remitted hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

29. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That  decision  is  set
    aside.

30. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (to  be  heard  by  a
    judge other than Judge Boardman) de novo in relation to the appellant's
    claim to asylum or humanitarian protection and under Art 8 of the ECHR.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

