
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06036/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th November 2013                           |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               Ali Ahmed Razay

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Myers made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 25th  July  2013.   He  was  granted
    permission by Judge Ford on 28th August 2013.   On  16th  October  2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds set aside the decision and her  reasons  for
    doing so are appended to this determination.

 2. The Appellant was properly served with notice of hearing  but  did  not
    attend.  His representatives advised the Tribunal on 4th November  2013
    that they no longer act for him.

 3. Mr Diwnycz submitted that the appeal ought  to  be  dismissed  for  the
    reasons outlined in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  He also produced a
    printout of a request from the Appellant made on 14th November 2013 for
    assistance in returning to Iran.

Findings and Conclusions

 4. It was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant was a national  of
    Iran.

 5. The claim is that his father was  a  supporter  of  Kurdish  opposition
    groups and made payments to them, and in that activity was supported by
    the Appellant.  As a consequence he and his family were arrested by the
    Iranian authorities.  He claims to have been tortured.   The  following
    day he visited a military hospital to see his  mother  and  an  officer
    refused  to  allow  him  access.   The  Appellant  assaulted  him   and
    arrangements were made for him to flee Iran.

 6. In support of his claim he adduced a medical report  produced  when  he
    was being detained at Harmondsworth.  The doctor had concerns that  the
    Appellant might have been the victim of torture  and  he  recorded  the
    Appellant's claim that he had been beaten and  given  electric  shocks.
    The doctor noted a 1.2cm roughly healed scar on the  Appellant's  thigh
    which looked consistent with his story of having  been  stabbed  there.
    The doctor said that the Appellant  became  visibly  upset,  tense  and
    tearful on relating his story and he had no reason  to  doubt  what  he
    said.

 7. The medical report is supportive of the claim to a limited extent,  but
    the existence of the scar does not establish how the scar  was  caused.
    The fact that the Appellant was upset when recounting  his  experiences
    again could have multiple causes.

 8. The Secretary of State sets out a number of  reasons  for  disbelieving
    the Appellant's claim in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  There were  a
    considerable number of discrepancies in his account.  For example,  the
    Appellant said that his father did not trust his  son  sufficiently  to
    tell him about his political activities, but  on  the  other  hand  was
    prepared to involve him in the actual  payments  to  the  groups.   The
    Appellant's claim that  the  family  were  supporters  of  the  Kurdish
    opposition groups and had political literature in the  house  and  held
    meetings there was inconsistent with the claim that they were reluctant
    to involve the Appellant in their activities.

 9. There were also inconsistencies as to when the Appellant  became  aware
    of the payments being made and clear discrepancies in the dates  as  to
    when he was arrested.  The Appellant's account of his escape  from  the
    military hospital and  the  authorities'  failure  to  arrest  him  was
    inconsistent with the available country information, and his account of
    escaping  with  his  uncle  and  the  attempt  to  ambush  him  by  the
    authorities was frankly bizarre.

10. The Appellant has not chosen to attend court  to  address  any  of  the
    concerns made  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  and  indeed  has
    indicated that he wishes to return home.

11. It is for the Appellant  to  establish  the  truth,  albeit  to  a  low
    standard of proof, to the events upon which he  wishes  to  rely.   His
    lack of interest in pursuing the appeal and in particular his  decision
    not to attend the Tribunal makes it more difficult for him to prove his
    case.  Clearly of  course  his  stated  intention  to  return  home  is
    strongly indicative that he has no  well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    there.

Decision

The decision of the judge has been set aside.   It  is  remade  as  follows.
The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


