
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06347/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     BN
                              (ANONYMITY ORDER)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. K. Wass, Counsel, instructed by Hanson Young
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal of Mr BN,  a  citizen  of
         Sri  Lanka  against  the  respondent's  decision  to   refuse   his
         application for asylum and to remove him from the UK.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.




    Background

      3. The appellant was born on 7 August 1992.  He applied for asylum  in
         the United Kingdom on 19 December 2013 and the  respondent  refused
         that claim by way of a decision dated 26 March 2015.

      4. The appeal against that decision came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Flower on 17 July 2015.  In a decision promulgated on 30 July
         2015, the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

      5. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  on  the
         following grounds:  firstly the judge erred in  failing  to  follow
         the Country Guidance decision of GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
         returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC); and secondly  that
         the judge's general  credibility  findings  were  flawed  given  in
         particular that the judge had found that the documentation provided
         was genuine and that the appellant had made efforts to substantiate
         his claim.

      6. Permission was granted and the appeal came before me.

    Ground 1

      7. The judge at [14] noted that it had been conceded by the respondent
         that the Sri Lankan documentation produced  by  the  appellant  was
         genuine and that it had been  appropriately  verified.   The  judge
         found at [25] that directions had been issued for the appellant and
         another individual 'to be taken into custody if they  pass  through
         the airport in Sri Lanka'.   The judge found at [27] that:
             "Essentially, the documentation which has been provided to  me
             confirms that  the  appellant  is  wanted  in  Sri  Lanka  for
             offences relating to credit card fraud.  He chose to leave Sri
             Lanka rather than face prosecution.   If  he  returns  by  air
             through a main airport he will be detained by the  Sri  Lankan
             police in connection with those matters"

      8. The judge set out the head note in GJ and others and I do the same:
             (1) This determination replaces all existing country  guidance
             on Sri Lanka.
             (2) The focus of  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
             changed since the civil war ended in May 2009.   The  LTTE  in
             Sri Lanka itself is a spent  force  and  there  have  been  no
             terrorist incidents since the end of the civil war.
             (3) The government's present objective is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  enshrined  in
             Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in  1983,  which
             prohibits the 'violation  of  territorial  integrity'  of  Sri
             Lanka.  Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence  of
             the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and  (b)
             the revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka.
             (4) If a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
             services there remains a real risk of  ill-treatment  or  harm
             requiring international protection.
             (5) Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for
             a person at real risk from the Sri Lankan  authorities,  since
             the government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and  Tamils
             are required to  return  to  a  named  address  after  passing
             through the airport.
             (6) There are no detention facilities at  the  airport.   Only
             those whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained
             from the airport.  Any risk for those in whom the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.
             (7)  The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in
             detention or otherwise, are:
                  (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat
                  to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a  single  state  because
                  they are, or are perceived to have a significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


                  (b)  Journalists (whether in  print  or  other  media)  or
                  human  rights  activists,  who,  in  either   case,   have
                  criticised the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its
                  human  rights  record,  or   who   are   associated   with
                  publications critical of the Sri Lankan government.
                  (c)  Individuals who have given evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among  those  who  may
                  have   witnessed   war   crimes   during   the   conflict,
                  particularly in the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only  those
                  who have already  identified  themselves  by  giving  such
                  evidence would be known to the Sri Lankan authorities  and
                  therefore only they are at real risk of adverse  attention
                  or persecution on return as potential or actual war crimes
                  witnesses.
                  (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised  "stop"
                  list accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.
             (8)  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
             sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities  within  Sri
             Lanka and in the diaspora.  The Sri  Lankan  authorities  know
             that many Sri  Lankan  Tamils  travelled  abroad  as  economic
             migrants and also that everyone in the Northern  Province  had
             some level of involvement with the LTTE during the civil  war.
             In post-conflict Sri Lanka, an individual's past history  will
             be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived by the Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government.
             (9) The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led
             "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is
             not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport  but  will
             be monitored by the security services after his or her return.
             If that monitoring does not indicate that such a person  is  a
             Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri  Lankan
             state or revive the internal armed conflict, the individual in
             question is not, in general, reasonably likely to be  detained
             by the security forces.  That will be a question  of  fact  in
             each case, dependent on any diaspora activities carried out by
             such an individual.
             (10)      Consideration must always be given  to  whether,  in
             the light of an individual's activities  and  responsibilities
             during the  civil  war,  the  exclusion  clauses  are  engaged
             (Article 1F of the Refugee Convention and Article 12(2) of the
             Qualification  Directive).   Regard  should  be  had  to   the
             categories  for  exclusion  set  out   in   the   "Eligibility
             Guidelines For Assessing the International Protection Needs of
             Asylum-Seekers from Sri  Lanka",  published  by  UNHCR  on  21
             December 2012.

      9. It was the  appellant's  contention  that  having  found  that  the
         appellant  had  provided   genuine   documentation   'appropriately
         verified by a credible source' and having found therefore that  the
         appellant 'is wanted in Sri Lanka for offences relating  to  credit
         card fraud', if he returns by air through a main airport he will be
         detained by the Sri Lankan police in connection with these matters,
         the judge should have  found  that  the  appellant  therefore  fell
         within the GJ and others risk categories.

     10. SG (Iraq) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940 endorsed the country  guidance
         system and reminded  that  Tribunals  must  take  Country  Guidance
         determinations into account:
             "... decision makers and tribunal judges are required to  take
             Country Guidance determinations into account,  and  to  follow
             them unless very strong grounds supported by cogent  evidence,
             are adduced justifying their not doing so."

     11. It was the judge's findings however that  the  appellant's  general
         credibility was not established and that his claims in relation  to
         alleged association with the LTTE was 'false and weak' and that  he
         was in the UK because 'he is seeking to avoid the criminal  justice
         system in Sri Lanka'.

     12. The judge considered that the evidence shows that the conditions in
         Sri Lankan prisons and detention centres was such that the  Country
         of Information Service information confirmed that they are  'likely
         to reach the Article  3  threshold  and  a  grant  of  humanitarian
         protection may be appropriate'.  It was  the  judge's  findings  in
         relation to his finding that the appellant was  wanted  for  credit
         card offences that he had not been convicted of anything and it was
         not certain he would go to prison.

     13. Ms Wass relied on the concession made by the respondent in  GJ  and
         others (paragraph 168) that 'individuals in custody  in  Sri  Lanka
         continue  to  be  at  risk  of  physical  abuse,  including  sexual
         violence,  and  that  such  risk  is  persecutory'.   I  accept  Mr
         Whitwell's point that GJ and others very much relates  to  the  Sri
         Lankan authorities concern generally in relation to  those  wishing
         to promote Tamil separatism and preventing any resurgence  in  such
         activity and that the case takes a narrow  view  of  the  perceived
         threat to the integrity of Sri Lanka from returned asylum  seekers.
         However it remains the case that GJ and others confirms that  there
         is a risk 'if a person is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
         services' and if a person appears on a 'stop' list  which  includes
         those against whom there  is  an  'extant  court  order  or  arrest
         warrant'.  Notwithstanding the  clear  context  of  GJ  and  others
         neither of those risk categories was qualified with  a  requirement
         that detention and/or the arrest warrant had to be in  the  context
         of Tamil separatism or associated issues.  There  was  no  specific
         exclusion of those detained and/or for whom  there  was  an  arrest
         warrant for criminal matters.

     14. Mr Whitwell submitted that this interpretation could not be correct
         as 'anyone with a criminal record' in Sri Lanka would therefore  be
         entitled to protection.  That is not correct.  It is not a criminal
         record  per  se  that  creates  a  risk,  but  rather  the   arrest
         warrant/detention by the Sri Lankan security services.

     15. The judge found,  and  Mr  Whitwell  did  not  dispute,  that  this
         appellant despite not being credible about  his  asylum  claim  had
         produced genuine court documents showing that he would be  arrested
         on return to Sri Lanka through  a  main  airport,  in  relation  to
         alleged credit card offences.

     16. The respondent's Sri  Lanka  Operation  Guidance  Note  (OGN)  2013
         concluded at 3.16.10  that  conditions  in  prisons  and  detention
         centres remain poor and that a grant of humanitarian protection may
         be appropriate (which the judge repeated at [47]).  At 3.16.11  the
         OGN goes on to cite GJ and others and that if a person is  detained
         by the Sri Lankan security services there remains a  real  risk  of
         ill-treatment or harm requiring international protection.   3.16.11
         goes on to state that there may be  a  heightened  risk  for  those
         perceived to be connected with Tamil separatism and/or LTTE.   This
         confirms that those detained, per se, are at risk of  ill-treatment
         with those with perceived or actual Tamil/LTTE connections being at
         'heighted risk'.

     17. The OGN at 3.16.12 sets out that the individual facts of  the  case
         must be considered that a custodial sentence is  not  mandatory  in
         all instances.  This was echoed  to  some  extent  in  the  judge's
         consideration at [48] to [50] where he found that the appellant had
         not shown that 'the offences for which he is wanted  in  Sri  Lanka
         place him at risk  of  conviction  and  a  subsequent  sentence  of
         imprisonment in conditions which could  mean  that  the  article  3
         threshold is breached and a grant of humanitarian protection  would
         be appropriate'.

     18. Where the judge erred however,  was  that  the  judge  had  already
         found, at [24] to [27] that the appellant would be detained at  the
         airport on return to Sri Lanka.  It  was  not  disputed  that  this
         would be on  foot  of  a  genuine  arrest  warrant.   There  is  no
         qualification in GJ and others or indeed the respondent's OGN  that
         states those for example remanded in custody prior to  for  example
         bail/trial, are not at risk.  Neither is there any qualification in
         GJ and others that, for example, only arrest warrants  relating  to
         Tamil/LTTE issues would put individuals at risk.

     19. Paragraph 228 of  GJ  and  others  discussed  the  legal  framework
         including that the previous Tribunal decisions in  TK  and  LP  had
         identified twelve risk factors including 'previous criminal  record
         and/or outstanding arrest warrant'.  Although Mr Whitwell suggested
         that the  lack  of  any  specific  mention  in  GJ  and  others  of
         criminality meant that this did not now apply, that is  to  confuse
         criminal record with an arrest warrant.  Whilst the former does not
         now give risk to a freestanding risk, it is notable  that  previous
         guidance also cited an arrest warrant as an alternative risk factor
         to a criminal record, again without any qualification in terms of a
         need for the appellant  to  be  wanted  in  relation  to  perceived
         Tamil/LTTE issues.  The fact that those with a criminal record  are
         now no longer at risk per se, does not  as  Mr  Whitwell  suggested
         mean that those with a criminal arrest warrant (as it was  accepted
         the appellant had) would not be at risk.

     20. In light therefore of GJ  and  others,  as  discussed  above,  this
         appellant, on the basis of the judge's specific  findings  that  he
         would be detained at the airport on return, would  be  at  risk  of
         serious harm and a grant of humanitarian  protection  is  therefore
         appropriate.

    Ground 2

     21. As I indicated at the hearing, there is no merit  in  this  ground.
         Although it was argued that the judge  had  erred  in  finding  the
         appellant not generally credible, given that the  judge  had  found
         that the appellant had made efforts to substantiate his  claim  and
         had  produced  genuine  documentation,  the  judge  made   reasoned
         findings including a detailed assessment of  the  evidence  in  the
         round.  The judge gave cogent reasons for making  adverse  findings
         on the appellant's general credibility at [28] through to [40].   I
         do not accept that the judge made any  error  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's brother's trial.  The  judge  was  clear  that  it  was
         'still ongoing'.  The fact that the documentation  provided  showed
         that the trial was due to take place after the  appellant's  appeal
         does not negate the judge's findings that an  'update'  could  have
         been provided by the appellant.  Even if I am wrong, any  error  is
         not material given  the  judge's  overall  findings.   The  judge's
         findings of fact and credibility together with his dismissal of the
         asylum claim are all preserved.

     22. However, as noted the appellant's appeal succeeds  in  relation  to
         Ground 1.

    Decision:

     23. The appeal is allowed.  The making of the decision  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal involved an error of law and  is  set  aside  to  the
         extent  set  out  above.   I  remake  the  decision  allowing   the
         appellant's appeal on  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
         grounds.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 8 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
