
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06487/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     A M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bhachu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISIONS AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 20  September  1986.   He  is  a  citizen  of
    Albania.

 2. He appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 20  March  2015  to
    refuse to grant him asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights
    grounds.  That appeal was heard by  Judge  Graham  who  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 20 August 2015, dismissed the appeal because  she  found
    that the appellant was not a credible witness with regard to events  in
    Albania, that he was not at risk on return and that as regards  Article
    8, he did not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

 3. The grounds  claim  the  judge  failed  to  take  account  of  material
    evidence.  In particular, the report from the Chief of Police  Station,
    Directorate of Tirana District Police at E8 of the Respondent's bundle.
     That report had been submitted to support  the  claim  but  the  judge
    failed to make a  finding  in  relation  to  that  evidence  which  was
    relevant to the existence of the blood feud.

 4. Judge Foudy granted permission to appeal as it appeared to her that the
    judge had not taken the report into account which might  have  affected
    the judge's findings upon credibility and her  assessment  of  risk  on
    return.

 5. The respondent filed a  Rule  24  response  on  5  October  2015.   She
    submitted that the judge directed herself appropriately.  Whilst it was
    conceded that the judge did not make any specific  findings  about  the
    report, it was clear from [8] of her decision that she had  taken  into
    account all the documents  placed  before  her,  including  the  police
    report.  The judge found the appellant's credibility was central to the
    appeal and found against  him  on  every  aspect  of  his  claim.   See
    paragraph [39]-[51], which concluded "I do not accept even the core  of
    the appellant's account and I make  comprehensive  adverse  credibility
    findings."

 6. The police report referred to an attack on the appellant in  Tirana  in
    2010 and that it involved the A Tribe from Kukes.  That was  in  direct
    contradiction to the appellant's own evidence as outlined  at  [20]  of
    the decision where it was  stated  that  the  police  investigated  the
    attack in 2010 but could not find the  appellant's  attackers  as  they
    were masked.  It was therefore unclear how the police in  Tirana  could
    provide information that the appellant was attacked  by  the  A  Tribe.
    That information could only have been provided by the appellant.

 7. In view of the fact that the appellant's claim had been disbelieved  in
    its entirety it was difficult to see that the judge's failure to make a
    specific finding in  relation  to  a  document  that  contradicted  the
    appellant's evidence, could amount to a material error of law.

Submissions on Error of Law

 8. Ms Bhachu submitted that the report at E8 of  the  respondent's  bundle
    from the Chief of Police Station, Directorate of Tirana District Police
    went to the core of the account because it evidenced that the appellant
    had made a complaint to the police in Tirana consistent with his  claim
    and it was material because it showed he was in Tirana at the time,  an
    attack took place, a blood feud was in existence and that  it  was  the
    second of two incidents.

 9. Ms Brocklesby-Weller conceded that the judge had erred in not referring
    to the report but the error was not material.   That  was  because  the
    appellant's credibility was multi-dimensional as  between  himself  and
    his brother and with regard to them both, the judge  had  made  adverse
    credibility findings.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10. The issue regarding the report at E8 of  the  respondent's  bundle  was
    raised at a Case Management hearing on 3 July 2015.  It was put to  the
    Presenting Officer at that hearing that  the  document  at  E8  of  the
    respondent's bundle was capable of verification and the Home Office was
    invited  to  obtain  such  verification.   In  the   event,   no   such
    verification was obtained by the Home Office, however, the skeleton  of
    Ms Bhachu was clear at [6] and [7] that the report was relied upon  and
    issue was  taken  that  despite  the  appellant  having  provided  such
    documentation,  despite   the   means   being   available   that   such
    documentation  could  have  been  verified  by  the   respondent,   the
    respondent had failed to make any effort in that regard.

11. The respondent's own guidance Blood Feuds: Albania October  2014  reads
    inter alia as follows:

         "Documents  originating  from  the  Albanian  courts,   police   or
         prosecution service, if genuine, may  assist  in  establishing  the
         existence of a blood feud at the date of the document relied  upon,
         subject to the test of reliability set out in A  (Pakistan)  [2002]
         UKIAT 00439 [2002] Imm AR 318( Tanveer Ahmed)"  See 1.3.6

    Further:

         "Staff at the British Embassy  in  Tirana  are  in  a  position  to
         respond to queries from UK  asylum  decision  makers  via  a  newly
         introduced referral process.   In  cases  where  a  person  is  not
         subject to state persecution (as would be the case  in  all  "blood
         feud" claims) local checks can verify details of the person and all
         Albanian court judgments can be  verified  through  the  Prosecutor
         General's Office in Tiran2".  See 1.3.7

12. The substantive hearing was unusual in that Ms Bhachu having signed  in
    as representing the appellant,  was  called  away  urgently  such  that
    substitute Counsel, Mr Sawar represented the appellant.  He adopted  Ms
    Bhachu's skeleton but on checking the judge's Record of Proceedings,  I
    can find no reference to  the  police  report  at  E8.   Its  existence
    appears not to have been raised by Mr Sawar or the Presenting Officer.

13. Clearly, the judge erred in not referring to the police  report  at  E8
    which was conceded by Ms Brocklesby-Weller.  I must decide whether  the
    judge's failure to engage with that report was  material,  particularly
    bearing in mind her comprehensive  adverse  credibility  findings  both
    with regard to the appellant and his brother.

14. The  existence  of  the  report  was  always  a  core  element  of  the
    appellant's claim.  He submitted the report with his application and it
    was included within  the  respondent's  bundle.   In  her  Reasons  for
    Refusal Letter, the respondent said that  the  documentation  submitted
    had been considered under the principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed.  The
    view of the Secretary of State was that they were entirely self-serving
    and did not assist the appellant's credibility.  The document at E8 was
    not specifically referred to, however, the reasons for refusal made  it
    clear that the appellant's account was rejected in its entirety.

15. The judge recited at [8] the documents  she  had  considered,  however,
    whilst she did consider some of the documentation at [43] -  [44],  she
    omitted to make any reference to nor carried out any  analysis  of  the
    police report at E8.  In particular, she did not  consider  whether  it
    was genuine in terms of a complaint having been made to the  police  or
    whether, if such a complaint had truly been made to the police, whether
    the facts reported were truthful such that she could rely upon them.

16. I take into account that whereas the judge referred to the documents at
    E5 and E6 at [43] - [44] she made no comment  upon  whether  she  could
    rely upon them in terms of Tanveer Ahmed.  Rather, she  avoided  coming
    to that decision by reference to  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's
    evidence. I find  that  the  judge  was  obliged  to  engage  with  the
    documentation and make findings as to whether she could rely  upon  it,
    such analysis  having  been  apparently  overlooked  in  the  extensive
    adverse credibility findings arising from  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his brother. I find the judge's failure  to  engage  with
    the documentation was a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

17. I set aside the judge's decision in its entirety which must be  re-made
    in the First-tier following a de novo hearing. Directions are  attached
    to this short decision.

Anonymity direction continued.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 19 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

                                    [pic]
IAC-hw-mp-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06487/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     a M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bhachu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. Remit to the First-tier Tribunal, for a de novo hearing.

 2. List first available date.  Time estimate four hours.

 3. Not later than ten working days prior to the hearing, the parties  must
    file with the First-tier  Tribunal  and  serve  upon  each  other,  all
    documentary evidence (including witness  statements)  upon  which  they
    intend to rely, as well as any skeleton arguments.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 19 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

