
[pic]
IAC-AH-dp-V1

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06245/2015,
                                                              aa/06246/2015,
                                                              aa/06247/2015,
                                                               aa/06248/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 February 2016                    |On 23 March 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before
                        THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS and
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                            [a d] + 3 dependants
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Davidson, (Counsel instructed by Karis Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding  (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                   DECISION AND REASONS - resumed hearing


   1. This matter comes before us as a resumed hearing following a  decision
      promulgated on 6th February 2016 in which it was found that there  was
      a material error of law by the First-tier Tribunal.  A  copy  of  that
      decision and reasons is  attached  and  to  which  we  refer  for  the
      background details.  The  main  issue  to  be  determined  by  us  was
      sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal   relocation.    We   heard
      submissions from both representatives and in addition read the further
      material produced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  including  an  expert
      report from A. Young.




   2.   Mr Davidson relied on the expert  report,  the  OGN  and  EH  (cited
      above). He emphasised EH (headnote 5) that where an active blood  feud
      had been identified in the northern area and which had lead  to  self-
      confinement, an appellant would normally qualify for  refugee  status.
      The system of registration was key to the issue  of  relocation.   For
      the family not to register would create problems in terms of accessing
      education, work and public  services.  The  appellant  would  have  to
      resort  to  self-confinement.  There  was  no  real   sufficiency   of
      protection available in this case. Mr Wilding focused his  submissions
      on the localised nature of the blood feud and the lack of evidence  to
      show that the family had connections and/or would  be  able  to  track
      down the appellant and his family outside of the home area.  He relied
      on EH [56 & 69-70] where the potential "reach" of the rival  clan  was
      considered both geographically  and  politically.  He  submitted  that
      there was a willingness by the authorities to provide protection.  The
      CNR letter carried little weight.

   3.  We are guided by EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348  (IAC)
      and in particular [70]  "internal  relocation  will  be  effective  to
      protect an appellant only where the risk does not  extend  beyond  the
      appellant's local area and he is unlikely to be traced in the rest  of
      Albania by the aggressor  clan.   A  crucial  factor  in  establishing
      whether internal relocation is a real possibility is the  geographical
      and political reach  of  the  aggressor  clan:  where  that  clan  has
      governmental connections, locally or more widely, the  requirement  to
      transfer civil registration to a new area would appear to obviate  the
      possibility of "disappearing" in another part of  the  country  ,  and
      would be likely to drive the male members of a victim clan into  self-
      confinement in the home  area  as  an  alternative.  Whether  internal
      relocation is reasonable in any particular appeal  will  always  be  a
      question of fact for the fact-finding Tribunal." At [74] " in areas of
      Albania less  dependent  on  the  Kanun  may  [our  emphasis]  provide
      sufficient  protection,  depending  on  the   reach,   influence   and
      commitment  to  prosecution  of  the  feud  by  the  aggressor  clan".
      Reference is also made to the October 2014 OGN at  2.3.9  "it  may  be
      practical for applicants in some  categories  who  may  have  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution in one area to relocate to other parts  of
      Albania where they would not have a well-founded fear, and taking into
      account their personal circumstances, it would not be unduly harsh  to
      expect them to do so.  Careful consideration  must  be  given  to  the
      relevance and reasonableness of internal relocation on a  case-by-case
      basis taking full account  of  the  individual  circumstances  of  the
      particular claimant".

   4.   We rely on the facts as established by the First-tier  Tribunal  and
      the conclusion that the appellants claim was  credible  and  they  had
      established a subjective fear of return. The evidence before  the  FTT
      clearly established firstly, a strong commitment on the  part  of  the
      rival clan to pursuing the blood feud  that  remains  active  and  has
      involved three deaths (the last was in 2009) , secondly that the  feud
      has lasted for some nineteen years, thirdly there were recent  threats
      extending to the appellant's wife and daughters  which  established  a
      current and continuing commitment to pursuit  of  the  appellant,  and
      fourthly the appellant had been in self-confinement and finally  there
      was evidence of past prosecution by the State  authorities.   We  also
      take into account that the appellant's eldest son was granted  refugee
      status by the First -tier Tribunal in 2012. We have concluded in  this
      particular case that the appellant has shown  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable or viable for him to relocate to another  area  in  Albania
      having regard to the risk presented by the blood feud and the lack  of
      effective protection.   It  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  this
      appellant  to  relocate.   We  have  considered  all  the  factors  in
      determining the nature of risk on return and whilst accepting that the
      ability (geographically and politically)  of  the  aggressor  clan  to
      locate the victim anywhere in Albania is a strong factor,  it  is  not
      the only factor and we must consider all the relevant circumstances in
      this particular case.


   5.  We place weight on the expert report which was not  challenged  other
      than its limited reference to EH.  We accept the arguments put forward
      on behalf of the appellant.  We are satisfied that there is sufficient
      evidence to show "the reach, influence and commitment"  of  the  rival
      clan  is  such  that  internal  relocation  would  not  be  viable  or
      reasonable for the appellant in particular where self  confinement  is
      likely. As to  "reach" we place weight  on  the  expert  report  which
      considers how in practice the family could be tracked down outside  of
      the home area,  significantly  by  word  of  mouth  and  thorough  the
      registration system. We accept that there was no specific evidence  of
      any political or geographical connections to establish how  the  rival
      family would be able to locate the appellant, however, given the level
      of commitment demonstrated in this particular feud  we  find  that  in
      reality it would not be difficult  to  trace  the  appellant  and  his
      family in the event of return  to  Albania  through  modern  means  of
      communication.  We place  little  weight  on  the  evidence  that  the
      appellant was able to travel outside of Albania in  the  context  that
      the risk arises from the blood feud in Albania, a small country  where
      the emphasis is on family or kinship networks. We accept the  view  of
      the expert that the appellant would be forced to remain in confinement
      or closed  living  (even  if  they  relocated)  given  that  the  risk
      presented by this particular feud is long term, active and has already
      required the appellant to go into  self-confinement.  The  CNR  letter
      carries some weight in that it is additional material  relied  on  and
      confirms that attempts at reconciliation have failed.

 6. As to sufficiency of protection we rely on the recent OGN (at  2.5)  in
    which it is accepted that whilst the authorities have  taken  steps  to
    improve the situation, there remains an insufficiency of protection  in
    particular in areas where the Kanun  law  predominates.  In  this  case
    there has been a prosecution  by  the  authorities  but  this  has  not
    prevented the feud from continuing and we find that this is a  mark  of
    the determination and commitment to pursuing  this  feud.   We  further
    rely on the expert's  report  (in  section  one)  which  considers  the
    effectiveness of the police. The background material further emphasises
    corruption in the police and judiciary (at 2.5.5).  There appears to be
    reluctance on the part the authorities to get involved, in part through
    fear of retaliation.  The  expert  report  (section  2)  confirms  this
    position and concludes that little progress has been made  in  practice
    given the degree to which those involved in feuds continue to  rely  on
    "traditional justice." We consider that in this case where prosecutions
    have been brought the fact that  the  feud  has  continued  shows  that
    "traditional justice" is adopted. Further  the  report  emphasises  the
    real difficulties that would be faced by the appellant and  his  family
    in seeking  education  and  employment,  which  would  make  them  more
    publically visible and  thus  more  traceable  given  modern  means  of
    communication in a small country where "identities are hard  to  hide".
    Given that registration is a legal requirement (and is only possible by
    producing documentation from the last place of residence) and necessary
    in order to access local services (COIS  August  2015  12.11),  we  are
    satisfied that this is another factor leading to the conclusion that it
    would be unreasonable to expect the family to relocate in another  area
    of Albania, given the level of commitment to the feud.

Decision

We substitute a decision in this appeal and we allow the  appeal  on  asylum
and humanitarian protection grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 7.3.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made.


Signed                                  Date 7.3.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
