
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA 06303 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Sent        |
|On 16 October 2013                     |On 31 October 2013        |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

                                 DAVIDE BIBA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Anderson, solicitor from  Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. We allow the appellant's appeal.  These are our reasons.  The appellant
    is a citizen of Albania who appealed unsuccessfully to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the decision of the respondent to remove him from  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is his case that he is a refugee, or otherwise entitled to
    international protection.

 2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pacey  on  1  August
    2013. He clearly  believed  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he  is  a
    Christian, brought up in Italy by his Albanian mother separate from his
    father who was returned by the Italian  authorities  to  Albania.   The
    family were reunited when the appellant's mother  returned  to  Albania
    with the  appellant  and  his  siblings  whereupon  the  appellant  was
    mistreated and persecuted by his father  who  threatened  to  kill  the
    appellant on account of his Christian faith. His mother sent  him  away
    to the United Kingdom for  his  own  safety.  The  respondent  did  not
    dispute the appellant's Christianity.

 3. Most of the key findings are set  out  at  paragraphs  14-19  of  Judge
    Pacey's determination. At  paragraph  26  of  the  refusal  letter  the
    respondent accepted that the appellant would be at risk  on  return  to
    his home area in Albania for a refugee convention reason  but  that  he
    could be reasonably expected to internally relocate. This admission was
    upheld by Judge Pacey at paragraph 11 of the determination. This  issue
    was not reargued before the First-tier Tribunal. The  appellant's  case
    before the First-tier Tribunal concerned only the  appellant's  ability
    to internally relocate in Albania and obtain state protection.  It  was
    the  appellant's  case  that  the  respondent  had  not  acted  in  the
    appellant's best interests pursuant to section 55 of the UK Borders Act
    2007. The First-tier Tribunal further decided the respondent's decision
    was not in accordance with the law because she had failed  to  consider
    section 55 properly and allowed  the  appeal  to  the  extent  that  it
    remained for the respondent to decide  the  application  in  accordance
    with the law. This is still outstanding.

 4. The judge accepted that it would be unduly harsh for the appellant,  as
    a minor, to relocate anywhere in Albania.  This  was  conceded  by  the
    respondent. The judge went on to find that the appellant could relocate
    in Albania together with his mother  and  together  they  could  obtain
    state protection.

 5. There was no evidence before the  judge  that  the  appellant's  mother
    would, could or was in any position to  relocate  with  the  appellant.
    There was no consideration of her responsibilities to  the  appellant's
    siblings. The judge assumed that the appellant's mother would  relocate
    with him within Albania.  The  assumption  was  not  supported  by  the
    evidence and so, it was said, the judge erred in law.

 6. The judge misapprehended the evidence placed before him. He recorded at
    paragraph 12  of  his  determination  that  it  was  strange  that  the
    appellant's mother had returned to an abusive husband but there was  no
    evidence before the judge that the appellant's  mother  had  ever  been
    abused by her husband before they resumed cohabitation. Thus there  was
    no evidence to support a finding that she had  returned  to  a  violent
    man. The evidence was that when the appellant's mother  challenged  her
    husband for trying to make the appellant change his religion,  then  he
    beat her. The appellant's evidence was that his father beat his  mother
    once she tried to stop him changing the appellant's religion.

 7. The evidence before the judge was that the appellant's father had  been
    forced to return to Albania by  the  Italian  authorities.  The  family
    remained  in  contact  by  telephone  and  visits  during   which   the
    appellant's mother conceived his younger siblings.

 8. The judge failed to consider the appellant's siblings when finding  the
    appellant could relocate in Albania with her. She would either have  to
    leave them with their father or relocate with the appellant as a single
    mother of three  children.  She  would  be  exposing  the  younger  two
    children to risks where none were disclosed before the judge.

 9. We find that the misapprehension of the facts taints the basis for  the
    judge's decision which  is  predicated  upon  an  assumption  that  the
    appellant could relocate in Albania with his mother.

10. Before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  respondent  submitted   that  the
    appellant's family apart  from  the  father  could  relocate  with  the
    appellant.  However  this  submission  had  no   basis   in   evidence.
    Contrarily, we find that there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant's
    mother would leave her husband to make a home for  the  appellant  away
    from him or that such a course would be practicable if the  appellant's
    mother was so inclined.  The respondent did not comply with her tracing
    duties following KA (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1014  and
    accordingly has no knowledge of the appellant's mother's situation  and
    motivations and whether she could relocate with the appellant.  Clearly
    she did not relate in Albania.  Instead she sent the appellant  to  the
    United Kingdom.

11. The judge found against the appellant on the issue of state  protection
    but the finding about state protection was predicated on the basis  the
    appellant was with his mother and not alone. As such  the  findings  on
    state  protection  are  fatally  flawed.  At  paragraph   14   of   the
    determination Judge Pacey records "I entirely accept that it would  not
    be reasonable to expect the appellant (a minor) alone  to  relocate  to
    another part of  Albania,  and  this  was  helpfully  conceded  by  the
    presenting Officer".  It having been conceded by  the  respondent  that
    the appellant could not return to Albania alone there is no need for us
    to  reconsider  state  protection  which  might  be  available  to  the
    appellant. Furthermore  we find that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
    appellant to return to Albania in order to relocate as a minor, alone.

12. Accordingly we set aside and remake the determination.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The  appellant's  asylum  appeal  is  allowed  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
protection grounds.

Signed

Elizabeth Grant

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal                 28 October 2013.
