
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/06810/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2017                         |On 13th June 2017             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                                     bgr

                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr S. Vokes, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity. The First-tier Tribunal had made  an  anonymity  direction.  That
shall continue in the same terms.

1.    The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  Judge
    Andrew (sitting at Birmingham on 27 April 2016) whereby  the  Secretary
    of State had refused the Appellant's protection  claim.  The  Appellant
    had claimed to be at risk on return  to  Mexico  under  the  Convention
    ground of being part of a Particular Social Group as a  woman  who  had
    been raped. She feared the Police and gangs in her home country.

2.    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had dismissed  the  appeal  based
    on both protection grounds and Article 8 ECHR grounds.

3.    The Appellant's grounds of appeal were lengthy but, were  encapsulated
    at the end of paragraph 1, where it was said, "The Judge  was  entitled
    to attach less weight to the  untested  statement  of  the  Appellant's
    husband, but it was unreasonable for  her  not  to  attach  any  weight
    whatsoever".

4.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer.
    The learned Judge observed, "It is arguable that the  Judge  materially
    erred by refusing to take into  account  a  lengthy  witness  statement
    prepared by the Appellant's husband. It is arguable that the fact  that
    he did not give evidence does  not  necessarily  mean  that  no  weight
    should have been attached to what he had written. All  grounds  may  be
    argued".

5.    At the hearing before me  Mr  Vokes  said  that  the  Judge  had  even
    declined to consider the husband's witness statement. The  problem  was
    that the Judge had said she  would  give  no  weight  to  that  witness
    statement. It was not that unusual for witnesses to  give  a  statement
    but not to give evidence. Mr Vokes said it was  particularly  important
    to note that it was a 22 paged witness statement. It has  to  be  noted
    too that the Appellant's account was in fact accepted. Indeed,  I  note
    that the Judge had accepted that the Appellant had been  kidnapped  and
    raped as claimed.

6.    Mr Vokes made submissions that there were  also  other  problems  with
    the Judge's decision including in respect  of  Paragraph  339K  of  the
    Rules.

7.    Mr Duffy in his submissions referred to the Rule 24 Reply. In  summary
    that had said the Judge was entitled to make adverse  findings  as  the
    Appellant's husband had refused to give evidence. It was also said that
    the Judge was not required to particularise every piece of evidence and
    therefore the ground was unmeritorious.

8.    It was said  one  had  to  ask  what  was  it  about  the  Appellant's
    husband's witness statement which would have made  a  difference?  What
    was about it which could have  advanced  the  case  further?  What  was
    material about any part, if there was to be an error? Mr Duffy said the
    second point was that one needed to contrast  with,  for  example,  Sri
    Lanka. This was a case of  non-state  actors.  It  was  in  respect  of
    corrupt police and drugs gangs. Th fluidity around it could not lead to
    the same result. He said that there was no material error of law.

9.    After hearing from Mr Vokes, I had reserved my decision.
10.    In my judgment there is a  materiel  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision whereby she had said "no" weight  could  be  attached  to  the
    Appellant's husband's witness statement. Whilst the  Judge  would  have
    been entitled to conclude that the amount of weight could be "limited",
    it was not open to her in this case to conclude that "no" weight  could
    be attached to the husband's evidence. This is especially so since  the
    Judge had found the Appellant to have been largely truthful in  respect
    of the serious sexual violence she had endured and in  respect  of  the
    kidnapping. It was therefore a material error of law for the  Judge  to
    attach no weight to the witness statement.

11.   The difference that the  Appellant's  husband's  evidence  could  have
    made is that the further risks which the husband had highlighted  could
    then have been adjudicated upon. In my judgment, it is  rare  that  "no
    weight" can be given to evidence in the form of  a  witness  statement.
    That is to be contrasted with "little weight" or "limited weight" being
    applied to evidence. It is possible, had this  not  been  a  protection
    claim, that Mr Duffy's submissions would have had more force, but I  am
    of the  clear  view  that  the  Judge's  decision  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's  husband's  evidence  meant  that  she  did  not  give  the
    Appellant's appeal the most anxious scrutiny.

12.   I conclude that the Judge's decision is flawed and cannot stand.

13.   There shall be a re-hearing at the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

There was a material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

That decision is set aside.


An anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                             Date: 30 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood

