

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: AA060972014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Stoke                               |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 17th May 2016                             |On 16 June 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MH
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson &
                       Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic  of  Iran  born  in
    1986. He  appeals  with  permission  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Pickup) to dismiss his  appeal,  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds, against a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the  United
    Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.



      Background


 2. The Appellant arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  December  2011  in
    possession of a valid Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  visa.  On  the
    10th November 2012, a few days after that visa expired, he applied  for
    asylum.


 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim  for  international  protection  was
    that he had a well-founded fear of persecution in Iran for  reasons  of
    his imputed political opinion. Whilst  in  Iran  he  had  come  to  the
    adverse attention of some members of the Baseej,  even  though  at  one
    point he had been a member of that organisation.  His  real  difficulty
    was however the fact that whilst in the UK he had become involved in  a
    charitable effort to assist victims of the earthquake in the Azeri area
    of north western Iran.  The Appellant claimed that he had been involved
    in this  relief  effort,  which  had  been  perceived  by  the  Iranian
    government as an implicit criticism of its own response. A man  by  the
    name of  Morteza  Esmailpour  had  been  arrested  and  had  given  the
    authorities the Appellant's name.  The Appellant claimed that a summons
    had been delivered to his home on the 29th October 2012  and  that  his
    family house had been raided the  officers  looking  for  him.  He  now
    feared that if returned to Iran he would be identified  on  arrival  as
    someone with an outstanding summons against  him.  That  identification
    would lead to interrogation and/or transfer to detention, both of which
    would be reasonably  likely  to  include  ill  treatment  amounting  to
    persecution and a violation of Article 3 ECHR.


 4. The Respondent rejected the entire claim for lack  of  credibility  and
    corroboration.

 5. The matter came before the First-tier Tribunal. The  Appellant  managed
    to produce a  number  of  documents  which  he  said  corroborated  his
    account. These included, for instance, online articles about the arrest
    and questioning of one Morteza Esmailpour. Whilst these documents  were
    prima facie capable of supporting the Appellant's  case,  the  Tribunal
    found that what he had actually done was to formulate a  false  account
    around real events chronicled in the public domain.  The  Tribunal  did
    not find the account to be credible  or  plausible  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.


    Error of Law

 6. The Appellant submits that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  the
    following material respects:


              i) The determination applies the wrong standard of proof;
             ii) The Tribunal made findings not supported by the evidence;
            iii) The Tribunal impermissibly required  corroboration  in  the
                 context of an asylum claim;
             iv) There was a failure to properly apply the country guidance.

 7. The grounds are lengthy and detailed, and Mr McVeety vehemently opposed
    each one.  For reasons which will become apparent,  it  has  only  been
    necessary to deal very briefly with grounds (ii)-(iv).




    Ground 1: wrong standard of proof


 8. At paragraph 43 the determination reads:


         "For the reasons set out herein, I find that there is  no  part  of
         the appellant's account that I can accept as probably true".

      At paragraph 65 it states:

         "I find the suggest (sic) at Q79 of the appellant's  interview  the
         more likely scenario in this case. That  is  that  the  information
         about ME was easily obtainable by the  appellant  from  the  public
         domain and that he has just  built  his  entire  story  from  these
         different pieces of information and evidence"


         [emphasis added]


 9. Although the Appellant acknowledges that the determination does contain
    a direction to the correct, lower standard of proof at paragraph 27, it
    is submitted that these statements say much about the standard that was
    actually applied in this determination.  Dr Mynott submits that the use
    of terms such as "probably" and "more likely" do not reflect the  lower
    standard of proof applicable in asylum appeals.  If  the  Tribunal  was
    actually applying the civil standard, all of the findings are  vitiated
    by this error. Mr  McVeety  accepted  that  this  was  so.  He  further
    accepted that the words  are  capable  of  suggesting  that  the  wrong
    standard was applied. He submitted however that the phrases cited  were
    "slips" and that a holistic reading of the  determination  will  reveal
    the correct standard to have been applied.   For instance at  paragraph
    27 the determination refers to the "lower standard of  proof",  and  at
    paragraph 42 the Tribunal expressly states that in making  findings  in
    this appeal it has applied that lower standard.


10.  It  is  arguable  that  where  a  determination  contains  conflicting
    directions, equal in number, it  could  be  assumed  that  the  correct
    standard has been applied. In this case however there  is  good  reason
    not to take that approach. That is because approximately one  third  of
    this determination is taken up with what appear to be  standard  format
    legal directions, that  is  to  say  paragraphs  that  are  held  as  a
    precedent and used as the basis  for  each  new  decision.  Mr  McVeety
    agreed that this must be so. There would for instance appear to  be  no
    reason for a direction  in  this  appeal  on  the  merits  of  fairness
    arguments raised in PBS cases [15], the  correct  approach  to  dealing
    with foreign criminals [16] nor indeed to Article 8 at all [9-21].  The
    directions at paragraph 27 and 42 appear to be standard paragraphs 'cut
    and pasted' into the decision. In contrast the phrases used at  43  and
    65 directly arise in the analysis of the Appellant's  case.   For  this
    reason I am satisfied that ground (i) is made out. To borrow a  phrase,
    the Appellant is justified  in  his  concerns  that  the  "more  likely
    scenario" is that the wrong standard was applied.


11. Mr McVeety quite properly agreed that if this ground was made  out  the
    entire determination would have to be set aside to  be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


    Ground (ii):  Findings  not  supported  by  the  evidence/  failure  to
    consider the evidenwith anxious scrutiny
    Ground (iii): requiring corroboration

12. I take these grounds together since they are argued in that way.


13. On the day of the hearing the Respondent produced two  documents  found
    online, both of which address the arrest and  imprisonment  of  Morteza
    Esmailpour.  One of these articles  contains  a  sub-headline  "Morteza
    Esmailpour, an Iranian Shi'ite Muslim, served a six month  prison  term
    in Iran for his refusal to implicate Baha'i aid workers he served  with
    after  the  2012   Azerbaijan   earthquakes".   The   Tribunal   placed
    considerable weight on this headline to draw negative conclusions about
    the Appellant's claim that he had been identified  by  Esmailpour:  "it
    makes no sense for ME to implicate the appellant when refusing to  name
    those he was with" [at 62].  The Appellant takes issue with that  logic
    on two  fronts.  Firstly,  it  is  submitted  that  there  was  nothing
    inconsistent in Esmailpour refusing to name people still in  Iran  (and
    therefore vulnerable to arrest) and him giving  his  interrogators  the
    name of a person whom he  knew  to  be  safe  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Secondly, it is submitted that the Tribunal  has  failed  to  read  the
    document with anxious scrutiny. Had it read the entire article,  rather
    that the headline presumably written by an editor, it would  have  seen
    that Esmailpour himself nowhere claims to have been  sentenced  to  six
    months in prison for a failure to name names. It is clear from the text
    itself that the issue of his Baha'i co-workers arose "in the middle" of
    his interrogation, so he  was  already  in  detention  at  that  point.
    Further there was other evidence before the Tribunal which stated  that
    he was sentenced to six months in prison for  "assembly  and  collusion
    for committing crimes against national security": see the article dated
    16th January 2013 from The Eurasia Review.   It is submitted  that  the
    negative conclusion reached by the Tribunal on this point was therefore
    vitiated by a failure to consider all of the relevant evidence. I  find
    this ground is made out.


14. Further it was submitted that the Tribunal erred in its approach to the
    summons.  Whilst conducting its Tanveer Ahmed assessment  the  Tribunal
    had in effect declined to place weight on this document because of  the
    "not  uncommon  experience"  of  the  Tribunal  being  given   doctored
    documents. Dr Mynott protested that this  was  an  inappropriate  basis
    upon which to reject the document. Were that a sustainable  reason  for
    rejecting documents, there would never  be  any  point  in  any  asylum
    seeker producing them.   Whilst that is correct as statement  of  fact,
    it does not assist in this case.  That  is  because  the  Tribunal  had
    another reason for declining to place weight on  the  summons.  It  had
    never been produced in the original and there was  no  explanation  why
    not.  All the Tribunal had was a scanned copy of uncertain  provenance.
    It was entitled to attach only limited weight to that document.

15. Finally, the Appellant complains that the Tribunal erred  in  requiring
    corroboration from the Appellant's father about how  that  summons  was
    received. It is submitted that this was nonsensical, particularly since
    a corroborative statement from  the  Appellant's  sister  was  rejected
    without any reason other than that she  was  his  sister,  and  it  was
    therefore "very easy" to get her to send an email backing  him  up.   I
    agree that had that been the only ground  for  rejecting  the  summons,
    there would have been an error. It is  trite  asylum  law  that  asylum
    seekers should not be required to produce  corroboration  and  I  agree
    that it would be perverse to draw adverse inference from the absence of
    evidence that would in any event have attracted no weight. However  for
    the reasons given above, in this instance there was no  discrete  error
    arising from the Tanveer Ahmed assessment.  Nevertheless as a result of
    my findings on Ground (i) in the re-making the First-tier Tribunal will
    have to conduct that assessment afresh.


    Ground (iv): failure to apply country guidance

16. Dr Mynott submitted  that  the  Tribunal  had  apparently  ignored  the
    guidance given in SB (risk on return  -illegal  exit)  Iran  CG  [2009]
    UKAIT 00053 (IAC). At paragraph 57 of  the  present  determination  the
    Tribunal finds that the Appellant would have a "perfect defence" to any
    accusations of involvement in any covert  opposition  activity  in  the
    period following the Azeribaijan earthquake. Dr Mynott submits that  in
    making this finding the Tribunal has overlooked the "clear guidance" in
    SB that return from the UK is in itself a risk factor and that risk had
    to be assessed taking that, as well as  other  matters,  into  account.
    The difficulty with that submission is that  this  was  not  the  clear
    guidance in SB at all. Whilst the  expert  witness  in  that  case,  Dr
    Kakhki, offered an opinion to that effect, this was expressly  rejected
    by the Tribunal:


         "Whilst we have no difficulty accepting that as a result of  recent
         events the Iranian government has sought to blame the UK  (and  US)
         governments for inciting the anti-regime protests, we are unable to
         accept that this has led to any significant change in the treatment
         of returnees...we do not think it would be justifiable to  describe
         "being a returnee from the UK" or some such category even as a risk
         factor" [at 51].

      This ground is therefore without merit.




  Decisions


17. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


18. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.


19. Having regard to the nature  of  the  evidence  I  make  the  following
    direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of
    2013: Anonymity Orders.


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This direction applies to  amongst  others,  the  parties.
        Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
        court proceedings".





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               12th June 2016
