

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06825/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 November 2016                       |On 07 December 2016              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                 abdul haque
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin, instructed by IAS Birmingham
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 25 March 2015, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal against the determination of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Broe that was promulgated on 7 November 2014.

 2. In his determination, Judge  Broe  decided  the  appellant  was  not  a
    refugee  from  Afghanistan  or  otherwise  in  need  of   international
    protection.  Judge Broe also concluded the appellant  did  not  benefit
    from articles 2, 3 and 8 of the human rights convention.

 3. Judge Chamberlain granted permission because  in  her  opinion  it  was
    arguable Judge Broe had erred in law by not having proper regard to the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in  KA  (Afghanistan)  about  the
    evidential advantage an asylum-seeking child might derive from the duty
    on the respondent to trace his family.  She also granted permission  in
    terms of Judge Broe's article 8 assessment.

 4. After discussing the legal issues with Mr Martin  and  Mr  Richards,  I
    concluded there is no legal error in  Judge  Broe's  determination.   I
    reserved my reasons, which I now give.

 5. I begin with paragraph 34 of Judge Broe's determination.  Because it is
    central to the arguments in this appeal, it is appropriate to cite it.

    "34.  I have considered the matter  of  family  tracing.   I  note  the
    efforts described in the reasons for refusal  letter  and  accept  that
    they were made.  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  has  been
    disadvantaged in any way by the matter particularly bearing in mind his
    lack of credibility regarding his family."

    Judge Broe says nothing more about family tracing in his determination.

 6. The first issue is whether Judge Broe was properly seized of the  facts
    in the appeal he heard.  It is unclear to what he is referring when  he
    refers to "the efforts described in the  reasons  for  refusal  letter"
    because in paragraphs 93 to 95 of the reasons for refusal letter  dated
    29 August 2014, the respondent conceded that she had not discharged the
    duty to endeavour to trace the appellant's family in Afghanistan during
    the time he was a child in the UK.  The respondent explained that  such
    tracing was impossible because of the lack of resources in Afghanistan.
     The respondent also identified the fact the appellant had admitted  to
    having had contact with his mother up until  towards  the  end  of  his
    period of discretionary leave (which expired on 16 October 2012).

 7. I understand the appellant's confusion regarding Judge Broe's  comments
    and accept it is evidence that Judge Broe did not fully appreciate this
    part of the case because the respondent admitted to making no effort to
    trace the appellant's family.  However, I do not accept that this error
    is material to the outcome because of the finding made, which draws  on
    the fact no family tracing had been undertaken.   It is to that finding
    that I turn because it forms the second issue.

 8. The appellant complains that  had  the  respondent  complied  with  the
    family tracing duty, then it may have provided  evidence  corroborating
    his account that he had no contact with his family.  Therefore, despite
    what Judge Broe concluded, he had been disadvantaged.

 9. I do not agree for a number of interrelated reasons.

10. There is  no  indication  the  appellant  challenged  the  respondent's
    assertion that it  was  impossible  to  carry  out  family  tracing  in
    Afghanistan because of the lack of resources when the appeal was  heard
    by Judge Broe.  Nor is such an argument mounted now.  It is, of course,
    contrary to the overriding objective of any court of tribunal to expect
    a party to do the impossible and even if the law imposes a  duty  on  a
    state to do something, reason must prevail.  Therefore, even  with  the
    presence of  the  duty  in  law,  the  appellant  cannot  realistically
    complain of being disadvantaged by it not being carried out when  there
    are good reasons why it cannot be.

11. In addition, the argument presented by the appellant does not take into
    account a raft of other authority explaining the ambit of  the  benefit
    identified by the Court of Appeal in KA (Afghanistan).  In addition  to
    that case itself, I must have regard to EU (Afghanistan) & Ors  v  SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 32, TN, MA and AA (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2015]  UKSC  40
    and even more recent RS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 1179.   In
    light of those authorities, the  appellant  cannot  expect  a  positive
    outcome.

12. In applying the case law, it must be recalled that Judge Broe  was  the
    second judge to deal with the appellant's case.  Judge Hall  had  dealt
    with the appellant's earlier appeal at the end of 2009  and  had  found
    the appellant was not credible with regard to his accounts of events in
    Afghanistan including in relation to his family.  Judge Broe  correctly
    used these findings as his starting point.  The fact the appellant knew
    throughout 2010, 2011 and most of 2012 that his account in relation  to
    his family was not accepted, and although  the  appellant  admitted  to
    being in contact with his mother  during  those  years,  the  appellant
    obtained no evidence from her.

13. In this context I find it to be of concern that the  appellant  accuses
    the respondent for not doing something when the burden of proof  always
    lay on him to prove his case  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof.   In
    referring to the appellant, I am  of  course  referring  to  his  legal
    advisers who would have been able to assist and were under  a  duty  of
    care so to do.

14. Ultimately, I must find that the failure of the respondent to trace the
    appellant's family had no bearing whatsoever on Judge Broe's assessment
    of the appellant's credibility.  There can be no presumption  that  the
    appellant would  have  benefited  from  evidence  obtained  via  family
    tracing.  The judge considered the evidence he had and  reached  cogent
    reasons for his finding that the appellant could not be believed.

15. Having dismissed this appeal in relation to the  protection  issues,  I
    move on to consider the remaining ground, which relates to the  article
    8 assessment.  Mr Martin submitted that Judge Broe had failed  to  take
    proper account of the length of time the appellant had been in  the  UK
    (he arrived here when he was just 13) and the  ties  he  had  developed
    since he arrived.

16. In essence, I find the current ground seeks to suggest  that  the  mere
    passage of time is sufficient to make any  expulsion  disproportionate.
    I am aware the UK government recognises through the  immigration  rules
    that length of time in the UK will be a  determinative  factor  in  two
    situations, namely where a person aged between 18 and 25 has spent  all
    their life in the UK, and where a person over 18 has spent more than 20
    years in the  UK  continuously.   Although  determinative,  even  these
    provisions are not conclusive as they are  conditional  on  the  person
    meeting the suitability requirements.

17. The appellant did not and  does  not  benefit  from  these  provisions.
    There are no other provisions within the law from which  the  appellant
    might benefit by mere length of residence in the UK  and  therefore  he
    falls to be considered under  the  general  provisions  of  article  8.
    There is no support in case law relating to article 8  that  length  of
    residence is a determinative factor other  than  in  the  most  extreme
    cases.  It is always a relevant factor but  it  is  for  the  judge  to
    decide what weight to give it.

18. It is not disputed that Judge  Broe  adopted  the  proper  approach  to
    consider the appellant's private and family life rights as protected by
    article 8 ECHR.  Nor is it disputed that the appellant sought  only  to
    rely on elements of his private life, having no family in the  UK.  Nor
    is it disputed that the evidence before Judge Broe was very limited  in
    respect of what private life the appellant had established in  the  UK.
    Judge Broe recorded at [16], that the appellant had  been  studying  in
    the UK and enjoys playing cricket and going to the gym  and  Mr  Martin
    admitted there was no other evidence  of  note  about  the  appellant's
    private life in the UK.

19. Judge Broe took into consideration the length of time the appellant had
    been in the UK when he assessed proportionality.  At [38] he identified
    the appellant had been in the UK  for  five  years.   I  am  satisfied,
    therefore, that Judge Broe did not ignore the period of residence.   It
    is evident from [38] and [39] that Judge Broe looked for other  factors
    that might indicate the appellant's private life as established in  the
    UK might outweigh the public interest  considerations  he  had  already
    recognised.   Judge  Broe  decided  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    personal circumstances did not tip the balance in  his  favour.   Given
    the  very  limited  evidence,  I  find  this  conclusion  is  not  only
    unsurprising but also correct in law.

20. Because none of the grounds are made out, the appeal fails and I uphold
    the decision of Judge Broe.



Decision

There is no legal error in the determination of Judge Broe and I uphold  his
decision.




Signed                                       Date
Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal               08 December 2016
