

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06804/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 3 July 2014                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     RR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms V Delgado of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

The Background

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on 23  December  1988.
      On 11 June 2013, the appellant entered the United  Kingdom  illegally.
      He was accompanied by "SG" with  whom  he  had  undergone  a  'Sigheh'
      marriage in Iran.  The appellant claimed asylum on the basis that SG's
      father, who was a colonel in the Sepah which is part  of  the  Iranian
      Revolutionary Guard, had threatened to kill the appellant and harm  SG
      when he discovered that the appellant and SG had a pre-marital  sexual
      relationship.

   3. On 2 July 2013, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claim
      for asylum and humanitarian protection and also under  Articles  2,  3
      and 8 of the ECHR.  Also on that date the Secretary of  State  made  a
      decision to remove the appellant by way of directions to Iran.

   4. SG did not make a separate claim for asylum but her situation has been
      considered in the context of  the  appellant's  claim  and  subsequent
      appeal.

The Appeal

   5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
      dated 6 November 2013, Judge Buckwell dismissed the appellant's appeal
      on all grounds.  Judge Buckwell made a number of positive findings  in
      favour of the appellant.  He noted that the accounts of the  appellant
      and SG were generally consistent.  He accepted that SG's father was  a
      colonel in  the  Sepah.  However,  he  concluded  that  there  was  no
      objective risk to the appellant or SG because,  at  its  highest,  the
      evidence only showed  that  SG's  father  was  angry.   There  was  no
      evidence that he had ever previously inflicted  injury  on  anyone  or
      that he had ever  hurt  anyone  in  his  family.  In  addition,  Judge
      Buckwell concluded that the appellant and SG could internally relocate
      within Iran.  Judge Buckwell also found that  the  appellant  had  not
      established, on an alternative basis of his claim,  that  he  and  his
      wife were at risk by  reason  of  their  illegal  departure  from  Ian
      applying SB Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 53  and  BA  Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT36
      (IAC).  Finally, Judge Buckwell concluded  that  it  would  not  be  a
      breach of Article 8 for the appellant, SG (and  their  child  who  was
      born in the UK) to be returned to Iran.

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On 9
      December 2013,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (UTJ  Martin)  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on two grounds.  First, in reaching his
      findings the Judge had arguably erred in law by failing to  take  into
      account an expert report which dealt with the potential risk from SG's
      father if he were a colonel in the Sepah.   Secondly,  the  Judge  had
      arguably failed to give adequate reasons for concluding that there was
      no objective risk to the appellant and SG on the basis that there  was
      no evidence that SG's father had inflicted injury on  anyone  else  or
      anyone in the family previously.

   7. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal was initially listed for  hearing  on
      24 March 2014.  Following that hearing, the Upper Tribunal  (McCloskey
      J and Arfon-Jones V-P) in a decision promulgated on 15 April 2014  set
      aside Judge Buckwell's decision.  The reasons are set out in  full  in
      the panel's decision.  In summary, the panel concluded that the  Judge
      had erred in law in reaching his finding that the appellant and SG had
      failed to establish that  they  were  at  risk  from  SG's  father  if
      returned to Iran.  The panel concluded that the Judge  had  failed  to
      take into account the expert's report which supported the  appellant's
      claim and had failed to give sufficient reasons for his findings based
      upon the absence of any evidence that SG's father had a propensity  to
      act violently.

   8. The hearing was adjourned to be relisted for a continuation hearing in
      order  to  remake  the  decision  in  respect   of   the   appellant's
      international protection claim and also under Article 8 of the ECHR.

   9. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Accepted Facts

  10. At the outset of the hearing, I invited the representatives to clarify
      whether any of the underlying facts relied upon by the appellant  were
      in dispute following  Judge  Buckwell's  decision.   Mr  Richards,  on
      behalf of the Secretary of State accepted the underlying facts of  the
      appellant's claim.  Those facts can be summarised as  follows  derived
      from  the  appellant's  asylum  interview,  his  statement  dated   10
      September 2013 and the oral evidence recorded in the determination  of
      Judge Buckwell before whom both the appellant and  SG  gave  evidence.
      In that latter regard, Judge Buckwell noted that:

           "The account given by the appellant and his  wife  is  generally
           consistent" (at para 64).

  11. The appellant and SG are Iranian nationals who lived in  Mashad.   The
      appellant met SG in early 2012  when  their  mothers  became  friends.
      After a few months, a relationship began with  them  communicating  by
      text and telephone.  They met about once a month  in  a  park.   Their
      families did not know about their relationship.

  12. About nine months after their relationship started, they decided  that
      the appellant should approach SG's family and ask  for  permission  to
      marry.  SG's father, however, disapproved of their relationship as the
      appellant was not "an army man".   The appellant contacted SG's father
      on a number of occasions to try to persuade him to change his mind but
      he would not do so.

  13. One day, SG overheard her parents arranging her marriage to  a  friend
      of her father's.  He was an army man and her father approved  of  him.
      In an attempt to force her father to  recognise  that  she  could  not
      marry  another  man,  SG  told  her  mother  that  she  had  a  sexual
      relationship with the appellant.  Her mother  then  told  SG's  father
      whilst they were away from Mashad on a day out.   SG's  father  became
      enraged and he told SG's mother that he was going  to  "chop"  SG  "to
      pieces". SG's father also telephoned the appellant and  threatened  to
      kill him.  SG's mother telephoned the appellant to come  and  take  SG
      away because of what her father would do.  The appellant collected  SG
      and they went to a friend's house and from there by  taxi  to  Tehran.
      There they stayed in the house of a friend of the friend for  about  a
      week.  Whilst there, they underwent a 'Sigheh' religious  marriage  on
      14 February 2013.  The friend with whom they were  staying  helped  to
      find them an agent who organised their departure from Iran  travelling
      via Greece to the UK.

  14. Since being in the UK, the appellant and SG have had a daughter.

Submissions

  15. Ms Delgado, on behalf  of  the  appellant  relied  upon  her  skeleton
      argument which she developed in her oral submissions.   She  submitted
      that the appellant's principle claim was that  the  appellant  and  SG
      were at risk on return from SG's father who is a colonel in the Sepah.
       In addition, she submitted that the appellant and SG would be at risk
      on return to Iran as they had illegally exited Iran.  On  my  enquiry,
      Ms Delgado expressly disavowed  any  reliance  upon  a  claim  by  the
      appellant that he was at risk of prosecution for any offence  in  Iran
      and as a consequence at risk of persecution or serious  ill  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 of the ECHR.

  16. In relation to risk on return and lack of state protection, Ms Delgado
      relied upon passages in the appellant's bundle of background  evidence
      and two  expert  reports  prepared  by  Dr  Mohamed  Kakhki  dated  24
      September 2013 and 19 May 2014.  The latter report was not before  the
      First-tier Tribunal  but  Mr  Richards  raised  no  objection  to  its
      admission under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

  17. Ms Delgado also relied upon a document entitled "Gender  and  Equality
      and Discrimination: The Case of Iranian Women"  from  the  Iran  Human
      Rights Documentation Center (USA) dated 8 March 2013 at page 26 of the
      bundle in particular section  1.2  highlighting  instances  of  honour
      killings by fathers of their own children; and 1.4 in relation to  the
      "legal immunity" given to fathers  if  they  kill  their  children  in
      honour  killings.   Further,  Ms  Delgado  relied  upon  the  document
      entitled "Honour Killings in Iran" by the Landinfo Country  of  Origin
      Information Centre (Norway) dated 22 May 2009 at page 62 of the bundle
      in particular, section 3.1 dealing with violence  within  families  as
      being a private and internal matter and  widespread  problem;  section
      3.2 on the absence of effective protection for those  threatened  with
      honour killings or other forms of violence; section 4 dealing with the
      "unpredictability" of the Iranian legal system and section 4.2 dealing
      with the Iranian states' response to honour killings.

  18. In relation to Dr Kakhki's  second  report,  Ms  Delgado  relied  upon
      passages at pages 5, 7 and 8.   She  relied  upon  these  passages  as
      evidence  to  establish  that  SG's  father  as  a   member   of   the
      Revolutionary Guard  was  likely  to  have  strong  hard-line  Islamic
      beliefs and sentiments and that:

           "It is not only their professional role but their personal faith
           and  integrity  that  will  be   undermined   by   an   improper
           unacceptable  relationship  within  their  own  family,  and  in
           particular when instigated by a female family member."

  19. Ms Delgado relied upon Dr Kakhki's opinion (at page 7) that given SG's
      position:

           "It will be very unlikely that they would successfully evade him
           as the Revolutionary  Guard  is  a  very  powerful  organisation
           within Iranian society, well-connected, and capable  of  finding
           an  individual  of  interest.   Thereby  making  the  option  of
           relocation anywhere else in Iran unfeasible."

  20. Ms Delgado also relied upon a passage at page 8 of the report where Dr
      Kakhki says:

           "...In my opinion, it would no longer be an option to deal  with
           the issue within the family upon the couple's  return  to  Iran.
           They would return as a couple who had  eloped  without  parental
           consent and had borne a child, likely  out  of  wedlock.   As  a
           ranked officer of Sepah [the appellant's] father-in-law would be
           expected to react harshly to uphold the principles he represents
           as a senior officer in the Revolutionary Guard."

  21. In relation to  Dr  Kakhki's  first  report,  Ms  Delgado  relied,  in
      particular upon his conclusion at page 20 that:

           "... It is my opinion that if  [the  appellant's]  father-in-law
           possesses a role within the Revolutionary Guard  or  indeed  has
           sufficiently important connections within the  security  forces,
           he could  use  such  positions  to  influence  or  initiate  any
           criminal proceedings against his daughter and her  husband  upon
           their return to Iran.  Such influence in my opinion  can  extend
           to the situation of honour killings/causing grievous bodily harm
           as he can use his connections to justify that her  actions  were
           impacting upon his honour and reputation in society."

  22. As I have already indicated, Ms Delgado, having cited this passage  to
      me in her submissions, confirmed that she did not directly  rely  upon
      the risk to the appellant of prosecution.

  23. As regards illegal exit, Ms Delgado  relied  upon  extracts  from  the
      UKBA's OGN for Iran dated October 2012 at 3.15 and 3.17.12 and 3.17.13
      which, she submitted, established that the appellant and  SG  were  at
      risk of detention on return and that detention was  likely  to  be  in
      harsh and potentially life threatening conditions such that Article  3
      would be breached.

  24. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of State  submitted  that  the
      appellant could not succeed on the basis of illegal exit and he relied
      upon the decision in SB.   As  regards  the  principal  basis  of  the
      appellant's claim, he accepted the primary facts were established.  He
      also accepted that the  FtT's  negative  finding  that  there  was  no
      evidence of previous harm caused by SG's father-in-law was not a point
      which he now relied upon.  He invited me to determine  the  appeal  on
      the objective evidence and Dr Kakhki's two reports applying  what  was
      said there to the appellant's  circumstances  in  the  light  of  SG's
      father-in-law being a colonel in the Sepah.  Mr Richards accepted,  in
      the light of Dr Kakhki's report, that internal relocation was  not  an
      option.

Discussion and Findings

  25. In relation to the appellant's asylum claim, he  must  establish  that
      there is a real risk or reasonable likelihood that if returned to Iran
      he would be subject to persecution for  a  Convention  reason,  namely
      race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular  social  group
      or political opinion.

  26. In this appeal, it was not  suggested  by  Mr  Richards  that  if  the
      appellant and SG are risk of persecution from SG's father  that  would
      not be for a Convention reason.  It is accepted  in  the  respondent's
      decision letter of 2 July 2013 that any risk would be as a  result  of
      the appellant's imputed political opinion (see para 15 of the  refusal
      letter).

  27. As regards Article 3 of the ECHR, the appellant  must  establish  that
      there are substantial grounds for believing that he would be  at  real
      risk of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment on return to Iran.

  28. As I have already  indicated,  the  Secretary  of  State  accepts  the
      primary facts in this appeal.  It is  accepted,  therefore,  that  the
      appellant and SG had an illegal premarital sexual relationship.  As Dr
      Kakhki points out in his first report (at pages 5-6) the fact that the
      appellant and SG underwent a 'Sigheh' religious marriage  subsequently
      would not:

           "negate the liability for past  misdemeanours  (if  investigated
           for premarital sexual relations etc) nor will  it  protect  them
           from familial/societal persecution if their actions  have  taken
           place against the wishes of their family.

  29. That, of course, is precisely the situation in which the appellant and
      SG would find themselves on return to Iran.  Before Judge Buckwell the
      issue was raised as to  the  period  of  validity  of  that  temporary
      marriage. The evidence of the parties before Judge Buckwell  was  that
      it was only for a period of one month.   Neither  representative  made
      any submissions before me concerning the length of its  validity.  The
      parties' evidence before  Judge  Buckwell  was,  as  he  pointed  out,
      generally consistent.   Dr Kakhki notes in his report that  this  form
      of temporary marriage, in the circumstances, would in any event  bring
      dishonour upon the family. He said this (at page 2):

           "...If  [the  appellant]  and  his  wife  entered  into   sexual
           relations and temporary marriage  in  order  to  circumvent  the
           requirement  for  her  father's  permission  (as  well  as   the
           necessary virginity element for  a  first  marriage)  they  have
           brought dishonour upon  their  families  and  could  be  legally
           prosecuted for their actions, based on immoral/sexual offences."



  30. As I have  already  indicated,  Ms  Delgado  expressly  disavowed  any
      reliance upon a risk to the appellant (or SG) of prosecution.

  31. Given that it was not challenged, I see no reason not  to  accept  the
      parties' evidence that the temporary marriage was only valid  for  one
      month.  In any event, even if it remains valid, in  the  light  of  Dr
      Kakhki's opinion, which I accept,  the  dishonour  would  remain  cast
      upon, in particular, SG's family.

  32. Added to that is, of course, the accepted evidence  that  SG's  father
      had threatened to kill the appellant and to  "chop"  into  pieces  his
      daughter because of their illicit premarital sexual relationship.

  33. At para 13 of his first report,  Dr  Kakhki  expresses  the  following
      opinion concerning the  likely  attitude  of  SG's  father  given  his
      background:

           "Applying this information to [the  appellant]  and  his  wife's
           circumstances, as they claim to have been involved in an illegal
           premarital sexual relationship (a fact allegedly known to  their
           families) it is likely that they  would  receive  some  form  of
           retaliation, particularly from (SG's) father, who  may  perceive
           his honour has  been  tarnished  by  their  actions.   They  are
           unlikely  to  receive  any  sympathy  or  protection  from   the
           government or society in general as they would  be  regarded  as
           having deserved such retaliatory actions based on their lack  of
           adherence to Islamic moral  values  etc.   The  authorities  and
           societal/family attitude has resulted in  the  victims  of  such
           abuse refraining from making complaints to the authorities about
           their treatment as there is a firm belief that  they  would  not
           get any sympathy from these sources."

  34. At page 5 of his second report  Dr  Kakhki,  as  I  set  out  earlier,
      expresses the view that SG's father would consider his  own  "personal
      faith and integrity" undermined by the  unlawful  sexual  relationship
      between the appellant and his daughter.

  35. The background evidence demonstrates that honour killings and harm  is
      meted out by families, particularly to female offspring, who engage in
      unlawful relationships considered to be morally repugnant (see "Gender
      Inequality and Discrimination: The Case of Iranian Women", page 26  of
      the bundle at paras  1.2  and  1.4).   The  background  material  also
      demonstrates that the state  does  not  provide  effective  protection
      against this and, in this appeal, that reality is only  emphasised  by
      the status of SG's father as a colonel in the Sepah.  At  page  16  of
      his  first  report,  Dr  Kakhki's  deals  with  this  issue  of  state
      protection with particular reference to the position of SG's father as
      follows:

           "The  government's  implicit  support   for   vigilante   groups
           targeting individuals implicated  in  acts  considered  immoral,
           such  as  [the  appellant's]  premarital  sexual   relationship,
           therefore creates fertile ground for such vigilantism.  This  is
           particularly the case if, on return to Iran,  they  disobey  the
           wife's family and decide to continue  their  relationship.   The
           extent of danger to [the  appellant]  and  his  family  is  only
           likely to increase, as the creation of  the  Special  Protection
           Division (also known as the Special Protection Headquarters), by
           the   government   illustrates   its   complete   support    for
           organisations taking justice into their own hands, with complete
           disregard for procedural protections.  This  is  especially  the
           case  if   [the   appellant's]   father-in-law   is   a   ranked
           Revolutionary Guard Officer, who may use his contacts  in  order
           to locate the couple and punish  them  for  their  disrespectful
           conduct."

  36. I accept Dr Kakhki's evidence.  SG's father is a colonel in the  Sepah
      and I accept he evidence that he  is  likely  to  view  adversely  the
      'dishonour' of  his  daughter's  relationship  even  more  a  civilian
      Iranian father.  The accepted evidence of  his  trheats  unequivocally
      supports this and reflects on what his likely reaction will be.  I  am
      satisfied, therefore, on all the evidence that there is  a  real  risk
      that SG's father will kill or cause serious harm to the appellant  and
      SG on return as a result of the dishonour which he considers  to  have
      been caused to his family by their illegal premarital relationship.  I
      find, on the basis of the background material, that  punishment  under
      Iranian law for crimes committed in this context by families  who  are
      "dishonoured" (including honour killings) is limited and, as Dr Kakhki
      points out in his reports, the position of SG's father  in  the  Sepah
      would provide  him  with  protection  from  the  consequences  of  his
      actions.  I also accept Dr Kakhki's evidence that the position of SG's
      father in the Sepah means that it is likely that the appellant and  SG
      would not be able to evade him if they return to Iran (see page  7  of
      Dr Kakhki's second report).   That  later  fact  was  accepted  by  Mr
      Richards when he accepted that internal relocation was not an option.

  37. Consequently, I am satisfied on the evidence that  the  Iranian  state
      would not provide a sufficiency of protection to the appellant and  SG
      given SG's father's position in the Sepah.

  38. Further, it is accepted that the appellant and  SG  could  not  safely
      relocate within Iran.

  39. Thus, I am satisfied that the appellant has established a real risk of
      persecution.  It is accepted that if the appellant is at  risk  it  is
      for a Convention reason, namely imputed political opinion.  The latter
      follows both from the perception within Iran of  the  appellant's  and
      SG's "dishonour" as being contrary to the Islamic mores of  the  State
      and from the basis upon which the State will not provide a sufficiency
      of protection.  Further, I am satisfied that on return  the  appellant
      would be subject to serious ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 of the
      ECHR.

  40. For those reasons, the appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds
      and under Article 3 of the ECHR.

  41. Ms Delgado relied, by way of alternative, to a risk to  the  appellant
      on return simply on the basis of his illegal  exit.   That  submission
      cannot, in my judgement, be made good in the light of SB (approved  in
      BA Iran CG [20111] UKUT 00036 (IAC)).  Ms Delgado sought to argue that
      the OGN for October 2012 should lead to a different conclusion because
      in paras 3.17.12 and 3.17.13 it was recognised that if a  person  were
      detained in prison or detention facilities the circumstances  of  that
      imprisonment or detention were likely to breach Article 3 of the ECHR.
       Ms Delgado did not provide me, nor rely upon,  the  entirety  of  the
      section of the OGN containing paras 3.17.12 and 3.17.13.  Those latter
      provisions are, in my judgement, not in play simply on the basis of an
      individual's return where they have illegally exited.  That  is  clear
      from the section at paras 3.15 of the OGN dealing with  "illegal  exit
      from Iran" which concludes, citing SB, that those who have exited Iran
      illegally are not generally at risk of persecution or ill treatment on
      return.  There  is  nothing  in  the  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
      appellant and SG would be treated anything other than as  an  ordinary
      returnee, albeit who has illegally exited.  I am  not  satisfied  that
      the  appellant  and  SG  face  a  real  risk  of  detention   in   the
      circumstances contemplated in paras 3.17.12 and 3.17.13 merely on  the
      basis of their illegal exit.  Applying SB, I  reject  the  appellant's
      claim on this alternative basis.

  42. As regards article 8, Ms Delgado did not make any oral submissions  in
      relation to Article 8.  Her skeleton argument, upon which  she  placed
      reliance, addressed the issue of Article 8 in four lines but solely on
      the basis that the appellant and SG would not be able to  live  safely
      in Iran.  On that basis, no separate issue  arises  under  Article  8.
      Given my finding that the appellant's return would breach Article 3 on
      the only basis upon which Article 8 is relied, he has also established
      a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

  43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
      appeal involved the making of an error of law and is set aside.

  44. I remake the  decision  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
      Refugee Convention and Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
