
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06143/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 28th September 2015                        |On 1st October 2015            |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                              RAHEEL IQBAL BUTT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Ali of Counsel instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 30th April 2015, in a renewed application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman gave permission to the appellant to
    appeal against the decision of  a  panel  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    consisting of Judge Boylan-Kemp and  Judge  Pooler  who  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights protection  to  the  appellant  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.

 2. The grounds of application  take  issue  with  the  panel's  conclusion
    (paragraph 37) that:

         "There is nothing of substance to indicate that  there  is  a  real
         risk to the  appellant's  life  due  to  this  sexual  relationship
         outside of marriage if he were to return to Pakistan ...".

    It is contended that the  panel  overlooked  objective  material  about
    honour  killings  and,  in  particular,  evidence  showing   that   the
    appellant's partner's father and brother were employed  by  a  national
    newspaper which was well-known.

 3. In granting permission Judge Chapman  believed  it  arguable  that  the
    panel had not taken account of  the  evidence  of  employment  for  the
    brother and father and objective evidence in the COI Report as to  risk
    on return.  Judge Chapman noted, however, that the panel  had  accepted
    the material facts  of  the  case  including  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and his partner  and  their  child's
    paternity and that the parties had received  threats  and  that  honour
    killings were carried out in Pakistan.

Error on a Point of Law

 4. At the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal I heard submissions from
    both representatives which I summarise, below.

 5.  Mr  Ali  confirmed  that  the  appellant  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    application.  He confirmed  that  the  main  contention  was  with  the
    panel's assessment of risk on return for the appellant and his  partner
    bearing mind the omission to consider the evidence of the employment of
    the partner's brother and father.

 6. Ms Johnstone reminded me of the Secretary  of  State's  response  which
    argued that the panel's conclusion that the appellant and partner could
    internally relocate was supported  by  adequate  reasoning.   She  also
    submitted that the evidence of employment (which  is  to  be  found  on
    pages 17 and 18 of the appellant's main bundle) presented at the First-
    tier hearing was not significant and  any  omission  by  the  panel  to
    consider it should not affect  the  other  reasoned  conclusions.   She
    contended that the panel did not have to refer to all of the  evidence.
    The conclusions in paragraphs 37 and  38  of  the  decision  were,  she
    thought, cogently reasoned leaving it open to  the  panel  to  conclude
    that there would be no risk on return.  The  panel's  conclusion  about
    internal relocation was also adequately reasoned.

 7. Mr Ali  concluded  by  indicating  that  the  panel  should  have  made
    reference  to  the  relevant  evidence  including  the  oral   evidence
    supporting the appellant's claims although he could  not  specify  what
    such oral evidence was or what parts of it had been overlooked  by  the
    panel.

Conclusions

 8.  The  determination  by  the  panel  is  comprehensive  and  more  than
    adequately reasoned.  The panel were satisfied with the evidence of the
    parties to the extent that it was accepted that the appellant  and  his
    partner were in a genuine relationship and there was a  child  of  whom
    they were the parents.  The panel carefully examined and  accepted,  as
    credible, e-mails which contained threats to the family.

 9. It cannot be contended  that  the  panel  did  not  carefully  consider
    objective material relating to risk on return in the situation in which
    the panel had found the parties to be.  In reaching its conclusions the
    panel examined not only country guidance but also the COI Report (which
    is quoted verbatim), and the oral evidence to which reference is  made.



10. As to the specific issue taken with the panel's  apparent  omission  to
    consider the position of the partner's family who were  said  to  be  a
    position of power, the panel was not wrong to conclude  that  they  did
    not have any evidence to support that claim.  Although the  panel  does
    not refer specifically to the copy cards, shown on pages 17 and  19  of
    the appellant's main bundle, it is not possible to  say  that,  if  the
    cards were specifically referred to, the panel  would  have  reached  a
    different conclusion.  The cards  themselves  cannot  be  taken  as  an
    indication of a position of influence and power for  the  bearer.   One
    card gives no indication of the position within the company  for  which
    the cardholder works and the other states the named person is  "Manager
    MPS and Disposal".  That information, of itself,  takes  the  influence
    argument no  further.   The  panel  were  entitled  to  conclude  that,
    although threats had been made, the claimed risk of serious harm was no
    more than speculation.

11. It is important to note that the panel gave  careful  consideration  to
    internal relocation which they found, for cogent reasons, would  be  an
    option for the appellant and his family although it is clear  that  the
    panel were of the view that such relocation might  be  unnecessary  and
    state protection would not need to be called upon.

12. The decision does not show a material error on a point of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity  direction  nor  was  one
requested before me.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


