
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06318/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2016                     |On 24 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                     GH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, solicitor of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. In this appeal, the appellant appeals against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  a  decision  taken  on  14
    August 2014 to refuse to grant her asylum.

Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on [  ]  1989.   She
    applied for asylum under the Immigration Rules HC395 (as amended) ('the
    Immigration  Rules').   That  application  was  refused   because   the
    Secretary  of  State  did  not  believe  that  the  appellant's  father
    threatened to kill her or that she would be at risk from her family  on
    return to Albania. The Secretary of State also considered that  it  was
    reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate within  Albania  if  she
    were  to  encounter  problems.  The  Secretary  of  State  granted  the
    appellant leave to remain for 30 months on Article 8 grounds.

The Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision of 29
    May 2015, Judge Flynn ('the judge'), dismissed the appellant's  appeal.
    The judge did not accept the appellant's account that  her  father  had
    tried to kill her or threatened to do so. The judge did not accept that
    the appellant had given a credible account and found that the appellant
    had not shown that she had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  When
    considering whether or not the appellant  was  at  risk  on  return  to
    Albania, the judge set out that the  only  issue  was  whether,  as  an
    unmarried mother of two young children, she would be at risk. The judge
    found that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the
    appellant from the authorities and that if she did not  return  to  the
    family home that there are  shelters  for  women  which  could  provide
    safety. The judge also found that she was not in need  of  humanitarian
    protection and also  dismissed  the  appeal  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds of appeal, in essence,  assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge misdirected himself regarding the issues to be addressed,  failed
    to address the appellant's vulnerability, gave inadequate  reasons  for
    findings and made contradictory findings, failed to consider adequately
    the background material and apply country guidance  and  ought  not  to
    have considered Article 3.

 6. On 23 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

 7. On 2 October 2015 I heard the appeal on error  of  law.  I  found  that
    there was an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  in
    respect solely of the judge's assessment of risk on return. I made  the
    following findings:

         "I consider that in this case there were other factors in  addition
         to the appellant's status as a single unmarried mother.  The  judge
         accepted that the appellant had been subject to  domestic  violence
         at the hands of her father, that she was from the Gorani region and
         that she does not speak Albanian.

         I consider that the judge  did  fail  to  consider  sufficiency  of
         protection and/or  relocation  in  light  of  all  the  appellant's
         individual circumstances. Had the judge considered  the  background
         materials and country guidance in light of those additional factors
         the outcome of the appeal might have been different.

         For the above reasons I find that there was a material error of law
         in the First-tier Tribunal decision  with  regard  to  the  correct
         assessment of the risk on return of the appellant to Albania."

 8. Having found an error of law I considered  that  I  could  re-make  the
    decision. However, both representatives invited me  to  adjourn  for  a
    further hearing particularly because a Country Guidance case  that  was
    likely to be of relevance regarding risk  on  return  was  soon  to  be
    released. That decision has now been released - TD and  AD  (Trafficked
    women)(CG) [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC) ('TD and AD')

 9. I therefore adjourned the matter for  a  further  hearing  to  consider
    solely the risk on return issue.

10. The following findings of  fact  were  preserved  from  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision:

          a. The appellant is from the Gorani region (paragraph 69)

          b. The appellant left school  at  around  12  years  old  without
             completing any qualifications (paragraph 69)

          c. Her family in Albania was not  rich  but  their  circumstances
             were relatively comfortable (paragraph 69)

          d.  The appellant is unmarried and has two children born  out  of
             wedlock (paragraph 66)

          e. The appellant suffered domestic violence at the hands  of  her
             father (paragraph 59)

          f. It is not reasonably likely that the appellant's father  tried
             to kill her or threatened to do so (paragraph 59)

          g. It is not reasonably likely that the appellant's  uncles  want
             to kill her  (paragraph 60)

          h. The appellant has never been a prostitute (Paragraph 66)

          i. The appellant has never been trafficked (paragraph 68)

          j.  The  appellant  suffered  from  depression  since  late  2014
             (paragraph 63)

The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal on 15 April 2016

11. Mr Howard handed up a  letter  from  Greenwich  MIND  and  a  US  State
    Department report of 13 April 2016. Mr Duffy  did  not  object  to  the
    admission of these documents. Despite no formal application under  rule
    15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I  decided
    to allow this evidence to be admitted.

12. Mr Howard submitted that there is a need for a Country Guidance case on
    the risk on return for Gorani Albanians. He submitted that  the  Gorani
    area is very small  and  consists  of  a  few  villages,  there  is  an
    additional  risk  factor  in  Albania  because  of  being  Gorani.  The
    inability to speak Albanian is also relevant.  He  submitted  that  the
    assessment of the risk on return is not covered in the current  Country
    Guidance because internal re-location has not been assessed in light of
    the specific Gorani situation.

13. I asked Mr Howard to take me to objective  evidence  that  demonstrated
    that the Gorani were persecuted because of their ethnicity or  were  at
    risk purely because they were Gorani. Mr Howard could not  take  me  to
    any specific objective evidence. He submitted  that  the  issue  is  in
    relation to re-location because of the small  isolated  population  and
    how they are perceived by Albanians.

14. Mr Duffy submitted that  from  the  objective  evidence  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that the Gorani were at enhanced risk.

15. I do not consider that there is any reason to suggest  that  a  Country
    Guidance case is required. No specific evidence could be identified  by
    Mr Howard that the Gorani are persecuted because  of  their  ethnicity.
    The factors that he mentions go to the harshness of re-location  rather
    than risk of persecution.

Summary of Submissions

16. Mr Howard relied on his supplementary skeleton argument and  noted  the
    findings of fact that were preserved  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision The appellant had spent a considerable period of time  outside
    Albania so she would now be at an enhanced risk on return to  her  home
    area where she would be considered to be an outsider. The appellant has
    two children born out of wedlock and she would be returning to  Albania
    on her own. The judge had found  that  her  partner  could  not  go  to
    Albania with her. I  asked  Mr  Howard  to  take  me  to  the  relevant
    paragraph in the First-tier Tribunal's decision. Mr Howard referred  me
    to paragraph 66 of the decision. I indicated  to  Mr  Howard  that  the
    judge had accepted that her partner would not go with her. That is  not
    to say that he could not go with her. It appeared to  be  a  matter  of
    choice.

17. He submitted that the case of TD and AD had  moved  the  categories  of
    risk. He submitted that if we were looking at someone who had not  been
    trafficked the findings in TD and AD were nevertheless still  relevant.
    He referred to TD and AD at paragraph 119  and  at  paragraph  112.  He
    submitted that the findings were relevant and you have to look  at  the
    particular circumstances of the case.

18. The relevant factors, in his submission, were that  the  appellant  has
    been subject to domestic violence, she lacked education,  her  children
    were born out of wedlock and that she has mental  health  problems.  He
    submitted that there was nowhere where the appellant could live in  the
    Gorani region as she would be at risk from her family. The Gorani  have
    a small population and there  are  only  11  villages  in  Albania.  He
    referred to the background materials including the operational guidance
    note and the most up-to-date United State Department report to which he
    referred in particular to pages 2, 12, 13 and 14.  I  indicated  to  Mr
    Howard that the materials he had my drawn attention to with  regard  to
    ethnic minorities and discrimination did not mention Gorani.

19. Mr Howard referred to the  letter  from  Greenwich  MIND  where  it  is
    indicated that the appellant would benefit from long-term  counselling.
    He submitted that  looking  at  all  the  features  in  the  round  the
    appellant has a well-founded fear on return to the Gorani  region.  She
    is likely to come to the attention of her family and would not be  able
    to obtain  any  protection.  He  submitted  that  internal  flight  was
    unreasonable given that the appellant had little  education,  does  not
    speak Albanian, and has children out of wedlock. He submitted  that  it
    would be unduly harsh and unreasonable, particularly given that she has
    mental health issues

20. In response to a question where I indicated that the appellant had been
    helped by a woman in her village Mr Howard submitted that her  evidence
    was that she lived in a storeroom and the woman  lived  2  houses  away
    down the road. The elderly neighbour knew her already. On  her  return,
    if she goes back now she fears what her family would do to her today.

21. He submitted that the question that also must be answered  is  'is  she
    likely to be subjected to  trafficking'  based  on  her  vulnerability,
    namely that she has mental  health  issues,  lacks  education  and  has
    children out of wedlock.

22. Mr Duffy submitted that the language point was astonishing. He asserted
    that it was not credible that someone who went to school to the age  of
    12 could not speak the national language at all. He submitted  that  if
    in fact the Gorani are discriminated against then they would be  highly
    unlikely to be able to establish their own schools. He  submitted  that
    as the appellant has leave to remain in the UK for a  temporary  period
    on the basis of her two  children  then  she  would  not  be  returning
    immediately. He submitted that she and her partner could go as a family
    with the children or she could return on her own. He submitted that she
    would not be easily identified as  someone  who  had  children  out  of
    wedlock unless she chose to tell people. With regard to risk on  return
    he submitted that the judge has made a  finding  that  the  appellant's
    father was aware of her presence. He allowed her to be on his  property
    for 2 years. He referred to paragraph 55  of  the  first-tier  tribunal
    decision and submitted that the judge did not  accept  the  appellant's
    account. He submitted that the  appellant's  father  did  not  seek  to
    pursue her during the two years that she  lived  in  Albania  with  her
    first child. There was no evidence that she suffered  from  persecution
    during that two-year period. Therefore, it would be very unlikely  that
    she would be persecuted by her father or any member of  her  family  on
    return to Albania.

23. He submitted that the appellant has not been trafficked and she has not
    been a prostitute. He referred to TD and  AD  at  paragraph  112  which
    refers to a risk  of  re-trafficking  potentially  in  the  future.  He
    submitted that the appellant would not be returning to  a  shelter  for
    trafficked women so the risk from traffickers for vulnerable  women  in
    shelters is not relevant in this case.  He  submitted  that  there  are
    shelters available in Albania for victims of  domestic  violence  where
    she could get support. He submitted that as her  partner  is  currently
    supporting her and her two children he could continue to support her by
    sending remittances from abroad. This reduces the risk of  exploitation
    and that she would be in a better financial position  than  many  other
    Albanians

24. He submitted that societal discrimination is not sufficient  to  amount
    to persecution. He submitted that there is nothing to support the claim
    that a domestic violence victim is at risk on return to other areas  of
    Albania and in any event there is evidence  that  there  is  protection
    from the police.

25. In reply Mr Howard referred to pages 71 and 72 of the bundle before the
    First-tier Tribunal. In the area that the appellant lived people  spoke
    purely Gorani so that the appellant would not need to  learn  Albanian.
    He referred to paragraphs 105- 112 of TD and AD - the situation outside
    the shelters is very harsh. He submitted that  the  Appellant's  family
    did not protect her from domestic violence. If her  father  had  abused
    her that is indicative of a future risk. She will not be able to obtain
    protection from neighbours.

26. I asked both advocates whether there was objective evidence  about  the
    language within the education system  in  the  Gorani  region.  Neither
    advocate could refer to anything directly in the objective evidence.  I
    referred to the  appellant's  partner's  witness  statement  where  his
    evidence was that the appellant does not speak Albanian to the required
    level. I  indicated  that  this  suggests  that  she  does  speak  some
    Albanian. Mr Howard submitted that her evidence  is  that  she  doesn't
    speak any Albanian but clearly she doesn't speak fluent Albanian in any
    event.

Discussion

27. I have considered the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of  International
    Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006  in  deciding  whether  the
    appellant is a refugee under the 1951 Geneva Convention.  I  have  also
    applied paragraph 339C of the immigration  rules  HC  395  to  consider
    whether the appellant is in need of humanitarian protection as being at
    a real risk of serious harm. Finally, I have considered whether the  UK
    would be in breach of its obligations under the provisions of the ECHR.
    The burden of proof is upon the appellant to show to  the  standard  of
    reasonable degree of likelihood or substantial  grounds  for  believing
    there is a real risk of serious harm on return to Albania for a Refugee
    Convention reason or alternatively so as to entitle her to humanitarian
    protection or protection under article 3 of ECHR.

28. I have considered all the background materials submitted including  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, the bundle submitted  for  the
    Upper Tribunal hearing and the two documents produced on the day of the
    hearing.

29. It is submitted that the appellant is a member of a  particular  social
    group, namely an unmarried Gorani woman who has two children  born  out
    of wedlock. As set out above  Mr  Howard  could  not  take  me  to  any
    objective evidence to demonstrate that the Gorani are persecuted  as  a
    result of their ethnicity. It is essentially a  broad  submission  that
    women generally are so  disadvantaged  under  the  system  applying  in
    Albania that  they  form  a  particular  social  group  and  that  this
    particular  appellant  with  the  additional   characteristic   (having
    children born out of wedlock) was entitled to be so  regarded  for  the
    purposes of her claim. Given my findings below I do not need to make  a
    finding as to whether or not the appellant is a member of a  particular
    social group for the purpose of the Refugee Convention. The appellant's
    claim is to fear persecution as a result of domestic  violence  at  the
    hands of her father. As this is an action by an individual  who  cannot
    be regarded as an  agent  of  the  state  for  these  purposes,  it  is
    important to  consider  whether  the  state  offers  a  sufficiency  of
    protection against this sort of conduct. The appellant did not seek the
    protection of the authorities in Albania.

30. The appellant's Gorani ethnicity is relevant to the background position
    in Albania. I have taken her ethnicity into consideration  with  regard
    to the cultural influences and social norms in the society within which
    she lived in Albania and also with regard to her ability to re-locate.

31. The question is whether or not she would be at  risk  either  from  her
    family or as a lone woman with two children  born  out  of  wedlock  on
    return to her home area in the Gorani region. If she would be  at  risk
    of persecution in her home area could she re-locate to another area  of
    Albania without risk of persecution? If internal  relocation  to  avoid
    risk from domestic violence is possible, would it on the facts  of  the
    case, be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to do so.

32. Although the appellant seeks to rely on aspects of the findings  in  TD
    and AD I am not persuaded that it is of relevance to the extent  relied
    upon. The appellant has never been a victim of trafficking and has  not
    been a prostitute. I consider below the submission that  she  might  be
    vulnerable and targeted by traffickers. I do accept that  the  findings
    in TD and AD with regard to the general position for  vulnerable  women
    in Albania is relevant.

33. In TD and AD the Upper Tribunal considered  the  situation  in  Albania
    generally. This  is  however  from  the  perspective  of  a  victim  of
    trafficking. The Upper Tribunal considered:

         "Life Outside the Shelters

         105. It was the consistent evidence of the IOM, the UNP, the  Needs
             Assessment, Mr Chenciner, Professor Haxhiymeri and Ms  Mullan-
             Feroze that once admitted to a shelter, a VOT will  be  aware
             that it is time limited. No VOT entering a shelter is given an
             exit date, but her departure date is determined  following  an
             assessment. We are not told to what  the degree  it  will  be
             influenced by her own wishes. There is a  'maximum  spend'  in
             each case of �2100, which is to cover the stay in the  shelter
             as well as reintegration 'on the outside': all VOTs are  aware
             that they cannot be accommodated and  supported  indefinitely.
             At some point, the VOT must either return to  her  family,  or
             set out on her own if that option is not available, and it  is
             in this latter endeavour, the parties agree,  that  she  would
             face her greatest challenge.

         106. All of the evidence before us indicates that  in  this  period
             women face numerous  obstacles,  that  include,  but  are  not
             limited to: financial hardship, difficulty in  finding  secure
             employment and housing,  poverty,  discrimination  and  stigma
             (pertaining to the VOT as  well  as  any  children  she  might
             have), isolation and no, or  severely  restricted,  access  to
             mental health services. As will be seen below it is argued  on
             behalf of the appellants that the cumulative  effect  of  such
             factors renders internal flight as unreasonable for many VOTs;
             it is further argued that the vulnerability of a VOT  at  this
             point  places  her  at  an  unacceptably  high  risk  of   re-
             trafficking or other harm.

         107. We do not accept that it is, in general,  "impossible"  for  a
             woman to live on her own in Tirana, as asserted  by  Professor
             Haxhiymeri. She refers in her evidence to her own organisation
             resettling survivors of domestic violence in the city,  living
             alone or with their children. The  case  studies  in  the  UNP
             report reveal that  five  of  the  eight  women  entered  into
             employment after leaving the shelter, and of these three  were
             living apart from family members,  for  instance  'T'  who  is
             paying her own rent, working for a private employer as a  chef
             and who describes herself as "confident and highly skilful".

         108. Such women have been able to live alone in Tirana;  women  who
             have been able to put the skills they  have  acquired  in  the
             shelters to good use,  and  even  to  flourish  in their  new
             vocations. For these women, there will  be  a  meaningful  net
             gain from packages such as that offered by the IOM: the skills
             they have developed, sometimes with the support of a  loan  or
             grant, has given them economic security  and  the  ability  to
             survive away from their families.

         109. For less resilient or adaptable women however,  the  path  to
             financial independence is not  so  straightforward.  Professor
             Haxhiymeri describes the assistance offered by  the  shelters,
             the Albanian  government  or  the  IOM  as  "superficial"  and
             stressed that such training packages rarely help women in  the
             long run. The problem she identifies is that women in  Albania
             tend to find work in the low-skilled,  informal  sector  where
             employment is not secure or protected, and where wages  rarely
             keep up with the costs of living: this is the  "grey  economy"
             discussed in AM & BM[8].  All  of  the  evidence  supports  a
             finding that the financial constraints make  survival  in  the
             cities difficult: we accept Professor Haxhiymeri's evidence of
             her personal experience of trying to  find  accommodation  for
             survivors of domestic violence. Workers at her  NGO  typically
             find that the cost of basic accommodation in Tirana,  even  in
             the outskirts, is E200 per month whereas a woman  working  in
             those conditions will typically earn no more  than  E150.  The
             respondents to the research consistently reported that  it  is
             "very difficult"  to  live  alone  because  of  the  financial
             constraints women face, in particular in staying in employment
             and in paying rent. The UNP report confirms that there  is  no
             provision for VOTs to have access to social housing, and  that
             they are therefore forced to rent in the private  sector.  The
             high unemployment rate means that people are  forced  to  take
             "any kind of job". The Needs Assessment succinctly  summarises
             this situation: "most victims are returning to the same place,
             facing the same  problems  that  they  had  before  they  were
             trafficked". The difference now being that they must face such
             daily grind whilst living with the physical, psychological and
             social consequences of that experience.

         110. At paragraphs 147-151 of AM & BM, the Tribunal considered the
             evidence of Dr Agnew-Davies in respect  of  the  psychological
             effects of  trafficking.  We  adopt  and  underline  the  view
             expressed in that case that in all claims it is  important  to
             consider the circumstances of the  individual,  including  her
             strength, age, and psychological make-up. For  VOTs  who  have
             been through extreme traumatic experiences it is not difficult
             to  see  how  they  are   likely   to   suffer   psychological
             consequences such as complex PTSD. The VOT may suffer  lasting
             physical damage as a result  of  her  experiences.  These  are
             important factors which  must  be  considered  when  assessing
             whether internal flight is reasonable for any individual  VOT.
             Whilst the evidence relating to psychological support services
             for VOTs once  they  have  left  the  shelters  suggests  some
             availability, that it is undoubtedly patchy and in many  cases
             wholly inadequate as we have observed  above.  An  individual,
             because of her condition, may have difficulty in accessing  or
             engaging with such services that do exist. She may be required
             to pay  for  mental  health  care,  increasing  her  financial
             burden. These are all matters relevant to the consideration of
             whether internal flight is reasonably available."

34. Life for a single woman in Albania is difficult and with children  born
    out of wedlock and a woman suffering from depression it  will  be  even
    more so. It is evident from  the  objective  background  material  that
    violence against women is a continuing and serious problem in  Albania.
    Background material  demonstrates  that  domestic  violence  is  deeply
    rooted in patriarchal traditions and  customs  such  as  strict  gender
    identities and roles, patriarchal authority, adherence to an honour-and-
    shame system, and customs of hierarchal ordering with the family.  This
    is particularly so  in  the  Northern  (including  the  Gorani  region)
    regions from whence the appellant lived with her family. The  appellant
    asserts that she could not return to  her  home  area.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal judge accepted that her father had  beaten  her.  It  was  not
    accepted that he had tried to kill her or that she was at risk of being
    killed by him or her uncles.

35. In March 2012 Albania amended the Criminal Code in order to criminalise
    domestic violence and prescribed a punishment  of  up  to  five  years'
    imprisonment. Although the appropriate legislation is now in place, its
    implementation is not fully effective. However, significant numbers  of
    prosecutions and protection/restraining orders have been  made  by  the
    courts. Various reports state that the  government  is  making  greater
    efforts to address the problem but noted that police often did not have
    the training or capacity to deal  effectively  with  domestic  violence
    cases and the number of women victims who benefit from free  legal  aid
    is small compared with the need.

36. The Amnesty international 'Amnesty report 2015/16: Albania, 25 February
    2016' reports:

         'Violence against women and girls

         State police reported 1,696 cases of family violence in  the  first
         six months of the year, giving  rise  to  993  requests  for  civil
         protection orders. Of 406  requests  submitted  to  courts  in  the
         capital Tirana between January and August  only  118  were  granted
         with 251 applicants withdrawing their application or not  attending
         court due to pressures from their abusers  or  family  members,  In
         Tirana between January and June defendants were convicted of family
         violence in 185 out of 190 prosecutions; most had pleaded guilty.'

37. Much  of  the  evidence  available  reports  the  situation  similarly.
    However, there are shortcomings in very  many  countries  or  parts  of
    countries where state protection is not always  effective.  In  Albania
    there  are  undoubtedly  shortcomings  in  the  effectiveness  of   the
    implementation of the legal regime. The shortcomings in  the  effective
    operation of the law are not such as to  diminish  the  sufficiency  of
    protection to a level where it can be said that the law has  no  effect
    and  is  not  enforced.  Clearly  civil  protection  orders  are  made,
    prosecutions are initiated and the courts are convicting  perpetrators.
    In DM (Sufficiency of protection-PSG -Women-Domestic violence)  Albania
    CG (2004) UKIAT 00059, the Tribunal considered the position of women in
    Albania generally at some length and concluded that a woman  who  could
    not get police help in respect of threats from her former boyfriend was
    not part of a  social  group  and  that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    protection by the state. The Upper Tribunal concluded:

         "18  For all those reasons, even if the conduct on the part of  the
             former boyfriend amounted potentially to  persecution,  we  do
             not  consider  that  there  was  a  lack  of  sufficiency   of
             protection in the state so that again, for  that  reason,  the
             respondent would not be entitled to the protection  either  of
             the  Refugee  Convention  or  Article  3   of   the   European
             Convention."

38. There are a number of  state  run  shelters  for  victims  of  domestic
    violence. There are shelters available in Berat, Elbasan, Korca, Tirana
    and Vlora for victims of domestic violence. A court order  is  required
    in order to obtain entry to a state shelter.  There  are  a  number  of
    nongovernmental organisations in Albania who are actively  involved  in
    domestic violence issues, including operating shelters for victims  and
    who can potentially assist victims to  obtain  the  protection  of  the
    authorities. The NGO shelters are said to be  more  flexible  than  the
    national shelters and can  accommodate  victims  without  a  protection
    order if the victim 'denounces' the domestic violence  and  starts  the
    process of obtaining a protection order. Many of the NGO shelters offer
    counselling or psychological support to victims, or refer the women  to
    other organisations that can offer psychological support and there  may
    be some opportunities for women to participate in  employment  training
    although it is acknowledged that this is very limited.

39. Despite the appellant's assertions  that  she  was  at  risk  from  her
    family, the appellant lived with her new  born  child  in  Albania  for
    nearly two years in a storeroom attached to the  family  property.  The
    appellant's father and mother were aware of her  presence.  Her  mother
    boiled milk and left it for her. Although the  appellant  asserts  that
    she had to keep herself locked away from her father, she did not suffer
    further violence during that 2-year period despite  living  within  his
    home. Further, despite her assertions that there was no-one to turn to,
    the appellant sought assistance from  a  local  neighbour  (Lifka)  who
    often allowed her and her child to stay with her when it was cold.  The
    neighbour gave her food and a warm room to sleep in.  She looked  after
    the appellant's daughter whilst the appellant picked berries  and  when
    the appellant washed the baby's nappies. Lifka sold the berries for the
    appellant. She was given nappies by the hospital and was assisted by  a
    doctor there in obtaining passports.

40. Whilst it is accepted that the appellant was only educated to  the  age
    of 12 it is clear that she is resourceful and  has  managed  to  obtain
    assistance despite having a young child born out of wedlock. During her
    time in Albania she changed her name to the name of her child's father,
    and convinced a man to obtain and provide  her  with  an  ID  card  (in
    2009). She obtained passports for herself and her daughter  (in  2010).
    In 2011 she walked to Kosovo with her daughter, hired a private minibus
    and then caught a bus to Prishtina.  She  obtained  the  assistance  of
    strangers who found someone to smuggle her into the UK. After  arriving
    in the UK she managed to contact the father of her child (who had  over
    2 years earlier abandoned her having put the phone down on her when she
    told him she was pregnant, had not answered any  of  her  calls  during
    that time so had not spoken to  her  for  over  2  years).  Whilst  the
    journey to the UK may well be characterised as demonstrating  that  she
    was desperate to escape from her life in Albania the  totality  of  the
    evidence demonstrates that she was neither friendless  in  Albania  nor
    lacking in the resourcefulness and ability to  obtain  assistance.  She
    clearly had a considerable degree of resilience.  The  appellant's  own
    evidence contrasts with her assertions today that she has nowhere  that
    she could go where she could remain alive  and  that  she  is  at  risk
    everywhere in Albania.

41. If the appellant returned to the Gorani region (her home area) I do not
    consider that she would be at risk now from domestic violence from  her
    father. If he did not subject her to domestic violence in the two years
    that she was living in such close proximity I find it unlikely that  he
    would do so now. If I am wrong in that, overall it is clear that  there
    are mechanisms for  protection  by  the  state  authorities  and  legal
    remedies available for women fearing domestic violence. There are  also
    support facilities and shelters available. The appellant did  not  seek
    the protection of the authorities in Albania and neither did  she  seek
    to re-locate to another area of Albania (either within the Gora  region
    or elsewhere). I appreciate that she might face discrimination  as  she
    has two children born out of wedlock.  However,  the  evidence  of  the
    level of discrimination is not such as to amount to persecution.

42. If the appellant could not return to her home area I consider  that  it
    would not be unduly harsh for the appellant  to  re-locate  to  another
    area of Albania.

43. In TD and AD the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 111 found:

         "As to the social consequences of a past trafficking experience  we
         note the findings in AM  &  BM  about  social  exclusion  of  women
         labelled as kurva, in the  context  of  the  tenacity  of  Northern
         Albanian  traditions.  It  might  be  thought  that  the  increased
         migration from the countryside  to  the  cities  might  lead  to  a
         weakening in such belief systems, as extended  families  leave  the
         land  and  break  down  into  smaller,  more   independent   units.
         Surprisingly we were shown no evidence to that effect, and in  fact
         it was suggested by Professor  Haxhiymeri  that  such  migration  -
         primarily from North to South - has had  the  opposite  effect,  of
         transporting conservative Geg social mores into  the  more  liberal
         south. The importance of the family unit as a social  and  economic
         construct was emphasised in all the evidence before us.  We  accept
         her evidence  that  women  living  on  their  own  are  immediately
         identifiable as being on the 'outside';  even  if  the  details  of
         their history are not known, work  colleagues  and  neighbours  may
         view them with some suspicion. In some cases  that  suspicion  will
         escalate to open prejudice and  hostility.  We  therefore  find  no
         reason to depart from the general conclusions on this matter  drawn
         by the Tribunal in AM & BM. Women living on their own are likely to
         be socially distinct. Whilst discrimination  and  stigma  certainly
         exist they will not generally constitute persecutory "serious harm"
         or breach Article 3, but  this  it  nevertheless  a  factor  to  be
         considered cumulatively when assessing whether internal  flight  is
         reasonable for any given appellant."

44. The appellant travelled to the UK with no knowledge of the language  or
    culture. She had no indication that her now partner would assist her or
    that she would be even able to contact him. Her evidence  was  that  he
    put the  phone  down  on  her  when  she  told  him  she  was  pregnant
    effectively abandoning her  to  her  fate  in  Albania.  On  subsequent
    occasions when she tried to contact him he did not answer the phone  to
    her. There was no contact between them for over two years.

45. The appellant deserves credit for her efforts to integrate in  the  UK.
    Since arriving in the UK she has  undertaken  courses  in  written  and
    spoken English. She has studied city  and  guilds  foundational  skills
    courses in maths and English. Although she could not speak English  she
    has taken the initiative and has attended a children's  centre  sharing
    her culture and learning  about  others'  cultures  thereby  developing
    friendships. She volunteers to assist in the children's centre  and  is
    working towards her own future with training and  classes  with  future
    employment in mind (see various references and letters of support).

46. Although she asserts that she speaks no Albanian her partner's evidence
    was that she does not speak it to the required level. I accept that she
    does not speak fluent Albanian and  that  there  would  be  a  language
    barrier if she were to re-locate to another area outside  of  the  Gora
    region. She is currently learning English. There is nothing to  suggest
    that she  could  not  learn  to  speak  Albanian  fluently.  Employment
    prospects are not very positive for the appellant as educated  only  to
    the age of 12 and with two young children but the training that she has
    undertaken  in  the  UK  and  the  educational  courses  attended  will
    potentially benefit her in Albania. She  is  currently  suffering  from
    depression. She indicated that she is experiencing recurrent  thoughts,
    memories and nightmares and that she is felling fearful  and  low.  She
    has indicated that there was no risk of harm to herself or others.  She
    has  been  referred  for  cognitive  behaviour  therapy  and  has  been
    prescribed medication. The appellant did not submit that there were  no
    medical facilities for the treatment of depression.

47. In MK (Lesbians) Albania CG [2009] UKAIT 00036 the Tribunal  held  that
    it cannot be said that without more there is a real risk that  a  woman
    without family support in Albania would suffer destitution amounting to
    inhuman or degrading treatment resulting in  a  breach  of  her  rights
    under article 3 of the ECHR or persecution. The Upper Tribunal found:

         "378.    In our view taking account of the totality of the evidence
         before us it cannot be said that there is a real risk that a  woman
         without  family  support  in  Albania  would   suffer   destitution
         amounting to inhuman or degrading treatment resulting in  a  breach
         of her rights under article 3 of the ECHR or persecution ...

         427. The real issue for us to  decide,  therefore,  is  whether  on
         account of not being able  to  return  to  her  parents'  home  and
         because of her  psychological  condition  the  appellant  would  be
         unable to fend for herself adequately in Albania so as to lead to a
         situation where she would suffer serious harm."

48. As set out above the appellant has  demonstrated  a  not  insignificant
    degree  of  resilience,  resourcefulness  and  adaptability.  There  is
    nothing to suggest that the  appellant's  partner  cannot  support  her
    financially - Mr Howard did not indicate such in response to Mr Duffy's
    submission. He can visit the  appellant  in  Albania.  Although  living
    conditions may be very difficult the evidence  on  the  facts  of  this
    appellant's case do  not  indicate  that  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that she will suffer from persecution or that  it  would  be
    unduly harsh for her to re-locate to another area of  Albania  or  that
    she  would  suffer  destitution  amounting  to  inhuman  or   degrading
    treatment resulting in a breach of her rights under article  3  of  the
    ECHR.

49. The appellant is not a  victim  of  trafficking.  She  has  never  been
    trafficked and has never been a prostitute. It was submitted  that  she
    might be likely to be a target  as  a  vulnerable  lone  woman  with  2
    children born out of wedlock and  given  that  she  is  suffering  from
    depression.

50. In TD and AD the Upper Tribunal (paragraph 152) noted:

         "We bear in mind Mr Whitwell's point that the target age group  for
         traffickers is late  teens/early  twenties,  and  that  this  would
         reduce the risk presented to the first appellant ..."

51. At paragraph 112 the Upper Tribunal considered:

         "It is against this background that all of the witnesses,  and  the
         civil  society  respondents  to  the  UNP  Report  and  the   Needs
         Assessment, expressed concern about the  risk  of  VOTs  being  re-
         trafficked during this critical phase of  their  reintegration.  We
         share this concern. Women who are socially isolated  and  suffering
         from  the  consequences  of  their  past  experiences  are  already
         vulnerable; where they are placed under the  additional  strain  of
         financial hardship this can render them even  more  susceptible  to
         the advances of those who would  seek  to  exploit  them.  The  UNP
         report cites an NCATS audit in which it is acknowledged that 18% of
         the cases referred in the reporting period - a total of 16 women  -
         had previously been trafficked and had been through the shelters at
         least once already. The same is said of two of the eight women  who
         constituted the case-studies in the UNP report. It  must  therefore
         be the case that for some women, the period after  they  leave  the
         shelters  can  be  risky.  Whether  an  individual  appellant   can
         demonstrate that she faces such a real risk must be  determined  on
         the facts, having regard to  her  personal  circumstances  and  her
         age."

52. The appellant is 27 years of age. She was not targeted  previously.  As
    set out above she managed to survive for two years in  Albania  with  a
    young child obtaining some, albeit limited,  resources  and  assistance
    when necessary. She was much younger then. She is beyond the target age
    group now. There are some support systems in  Albania  for  victims  of
    domestic violence. She is  suffering  from  depression  but  can  avail
    herself of treatment. It is very likely that she would  have  financial
    assistance from her partner. There  is  work  available  for  unskilled
    workers in Albania although it is very poorly paid. I do  not  consider
    on the facts of this appellant's case that her situation is  such  that
    she  is  likely  to  be  targeted  and  lured   into   trafficking   or
    prostitution.

Decision

The appellant has not discharged the burden upon her to the  standard  of  a
reasonable degree of likelihood or substantial grounds for  believing  there
is a real  risk  of  serious  harm  on  return  to  Albania  for  a  Refugee
Convention reason or alternatively so as  to  entitle  her  to  humanitarian
protection or  that  her  living  conditions  would  amount  to  inhuman  or
degrading treatment resulting in a breach of her rights under article  3  of
the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal is  dismissed.  The  Secretary  of  State's  decision
stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw
Date 22 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


Annex

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06318/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2015                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                     GH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, solicitor of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. In this appeal, the appellant appeals against a decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  a  decision  taken  on  14
    August 2014 to refuse to grant her asylum.

Background Facts

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on  29  March  1989.
    She applied for asylum under the Immigration Rules HC395 (as  amended).
    That application was refused because the Secretary  of  State  did  not
    believe that the appellant's father threatened to kill her or that  she
    would be at risk from her family on return to Albania. The Secretary of
    State also considered that it was reasonable to expect the appellant to
    relocate  within  Albania  if  she  were  to  encounter  problems.  The
    Secretary of State granted the appellant leave to remain for 30  months
    on Article 8 grounds.

The Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision of 29
    May 2015, Judge Flynn ('the judge') dismissed the  appellant's  appeal.
    The judge did not accept the appellant's account that  her  father  had
    tried to kill her or threatened to do so. The judge did not accept that
    the appellant had given a credible account and found that the appellant
    had not shown that she had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  When
    considering whether or not the appellant  was  at  risk  on  return  to
    Albania, the judge set out that the  only  issue  was  whether,  as  an
    unmarried mother of two young children, she would be at risk. The judge
    found that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  available  to  the
    appellant from the authorities and that if she did not  return  to  the
    family home that there are  shelters  for  women  which  could  provide
    safety. The judge also found that she was not in need  of  humanitarian
    protection and also  dismissed  the  appeal  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   The
    grounds of appeal, in essence,  assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge mis-directed himself regarding the issues to be addressed, failed
    to address the appellant's vulnerability, gave inadequate  reasons  for
    findings and made contradictory findings, failed to consider adequately
    the background material and apply country guidance  and  ought  not  to
    have considered Article 3.

 6. On 23 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal. Thus, the appeal came before me.

 7. I heard submissions form Mr Howard on behalf of the  appellant  and  Mr
    Bramble on behalf of the Secretary of State. I reserved my decision  at
    the end of the hearing.

Summary of Submissions and Discussion

 8. There are 8 grounds of appeal. I have not dealt with them in the  order
    in which they were pleaded. I have dealt with the most  straightforward
    issues first.

Ground 7 - consideration of Human Rights  Grounds  on  a  section  33  (sic)
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act')

 9. The grounds assert that it was wrong for the judge to make findings  in
    relation to Article 3. The grounds refer to paragraph 7 of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's  decision  wherein  the  judge  notes  the  appellant's
    representative's assertion that 'this was solely  a  Section  33  (sic)
    appeal'.

10. The Secretary of State has granted 30  months  discretionary  leave  to
    remain to the appellant. The appeal was made under section  83  of  the
    2002 which restricts an appeal to an appeal against  the  rejection  of
    the asylum claim  only.  Therefore,  the  judge  erred  in  considering
    Article 3. However this is not material to the outcome of the appeal.

Ground 5 - Contradictory findings

11. The grounds assert that at paragraph 70 of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision the  judge  accepts  that  there  is  societal  discrimination
    against unmarried mothers but at paragraph 73 contends that there is no
    evidence to show that unmarried mothers face a risk of  persecution  as
    members of a particular social group.

12. Mr Bramble submitted that the two paragraphs were not contradictory. It
    was not suggested that the level of discrimination meets the  level  to
    amount to persecution.

13. I do not accept that the  findings  of  the  judge  are  contradictory.
    Discrimination does not equate to persecution.

Ground 4 - Basis of judicial findings

14. The grounds assert that at paragraph 64 the judge states that:

         "... I have reached my findings almost entirely on the basis of her
         evidence, not her behaviour ..."

15. It is asserted that  the  judge  failed  to  explain,  apart  from  the
    appellant's evidence, as to what basis the judge has made findings.

16. Mr Bramble  submitted  that  the  judge's  reference  to  behaviour  at
    paragraph 64 is clearly in relation to the  behaviour  in  delaying  in
    applying for asylum. The structure of the preceding paragraphs makes it
    clear that the behaviour is a  reference  to  the  issues  set  out  in
    paragraphs 62 - 63.

17. I agree with Mr Bramble's submissions. The comment at paragraph 64 must
    be read in light of the preceding paragraphs. At paragraph 62 the judge
    makes an overall finding on the credibility of the appellant. The judge
    then refers to the long delay in the appellant  making  her  claim  for
    asylum and the Secretary of State's assertion  that  this  damaged  her
    credibility. At paragraph 63 the  judge  sets  out  the  countervailing
    factors raised by the appellant and assesses those factors finding that
    it was reasonably likely that the appellant felt unwell on  arrival  in
    the UK but that the medical evidence  did  not  support  her  claim  of
    depression until late 2014. The judge then concludes  at  paragraph  64
    that he agrees  with  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  appellant's
    behaviour has caused a degree of damage to her credibility but that  he
    reached his findings almost entirely on the basis of her  evidence  not
    her behaviour. It is clear that  the  behaviour  referred  to  was  the
    making of a late claim and that although the judge had taken this  into
    consideration  his  findings  on  credibility  were  not  significantly
    influenced by the fact of the late claim for asylum. It is  clear  that
    the basis of the judge's finding  on  credibility  were  based  on  the
    evidence and the conclusions reached on that evidence as set  out  from
    paragraph 53 of the decision.

Ground 2 - Failure to address the appellant's vulnerability

18. It is asserted that at paragraph 2 of the decision the judge noted that
    the appellant stated that she did  not  speak  Albanian  and  would  be
    extremely vulnerable. The grounds assert that at paragraph  52  of  the
    decision the judge notes that submissions were made about the appellant
    having been traumatised and at paragraph 63 the judge notes the  medial
    evidence supporting  the  appellant's  contention  of  depression.   At
    paragraph 70 of the determination the judge accepted that the appellant
    had suffered violence from her father. It is contended that  the  judge
    did not adequately consider the vulnerability  of  the  appellant  when
    assessing her general credibility. Reliance is  placed  on  the  'Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010; Child,  vulnerable  adult  and
    sensitive appellant guidance'. Reference is made to paragraphs  14,  15
    and 19 of that guidance. Mr Howard  submitted  that  in  light  of  the
    judge's findings he was required to make a finding  as  to  whether  he
    finds the appellant to be a vulnerable witness and when  assessing  her
    credibility to record how he assessed the  evidence  in  light  of  her
    vulnerability.

19. Mr Bramble submitted that the  extract  from  the  guidance  refers  to
    discrepancies in oral evidence. At paragraph 55  of  the  decision  the
    judge says that he has listened carefully to the  evidence.  There  are
    numerous inconsistencies. At paragraphs 56-59 the judge is not directly
    referring to discrepancies. He was looking at facts  from  the  witness
    statement and interview and the judge quite rightly expresses  concerns
    about the evidence overall. At paragraph 60 the findings  likewise  was
    not based on oral evidence. The question is the core of the  story  and
    its credibility. The judge found against the appellant overall not just
    from the oral evidence. The grounds are merely an  attempt  to  de-rail
    the findings made by the judge that he was entitled to make.

20. Whilst the judge has not recorded whether or not he considers that  the
    appellant is a vulnerable witness, if the judge did not  consider  that
    the appellant was particularly vulnerable there is no need to  make  or
    record such a finding. The reference in  paragraph  2  of  the  judge's
    decision is merely a recitation of the witness's assertions and further
    it is a reference to an assertion of vulnerability on return to Albania
    not vulnerability as a witness.

21. The judge considered that there were numerous  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence comparing what  was  said  in  her  interview,  in  her  first
    statement and oral evidence at the hearing. The judge  also  considered
    the general credibility of the appellant's assertions and did not  make
    his  credibility  findings  based  solely  on  inconsistencies   and/or
    discrepancies. For example at paragraph 56 the  judge  considered  that
    even if the first statement contained an error  (thereby  ignoring  the
    discrepancy) he did not find it credible that the appellant could  have
    remained in the family home for two  years  without  her  father  being
    aware of this.  There  were  very  many  discrepancies  throughout  all
    aspects of the appellant's claim.

22. In this case the account was inherently  lacking  in  credibility.  The
    appellant's core claim is that she escaped from Albania because she was
    at risk of being killed by her father and uncles. She  claims  to  have
    lived for nearly two years in the family home in a store room with  her
    very young baby/toddler. She asserted that she manged to bar  the  door
    to her father in her first statement, in her asylum interview that  her
    father knew she had the baby there and threatened the baby and then  at
    the hearing, in oral evidence, she asserted that  her  father  was  not
    aware of her presence.

23. If her father was aware of her and her baby's  presence  in  the  store
    room for nearly two years the claim that she is at risk of being killed
    by him lacks credibility. It is equally lacking in credibility that her
    father would not have been aware that  she  and  her  young  baby  were
    living there for such  a  lengthy  period.  It  is  unlikely  that  any
    vulnerability of the appellant would be able  to  provide  explain  her
    differing recollections. I do not consider that the First-tier Tribunal
    judge erred in making  the  findings  on  the  appellant's  credibility
    notwithstanding any vulnerability. He was entitled to rely on the stark
    inconsistencies in, and difficulties with,  the  appellant's  evidence.
    Therefore, even if  the  appellant  was  a  vulnerable  witness  it  is
    unlikely to have made a material difference given the implausibility of
    so many elements of the appellant's claim.

Ground 3 - inadequate reasoning

24. The grounds provide several examples of instances where  the  judge  is
    said to have failed to give adequate reasons for his findings.

25. Mr Bramble submitted that the grounds amount to a disagreement with the
    judge's findings. The judge has at each point given clear  reasons  for
    credibility findings and has explained this.

26. I consider that the grounds, in essence,  have  picked  bits  here  and
    there from the decision out of context ignoring  the  overall  findings
    and conclusions. As set out by the Upper Tribunal in the  case  of  VHR
    (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica UKUT 00367 (IAC) in the headnote and at
    paragraphs 7 and 8:

         'Appeals should not be mounted on the basis of a litany of forensic
         criticisms of particular  findings  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
         whilst ignoring the basic legal test which  the  appellant  has  to
         meet.

         ...

         [7]  In our judgement, the problem with Mr Chelvan's  approach  and
         this appeal is that he has sought to comb through the  judgment  as
         if it was a statute and pick bits here and  there  out  of  context
         whilst ignoring the  overall  findings  of  the  Determination  and
         Reasons and the conclusions.

         [8]  ... It  is  not  necessary  for  judges  to  record,  analyse,
         rehearse and repeat the entire interstices of the evidence ...'

27. I do not intend to go through each of the examples cited.  I  take  the
    second  example.  It  is  asserted  that  at  paragraph   59   of   the
    determination the judge accepts that the appellant's  father  may  have
    beaten her several times but does not  accept  that  it  is  reasonably
    likely that he tried to kill her. It is contended that  the  judge  has
    given inadequate reasoning for this finding.

28. Even within paragraph 59 the judge provides reasons. He states:

         "I find it incredible that, if he had wanted to  kill  her  or  the
         baby, he could not have managed this during the period of more than
         one year when she remained within the family property"

29. Further numerous inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence were noted
    throughout the decision that cast doubt on her  father's  intention  to
    kill her. For example, the judge  records  at  paragraph  55  that  the
    appellant stated in her first statement that she stayed in a  storeroom
    and barred the door against her father, then in oral evidence said that
    her father did not know where she was hiding and  further  at  para  57
    records that the appellant said an elderly woman in the  village  often
    let her and her daughter stay with her but in interview said that  once
    one person in the village knows about it everyone knows.  At  paragraph
    56 the judge records  that  he  did  not  find  it  credible  that  the
    appellant could have remained in the family home for around  two  years
    without her father being fully aware of this.  These  are  all  reasons
    leading to the final conclusion in paragraph 59.

Grounds 1, 6 and 8 - Misdirection as to the issues to be addressed,  Failure
to adequately consider background material  and  failure  to  apply  country
guidance

30. These grounds are interrelated because if the judge  did  not  consider
    the correct issues this may have an impact  on  an  assessment  of  the
    relevant  background  material  and  the  application  of  the  Country
    Guidance cases.

31. It is set out in the grounds that the  judge  states  at  paragraph  66
    that;

         "The only issue is whether the appellant would be at risk on return
         to Albania as an unmarried mother of two young children ..."

32. Mr Howard submitted  that  the  judge  has  not  addressed  the  issues
    appropriately. He referred to paragraph 2 where the judge records  that
    the appellant's evidence was that she would be vulnerable. At paragraph
    11 her evidence was that she would be taken again for prostitution. The
    judge recorded the submission made at paragraph 52  regarding  risk  of
    being trafficked. The judge was asked to consider whether the appellant
    was a member of a particular social group as a single lone Gorani women
    with two children out of wedlock at risk of being trafficked or  forced
    into prostitution.

33. Mr Bramble accepted that it was hard to argue against the  grounds  set
    out in ground one. The judge had found that  there  are  other  factors
    beyond just being an unmarried mother of young children.  There  is  an
    acceptance that the appellant is Gorani so if required to relocate this
    must be taken into consideration. It was accepted by the judge that the
    appellant suffered from violence.  Grounds  6  and  8  do  fall  to  be
    considered with the first ground so it is arguable that the  judge  has
    not looked at all factors. Mr Bramble submitted that  the  grounds  had
    taken extracts from the case law but the highlighted paragraphs have to
    be read in  light  of  the  whole  paragraph.  The  appellant  has  not
    previously been trafficked so the paragraph relied on  in  the  Country
    Guidance case of AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80
    (IAC) does not apply to her.

34. I consider that in this case there were other factors  in  addition  to
    the appellant's status as a single unmarried mother. The judge accepted
    that the appellant had been subject to domestic violence at  the  hands
    of her father, that she was from the Gorani region and  that  she  does
    not speak Albanian.

35. I  consider  that  the  judge  did  fail  to  consider  sufficiency  of
    protection and/or relocation in light of all the appellant's individual
    circumstances. Had the judge considered the  background  materials  and
    country guidance in light of those additional factors  the  outcome  of
    the appeal might have been different.

36. For the above reasons I find that there was a material error of law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision with regard to the correct  assessment
    of the risk on return of the appellant to Albania.

37.  I set-aside  the  decision  pursuant  to  paragraph  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

Re-Making the decision

38. Both representatives invited me to adjourn for a further hearing  if  I
    were to find a material error of law  particularly  because  a  Country
    Guidance case (TD; AD AA/04702/2014; AA/03726/2014), that is likely  to
    be of relevance, regarding risk on return is soon to be released.

39. I decided that I will adjourn for a further hearing to consider  solely
    the risk on return issue.

40. The following findings of fact are to be preserved from the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision:

          a. The appellant is from the Gorani region (paragraph 69)

          b. The appellant left school  at  around  12  years  old  without
             completing any qualifications (paragraph 69)

          c. Her family in Albania was not  rich  but  their  circumstances
             were relatively comfortable (paragraph 69)

          d.  The appellant is unmarried and has two children born  out  of
             wedlock (paragraph 66)

          e. The appellant suffered domestic violence at the hands  of  her
             father (paragraph 59)

          f. It is not reasonably likely that the appellant's father  tried
             to kill her or threatened to do so (paragraph 59)

          g. It is not reasonably likely that the appellant's  uncles  want
             to kill her  (paragraph 60)

          h. The appellant has never been a prostitute (Paragraph 66)

          i. The appellant has never been trafficked (paragraph 68)

          j.  The  appellant  suffered  from  depression  since  late  2014
             (paragraph 63)

Decision

41. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law.  I set aside that decision.

42. The appeal on the risk on return issue is to be considered at a further
    hearing.

FURTHER DIRECTIONS

1.   The appeal will be listed before Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Ramshaw
for a further 90 minute hearing at the  first  available  opportunity  after
the release of the Country Guidance case on Albania (TD;  AD  AA/04702/2014;
AA/03726/2014).

2.   Any evidence to be relied on that has not already been  filed  must  be
filed at least 14 days before the hearing and served on the other party.


Signed   P M Ramshaw
Date 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

