

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06639/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th January 2015                          |On 6th January 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                                     OAT
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Afzal - Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by OAT, a female citizen of Nigeria born 2nd November
    1969.  She appeals against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Crawford issued on 9th October 2014 dismissing on  asylum,  human
    rights and humanitarian  protection  grounds  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent made on 20th August 2014 to refuse to  grant
    asylum and to remove her from the United Kingdom.

 2. On 4th November 2014 Judge Pooler granted  permission  to  appeal.   He
    said:

         "3.  It is arguable that the judge failed to give adequate  reasons
             at [47] for his findings on proportionality.  His finding that
             the Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Immigration
             Rules  relating  to  private  and  family  life   is   however
             unchallenged and the Appellant will need to be  alive  to  the
             need to show a good arguable  case  for  the  grant  of  leave
             outside the Immigration Rules, following Gulshan (Article 8  -
             new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640.

           4. The judge considered internal relocation at [38] where he gave
             succinct reasons for finding that it would be  reasonable  for
             the Appellant to relocate.  It is unlikely  that  the  grounds
             relating to the  judge's  conclusions  on  the  asylum  appeal
             disclose a material error of law; but since permission  is  to
             be granted all grounds may be argued."

 3. It is submitted in the grounds seeking permission that  Judge  Crawford
    failed to give adequate reasons for his decision and  applied  "a  very
    high standard of proof".  In particular it is submitted that he did not
    deal properly with the delay by the Appellant in claiming asylum;  that
    he erred in failing to give more reasons for his findings  relative  to
    the Appellant's three children, his finding that their  best  interests
    are that they remain with their mother being inadequate; that he failed
    to give adequate reasons for his finding that removal of the  Appellant
    and her children would be proportionate.

 4.  At the hearing before me Mr Afzal made a further submission i.e.  that
    Judge Crawford failed to apply his  mind,  following  Gulshan,  to  the
    question of  whether  or  not  there  were  exceptional  or  compelling
    circumstances in this case which justified him dealing with Article  8.
    He submitted that in  the  absence  of  a  declaration  of  what  these
    exceptional /compelling circumstances were he ought not to have gone on
    to consider Article 8.  Mr  Afzal  criticised  the  reliance  by  Judge
    Crawford at paragraph 35 on the fact that the Appellant's  husband  had
    arranged travel tickets and accommodation in the USA for the  Appellant
    and her children and his conclusion that these arrangements would  have
    been expensive, making it unlikely that the Appellant's  husband  would
    have asked the Appellant to break off her holiday in the UK  four  days
    after her arrival in order to return to Nigeria for FGM to  be  carried
    out on her daughters. Mr Afzal said that everything in  that  paragraph
    was conjecture.  Judge Crawford could not possibly have known what  the
    flights etc. cost or what was in the minds of the family.  He made  the
    same submission with regard to the Appellant's claim that the pastor at
    her church had arranged for her children to start school only a week or
    two after they arrived in the UK but she  had  not  learned  about  the
    asylum process for several months after that.  With regard to the issue
    of internal relocation he said that people in Nigeria are recognised by
    their tribal origin.  The Appellant's family would track the  Appellant
    down.  The issue of female genital mutilation and the  threat  of  that
    happening to her and her daughters is out of her control.  He said that
    her son's arrival may be what prompted her to seek asylum.

 5. The position of Mr McVeety is that the Appellant had been in the UK for
    less than twelve months at the date of the hearing and  it  would  have
    been almost impossible for her to establish a  disproportionate  breach
    of her rights under Article 8.  He relied on the decision in Zoumbas  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  74   and  EV
    (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    EWCA Civ 874 .  With regard to the asylum claim he submitted that Judge
    Crawford had taken account of all the factors and evidence before  him.
    Mr McVeety questioned why the children would start school so soon after
    arriving in the UK on visit visas.  They were talking of going  to  the
    USA.  He submitted that the findings at paragraph 36 about the delay in
    claiming asylum are not perverse.  In considering  internal  relocation
    the Judge took into account the fact that the Appellant is an  educated
    woman.  Again he considered the evidence in the round.  He pointed  out
    that at the time of the hearing the Appellant's son had  only  been  in
    the UK for about four months.

Decision on Error of Law

 6. I have given careful consideration to all the  evidence  before  me  in
    this case.

 7. The determination of Judge Crawford is comprehensive and thorough.   He
    properly considered all aspects of the asylum claim.  It was  submitted
    by Mr Afzal that Judge Crawford had raised no issues of credibility but
    that is not so. Indeed he raised several such issues and concluded that
    the Appellant had fabricated her asylum claim. He  took  into  account,
    as he was entitled to do, that although she claimed to have spoken to a
    lawyer in November 2013 the Appellant did not claim asylum  until  10th
    April 2014.  Her son had arrived in the UK in March 2014.  He took  the
    view that she had deliberately waited until all her  children  were  in
    the UK before claiming asylum.  As  he  was  entitled  to  do  he  took
    account of the delay in claiming asylum in assessing  her  credibility.
    He was entitled  to question how people at the church were able to tell
    her how to enrol her children at a school  when  they  only  had  visit
    visas but did not tell her she could claim asylum despite her expressed
    fears that her daughters were at risk of FGM in Nigeria.  He noted that
    the Appellant had said repeatedly that FGM is carried out  on  children
    at the age of 10 years and 5 months and when she came to the UK on 16th
    August 2013 her daughter S was 10 years and 4 months old.  He took into
    account that the Appellant and her daughters had visit visas  for  both
    the UK and the USA and  although he may  have  made  some  presumptions
    about the costs of the proposed trip was entitled to take  these  plans
    into account in questioning whether or not her husband would phone  her
    as claimed telling  her  to  return  to  Nigeria,   especially  in  the
    circumstances that the family had lived in Nigeria for some time  after
    the death of the old head of the family without any talk of  the  girls
    being subjected to FGM.   With  regard  to  internal  relocation  again
    Judge Crawford thoroughly covered all the relevant  factors.   He  took
    into account the size and the large population in  Nigeria.   He  noted
    that the family obviously have money having travelled abroad to the  UK
    twice and to the USA.  He took into account  the  fact  that  both  the
    Appellant and her husband are educated adults  who  would  be  able  to
    obtain employment away from the immediate vicinity of the head  of  the
    family.  He took into account particularly  that  the  family  were  in
    Nigeria for some time after the death of the old head of the family and
    the installation of the new head but no attempt was made to  carry  out
    FGM on the girls.  I find no material error of law in the findings made
    by Judge Crawford relative to the asylum claim or that for humanitarian
    protection.

 8. I consider there to be no merit whatsoever in the submission  that  the
    Judge erred in proceeding to consider Article 8 without  first  finding
    compelling circumstances.  Judge Crawford could have  said  that  there
    were no compelling circumstances and  following  Gulshan,  declined  to
    deal at all with Article 8. Instead he chose to set out his view  which
    was that in all the circumstances removal  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    children would not give rise to a  disproportionate  interference  with
    their private or family lives. I do not see how this can  be  construed
    as a material error of  law  sufficient  to  vitiate  his  decision  on
    Article 8. I do not think that he  had  to  give  lengthy  reasons  for
    finding that it was in the best interests of the children  to  be  with
    their mother as this has been stated  frequently  by  this  and  higher
    courts.

Notice of Decision

The grounds disclose no material error of law and none is  apparent  on  the
face of the determination.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 5th January 2015.



N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

