
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06544/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 October 2017                     |On 12 January 2018                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                         mr abdul zahir ibrahimkhel
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Solomon, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, born in 1992.  He arrived in
    the UK in 2008 and claimed asylum.  Because of his  age  he  was  taken
    into the care of Kent Social Services.

 2. Although it appears that the earlier application for asylum was treated
    as withdrawn on 20 October 2008, the applicant made another application
    for asylum or the previous  one  was  reactivated.   In  any  event,  a
    decision was made on 26 March 2015  to  refuse  the  asylum  and  human
    rights claim.  The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart at a  hearing
    on 15 March 2017 which resulted in the appeal being  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

 3. I should also say that following an earlier appeal a  different  First-
    tier Judge also dismissed the appeal, but her decision  was  set  aside
    for error of law and the matter remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which resulted in the decision which is now challenged before me.

    The grounds and submissions

 4. I summarise the grounds and submissions.  The grounds contend that  the
    FtJ failed to apply the correct standard of proof, with  her  reasoning
    indicating that she had applied too high a standard of  proof.   Linked
    to  this  is  the  contention  that  the  FtJ  was  wrong  to   require
    corroboration of the appellant's account.

 5. In relation to the corroboration point, the FtJ had said at  [46]  that
    there was no supporting evidence of  the  appellant's  claim  that  his
    uncles were  Taliban  commanders.   In  addition,  there  was  in  fact
    supporting evidence from the witnesses who either gave oral evidence or
    provided a statement in support of the appeal.   Furthermore,  the  FtJ
    was wrong to say that the appellant gave no reason as to why his father
    did not support the Taliban, the appellant having dealt  with  that  at
    [4] of his witness statement.

 6. Similarly, in relation to the appellant's claim  that  his  father  and
    brothers had been killed, the FtJ was again wrong to say that there was
    no supporting evidence of it; there was,  from  the  witnesses  already
    referred to.

 7. At [50] the FtJ said that  she  considered  it  "surprising"  that  the
    appellant did not say during his port interview that he had two  uncles
    who are Taliban commanders and who were looking to kill him.   In  this
    respect the FtJ had not had sufficient regard  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was interviewed as a minor, and apparently in the absence  of
    a responsible adult.

 8. Further, relatives had  given  evidence  but  the  FtJ  had  not  given
    adequate reasons for not accepting their evidence.

 9. It is argued in the grounds that the FtJ's  evaluation  of  the  expert
    evidence was  materially  flawed.   At  [52]  she  had  said  that  the
    appellant's claim that his family is in a blood  feud  is  inconsistent
    with what is generally considered to be a  blood  feud.   However,  the
    expert's report of Dr Antonio Giustozzi at [8] was that kin conflict of
    that sort, between uncles, nephews and even  brothers,  was  a  typical
    feature of the Afghan countryside.  Further  aspects  of  the  expert's
    report are referred to and in respect of which  it  is  said  that  the
    FtJ's decision failed to have regard.

10. Although the FtJ concluded that the appellant has close extended family
    in Kabul,  the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  his  grandfather  had
    disappeared and his cousin's  evidence  was  that  family  members  and
    friends were too scared to help find other members of  the  appellant's
    family.

11. Those errors, it is argued, vitiate the FtJ's assessment of Article  8.
    Furthermore, the conclusion that the respondent's delay had not been to
    the appellant's disadvantage was an erroneous conclusion in  the  sense
    that  prejudice  is  not  part  of  the   assessment   in   considering
    proportionality.  In addition, the result of the delay  has  been  that
    the appellant has been prejudiced since he has lost out on a  grant  of
    discretionary leave to remain as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.



12. In submissions Mr Solomon adopted the grounds of appeal.  In  terms  of
    the standard of proof, it was submitted that there is no  reference  in
    the FtJ's decision to the lower standard of proof.

13. In relation to what the FtJ said about the lack of corroboration,  that
    was a significant feature of the FtJ's decision.  She did not go on  to
    consider whether it would be reasonable in the circumstances to  expect
    supporting evidence to be provided.  For example, in relation to  death
    certificates there is no evidence that they are routinely provided.  In
    addition, the FtJ appears to have supposed that each Taliban  commander
    would be known to an expert.  I was referred to  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses called in support of the  appeal  to  the  effect  that  they
    supported the appellant's  account  of  the  appellant's  uncles  being
    Taliban commanders.  Although it is true that at [51] the FtJ did  make
    findings  about  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  relatives,  those
    findings were inadequate, it was submitted.

14. In reliance on the grounds of appeal at  [4],  it  was  submitted  that
    inherent implausibility is a "wholly inappropriate factor" to  rely  on
    in asylum cases.  In support of that proposition the decision in  HK  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1037  was
    relied on.

15. In the skeleton argument that was  before  the  FtJ,  submissions  were
    advanced in relation to the  appellant's  port  interview.   The  FtJ's
    brief reference to his age when he was interviewed  at  that  time  was
    insufficient.  YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145, in particular
    at [19]  was  cited  in  support  of  the  suggestion  that  the  FtJ's
    assessment of the appellant's account at  the  time  of  the  screening
    interview was inadequate.

16. Mr Clarke submitted that in relation to the standard of proof, the fact
    that the FtJ accepted that the appellant had not  absconded,  and  that
    there was no 'section 8' point that could be taken against  him,  could
    not be said to be determinative of the appeal, as the grounds appear to
    suggest.  She was otherwise  entitled  to  find  that  the  appellant's
    account was not credible.

17. In terms of the 'corroboration'  point,  it  was  submitted  that  what
    underpins the case law in this regard is the fact that corroboration is
    not required where a person is fleeing the country and would  not  have
    the time to obtain corroborative evidence, but that  must  be  seen  in
    context where someone is in the UK.  At [46] the  FTJ  dealt  with  two
    issues, namely whether the appellant's uncles were  Taliban  commanders
    and  whether  his  father  and  brothers  were  killed.   Although  the
    appellant relied on expert evidence from someone  who  claims  to  have
    links to the Taliban, that expert did not provide evidence to  indicate
    that he knew that those uncles were Taliban commanders.   The  FtJ  was
    entitled to ask why the appellant's uncles would need to concoct a land
    dispute given that the people in the area supported the Taliban.

18. Furthermore, the appellant has close family in Afghanistan and  one  of
    the witnesses was  a  frequent  visitor.   Despite  that,  evidence  in
    relation to the points raised by the FtJ had not been provided.  It  is
    not  a  case  of  there  being  no  family  contact  with  Afghanistan.
    Therefore, the FtJ was entitled to draw a reasonable inference from the
    absence of evidence, bearing in mind that the appellant had been in the
    UK for nine years.  The FtJ pointed out at [46] in  the  last  sentence
    that not even the death certificates of his  father  and  brothers  had
    been provided.  That  is  evidence  that  could  reasonably  have  been
    provided, given that he has family there and a family member who  makes
    trips back to Afghanistan.

19. Although the expert evidence was that those  in  the  patrilineal  line
    could be at risk by means of a blood feud, the two witnesses  who  gave
    evidence have not  had  any  problems.   The  second  witness  to  give
    evidence visited Afghanistan frequently, staying in  Kabul,  which  the
    FtJ said was only 15 to 30 minutes' drive  away  from  the  appellant's
    home area.

20. Although it was true to say, as the grounds at [3]  suggest,  that  the
    FtJ was wrong to say that the appellant had given no reasons as to  why
    his father did not support the Taliban, bearing  in  mind  [4]  of  the
    appellant's witness statement, it is difficult  to  see  how  that  was
    material.

21. The grounds' reliance on HK in terms of corroboration are  wrong,  when
    the decision as a whole is considered.

22. It was further submitted that the FtJ at [51] had given good reasons as
    to why she was not satisfied about the reasons for the appellant's aunt
    not having attended the hearing.  This is particularly  so,  given  the
    gravity of  the  nature  of  the  appeal.   It  was  open  to  the  FtJ
    significantly to reduce the weight attached to that witness's evidence.
     The witness could have come to the hearing after dropping her children
    off at school, as the FtJ said.

23. The FtJ was entitled  to  find  that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant's mother would have been able to make  the  arrangements  for
    the appellant's departure so quickly, going to their home area and then
    immediately arranging the flight.  Furthermore, it was difficult to see
    why the uncles would not go to the grandfather's  house  and  kill  the
    remainder of the family, if that is what they wanted to do.

24. As regards the port interview, it is true that  the  matter  was  dealt
    with in the appellant's skeleton argument  that  was  before  the  FtJ.
    However, she took into account that the appellant was a  child  at  the
    time of the interview.

25. In relation to the evidence from  the  appellant's  relatives,  it  was
    relevant to the asylum claim that the appellant's  cousin,  Naimatullah
    Rahmatullah, gave inconsistent evidence about how long he had stayed in
    Kabul before leaving the country (in respect of which the complaint  in
    the grounds is that  the  FtJ  had  failed  to  explain  why  this  was
    relevant).  His evidence was that he had moved to Kabul because of  the
    situation in Mayden,  but  that  evidence  was  inconsistent.   It  was
    difficult to see why the FtJ  was  not  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse
    inference from that inconsistency.

26. The FtJ was entitled to draw an adverse inference from  the  fact  that
    the witnesses are paternal relatives and had not been troubled  by  the
    blood feud.   One  of  them  had  been  to  Kabul  many  times  without
    experiencing any problems.

27. As regards the complaint about the FtJ's conclusion  that  the  witness
    statements used very similar language, and the finding that "heads were
    put together", Mr Clarke conceded that he could not in  fact  see  what
    point the FtJ was making in this respect on the basis  of  the  witness
    statements he has seen.  However, in the light  of  the  findings  made
    otherwise, that is not a matter that could have affected the outcome.

28. Mr  Clarke's  submissions  in  relation  to  the  FtJ's  findings  with
    reference to the expert evidence can be summed up as a submission  that
    the FtJ was entitled to make the findings that she did on the basis  of
    the expert evidence, which she fully took into account.

29.  Likewise,  in  terms  of  sufficiency  of  protection   and   internal
    relocation, given her conclusion that the appellant does not  have  the
    profile or risk that he claimed, he would not be at risk on return  and
    would in any event be able to live in Kabul.

30. In reply, Mr Solomon submitted that the relatives  that  gave  evidence
    explained the enquiries that they had made of the appellant's family in
    Afghanistan.  Although their evidence suggests that they  are  able  to
    travel without risk, that is not enough to discount  the  risk  to  the
    appellant in the context of a claim which asserts risk to him  and  not
    beyond close family members.

31. In relation to the expert evidence, Dr Giustozzi  is  a  well-respected
    expert who evaluated  the  claim  in  the  context  of  the  background
    evidence, and concluded that the appellant would be at risk.

    Assessment and conclusions

32. There are three respects in which I consider that the grounds of appeal
    in relation to the FtJ's decision have merit.  The first is in terms of
    the FtJ having considered it adverse  to  the  appellant's  credibility
    that in the initial port interview he did  not  say  that  he  had  two
    uncles who are Taliban commanders who were looking  to  kill  him.   At
    [50] the FtJ said that the fact that there was a phone  interpreter  is
    not an explanation for the lack of detail, nor was his contention  that
    he was expecting a more detailed interview.  She pointed out  that  his
    uncles had been Taliban commanders looking to  kill  him  as  the  sole
    reason for his departure  and  it  was  significant  that  it  was  not
    mentioned.

33. However, not only does the FtJ's decision fail to take into account the
    detailed submissions advanced in the skeleton argument in  relation  to
    that initial interview, I for my part cannot see that  the  appellant's
    initial account is so greatly inconsistent as suggested, when  seen  in
    context.  The appellant said that he had a problem in Afghanistan  over
    a land dispute whereby "my uncle" killed his  father  and  brother  and
    that he escaped to his maternal uncle in Kabul.  He  said  that  if  he
    went back his uncle would kill him.  That, it seems to me, is the rough
    gist of his claim; risk from a relative, and his father and  a  brother
    were killed.  It does not of course refer to two uncles, and  does  not
    refer to them being Taliban commanders.  It similarly does not say that
    two of his brothers were killed.  However, those omissions must be seen
    in the context of the appellant's age when he arrived, the fact that he
    had undergone what was probably an arduous  journey,  arriving  in  the
    back of a lorry, and that interpretation was done over  the  telephone.
    In all those respects it is not difficult to conclude  that  there  may
    have been room for error, either in what was said, what was translated,
    or what was written down.

34. In the circumstances, I do not consider that the FtJ  was  entitled  to
    find that what the appellant said in that interview was adverse to  his
    credibility because of inconsistency.

35. The second matter in respect of which I am satisfied that  the  grounds
    have merit concerns the FtJ having said at [46] that the appellant gave
    no explicit reason as to why his father did not  support  the  Taliban.
    In his witness statement at [4] the appellant did give a reason, namely
    that he blamed the Taliban for the  internal  conflict  and  deaths  of
    innocent people.  The FtJ did not take  that  into  account,  it  would
    appear.

36. The third respect in which I  consider  that  the  grounds  have  merit
    concerns what the FtJ said at [51] in the last  sentence,  namely  that
    the witness statements of the appellant's relatives  use  very  similar
    language, with the FtJ finding that  "heads  were  put  together".   Mr
    Clarke acknowledged that the conclusion that there  was  similarity  in
    the witness statements indicating  that  there  was  collusion  amongst
    them, is not borne out by consideration of the witness  statements.   I
    agree with that concession.  The FtJ did not explain why  she  came  to
    that view, and it is not a conclusion that appears to be  reflected  in
    any of the witness statements.

37. However, whereas those issues may in another case be a sufficient basis
    from which to conclude that the FtJ's decision should be set aside  for
    error of law in terms of  the  assessment  of  credibility,  I  do  not
    consider that those errors have that effect  in  this  case.   That  is
    because even without the FtJ having  erroneously  taken  those  matters
    into account  in  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility,  she  would
    inevitably have come to the same conclusion as to the appellant's  lack
    of credibility.  This is  evident  when  one  considers  her  reasoning
    overall.

38. It would have been better had the FtJ given an  express  self-direction
    as to the appropriate standard of proof, but it is not an error of  law
    for her not to have done so, provided it is apparent from the  decision
    that she did apply the correct standard.  There is nothing to  indicate
    the application of anything other than the correct  standard  of  proof
    and it is to be noted that at [52] the FtJ said that the appellant  did
    not have a well-founded fear of persecution when  he  left  Afghanistan
    and that "neither was there a real risk of serious harm".

39. The point advanced in relation to corroboration has no merit.   In  the
    course of his submissions Mr  Solomon's  enthusiasm  for  the  argument
    waned somewhat, once the decision in HK was  considered  overall.   The
    grounds   contend   that   inherent   implausibility   is   a   "wholly
    inappropriate" factor to rely on in asylum cases, for which HK is cited
    as authority.  The phrase "wholly inappropriate" appears at [29] of  HK
    where it is said as follows:

         "Inherent improbability, which may  be  helpful  in  many  domestic
         cases, can be a dangerous, even  wholly  inappropriate,  factor  to
         rely on in some asylum cases" [my emphasis].

40. The decision then explains the reasons for that view.  However, at [30]
    the Court accepted that the rejection  of  an  account  on  grounds  of
    implausibility is permissible "on reasonably drawn inferences  and  not
    simply on conjecture or speculation".  The quotation is  from  Awala  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] CSOH 73.

41. Thus, where the FtJ referred, for example at [46] and [47], to  matters
    being not plausible, she was entitled to take that lack of plausibility
    into account in  circumstances  where  that  conclusion  was  based  on
    reasonably drawn inferences, rather than conjecture or speculation.

42. The point about a lack of "supporting evidence" which  is  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant argues that supporting evidence in relation  to
    certain matters, for example the killing of the appellant's father  and
    his two brothers, was to be found in  the  witness  statements  of  the
    relatives who gave evidence.  It seems to me however,  that  where  the
    FtJ was referring to a lack of supporting  evidence  she  had  in  mind
    evidence other than the written or oral  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    relatives in the UK.  Thus,  at  [46],  she  said  that  there  was  no
    supporting evidence that his father and brothers were  killed,  stating
    that the appellant had been in the UK for nine years and that that  was
    more than sufficient  time  to  have  produced  at  least  their  death
    certificates.  In the  same  paragraph,  she  said  that  although  the
    appellant's paternal uncles were claiming  to  be  Taliban  commanders,
    there was no supporting evidence of  that  claim,  not  even  from  the
    appellant's expert (Dr Giustozzi) who says he has  links  with  Taliban
    cadres.  She further stated that Dr Giustozzi does not suggest that  he
    even raised their name with these contacts or carried out any research.



43. Whilst I cannot see in Dr Giustozzi's report any explicit reference  at
    least, to his having contacts with Taliban cadres, it is  evident  that
    Dr Giustozzi has contacts in Afghanistan,  and  extensive  contacts  at
    that.  The FtJ made the valid point that there was no evidence from him
    to  support  the  claim  of  the  appellant's  uncles   being   Taliban
    commanders.  In this context I also note that the evidence set  out  by
    the FtJ at [22] from Zahidullah Sadat was to the effect that the uncles
    were Taliban commanders in  charge  of  factions  heavily  involved  in
    recruiting new Taliban members and assassinations,  and  that  everyone
    within Mayden Wardak  appeared  to  know  that  they  were  behind  the
    killings of the appellant's father and brothers. At [40]  she  referred
    to the fact that the names of the two uncles who are said to be Taliban
    commanders, are given in the appellant's witness statement.

44. The point the FtJ was making was clearly  that  it  was  reasonable  to
    expect that some documentary or expert evidence to support the basis of
    the appellant's claim could have been provided in the years  since  the
    appellant had been in the UK.  It is not as if the appellant has had to
    rely on his own researches or resources for  that  purpose,  given  the
    evidence of his relatives travelling back  to  Afghanistan  and  having
    apparently made some enquiries themselves.  Indeed, in this  context  I
    note that the evidence of Zahidullah Sadat  in  his  second  statement,
    referred to by the FtJ at [23] was that he had contacted the Afghan Red
    Crescent Society and  National  Red  Crescent  in  Kabul.   It  is  not
    apparent that there was any evidence to  support  that  aspect  of  his
    evidence.

45. I do not accept that the FtJ had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    not accepting the evidence of the appellant's  relatives.   Naimatullah
    Rahmatullah said initially that he had lived in  Kabul  all  his  life,
    then said that he lived in Mayden and then moved to Kabul, stating that
    he grew up in Mayden and lived in Kabul for one year before  coming  to
    the UK [29].  The FtJ said that his evidence was inconsistent in  terms
    of how long he had stayed in Kabul before leaving the country.  The FtJ
    also said that "The cousin" which I presume is a reference to the first
    witness, Zahidullah Sadat, is able  frequently  to  visit  Afghanistan,
    staying in Kabul, only 15 to 30 minutes'  drive  from  the  home  area,
    without having experienced any difficulty.  At [57] she said that  both
    of the appellant's witnesses agreed that they felt safe in Kabul.

46. Although on behalf of the appellant it was said that it  was  not  they
    who were at potential risk  but  the  appellant,  on  the  question  of
    whether the  FtJ  gave  reasons  for  rejecting  the  evidence  of  the
    witnesses I am satisfied that she did.  It is also to be borne in  mind
    that in relation to the general credibility of the claim, at  [49]  the
    FtJ rejected the contention that  it  was  mere  coincidence  that  the
    appellant happened to come across someone who was  able  indirectly  to
    connect him with his relatives in the UK,  her  conclusion  being  that
    they were in fact expecting the appellant.

47. In relation to the appellant's aunt who neither attended the hearing of
    the first appeal in 2015 nor before the FtJ, the FtJ  was  entitled  to
    conclude that there was no credible reason for her  failing  to  attend
    the hearing, since she could have dropped off her  children  at  school
    and then come to the hearing, as the FtJ said at [51].  Thus, what  she
    says in her witness statement in support of the appellant's account was
    justifiably rejected.

48. In terms of the lack  of  risk  to  the  appellant's  UK  relatives  as
    compared to the claimed risk to the appellant,  the  claim  being  that
    neither of them would be at risk on their visits to Afghanistan, it  is
    to be noted that Zahidullah Sadat's evidence was that when he tried  to
    make enquiries of  the  appellant's  family  in  Afghanistan,  when  he
    returned there in March 2016, he referred to first cousins having  been
    threatened, and family members and friends being too  scared  to  help.
    That is hardly consistent with the contention that he was not  at  risk
    on return, still less so when he said to have been making enquiries  on
    the appellant's behalf.

49. So far as the expert evidence is concerned, the FtJ took  into  account
    that evidence and made her assessment of it.  The expert evidence  can,
    by turns, support the appellant's account or undermine it.  Thus,  what
    is said about risk to family members supports  the  appellant's  claim,
    but also suggests that relatives,  such  as  those  in  the  UK,  would
    potentially be at risk.

50. I  consider  that  the  FtJ  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  it  was
    speculative of Dr Giustozzi to say that the  appellant's  uncles  could
    easily frame the appellant as a government  collaborator.   Apart  from
    anything else, that is no part of the appellant's claim, and whilst  it
    may be  on  the  expert  evidence  a  theoretical  possibility,  it  is
    nevertheless a speculative possibility on the facts of this case.

51. At [47] the FtJ said that "I do not find implausible  that  his  mother
    would have taken the risk to return to the area where her  husband  and
    children had just been killed".   There  was  some  discussion  at  the
    hearing before me in relation to whether the FtJ meant to say that  the
    appellant's mother returning to the area was plausible or  implausible.
    In fact, when one considers the whole of the paragraph, it  is  evident
    that she concluded that it was implausible.  She referred to a question
    put to the appellant in cross-examination about whether it  would  have
    been safe for a woman to have travelled alone.  The FtJ was entitled to
    conclude that that aspect of the appellant's account was not  credible.
    Likewise, in terms of there having been no  evidence  that  the  uncles
    said to be Taliban commanders went  to  the  appellant's  grandfather's
    house in Kabul to look for the appellant (or indeed his other brother).



52. Similarly, the FtJ was entitled to conclude that it  was  not  credible
    that  the  appellant's  mother  would  have  been  able  to  make   the
    arrangements for the appellant's departure so quickly.  It appears from
    the evidence that the appellant gave [19], that on  the  day  that  his
    father and brothers are said to have been killed, his mother left Kabul
    to go to the home area, came back the next morning  and  the  appellant
    left when she returned. The evaluation of that aspect of the claim  was
    a matter for the FtJ.

53. The FtJ resolved two matters in  the  appellant's  favour,  namely  the
    contention that he had absconded from social services (and had thus not
    pursued the asylum claim), and the 'section 8' point in  terms  of  the
    appellant not having claimed asylum en route to  the  UK  when  he  had
    travelled through 'safe' countries.  She undertook a  careful  analysis
    of the evidence in relation to the appellant having  left  Kent  Social
    Services without informing the authorities, but  in  particular  as  to
    subsequent events including the involvement  of  the  appellant's  then
    solicitors.  In relation to the section 8 point, she  referred  to  his
    age when he left Afghanistan, his being under the direction  of  adults
    and his not being expected to be able to understand the concept of safe
    countries.

54. I mention those two potentially significant issues resolved  in  favour
    of the appellant to illustrate my view that the FtJ's consideration  of
    the issues was a balanced one.  Furthermore, it  is  evident  from  her
    detailed summary of the evidence, and the appellant's account, as  well
    as the expert evidence, that she had a clear appreciation of the  basis
    of the appellant's claim and the  factual  issues  that  needed  to  be
    resolved.

55. Much of the argument on behalf of  the  appellant  amounts  in  reality
    simply to a disagreement with the FtJ's  assessment  of  the  evidence.
    The weight to be attached  to  the  expert  evidence,  and  indeed  the
    evidence of the other witnesses, was a matter for  her.   She  was  not
    bound to accept the evidence of Dr Giustozzi, and for my part  I  would
    observe that Dr Giustozzi's report is based on  an  acceptance  of  the
    appellant's account as credible.  Furthermore, his conclusion that  the
    appellant would be at risk on return is a conclusion that strays beyond
    the remit of an expert, he having stated in  the  concluding  paragraph
    that the appellant would be at great risk from his uncles.

56. Whilst I have identified errors in the FtJ's decision, it  is  not  the
    case that every error in assessing credibility leads  to  a  conclusion
    that the assessment of credibility is vitiated for error  of  law,  and
    such is not the case here.

57. Having concluded that the appellant would not be at risk on return, and
    that he has family members there who would be able to support  him,  as
    well as the other matters that she referred to at [57] of her decision,
    there is no error in her conclusion that  he  would  be  able  to  live
    safely in Kabul where, she found, he  has  close  extended  family  and
    having rejected  the  contention  that  his  family's  whereabouts  was
    unknown.

58. Equally, it follows that in the light of her conclusions  the  FtJ  was
    entitled to find that the appellant's return  would  not  amount  to  a
    disproportionate breach of his Article 8 rights.

59. She noted the delay on the part of the Home  Office,  but  contrary  to
    what is asserted  in  the  grounds  the  appellant  cannot  derive  any
    advantage from his not  having  been  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain  as  a  minor.   Even  if  the  appellant   had   been   granted
    discretionary leave to remain, that would only have been until  shortly
    before his 18th birthday.  He is now aged 25  years  of  age.   At  the
    expiry of his discretionary leave he  would  in  any  event  have  been
    required to return to Afghanistan, in circumstances  where  he  has  no
    basis of stay in terms of any protection ground.

60. Accordingly, the FtJ's decision to dismiss the appeal  on  all  grounds
    must stand.

    Decision

61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  11/01/18
