
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06625/2009


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 12 June 2013                               |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                            Mr Makok Aswad Mamand

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms H Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   Despite being sent notice of today's hearing,  the  appellant  made  no
    appearance nor had he contacted the Tribunal to  explain  his  absence.
    In these circumstances I exercise my discretion  to  proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of one of the parties.

2.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  His appeal has been  remitted  to
    the Upper Tribunal by way of a consent order from the Court  of  Appeal
    on 13 June 2012.  The statement of reasons set out that:

    (i)  his asylum claim was refused by the respondent on 25 June 2009;


    (ii) his asylum appeal was dismissed by Immigration Judge  B  H  Foster
         OBE on 11 August 2009;


    (iii)     on  12  February  2010,   Mr   Justice   Wilkie   ordered   a
         reconsideration of his appeal on article 15(c) of the Qualification
         Directive grounds only;


    (iv) on 9 May 2011 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb dismissed his appeal.

3.   The statement of reasons concluded:

         "The respondent accepts that this appeal should be remitted to  the
         Upper Tribunal for  reconsideration  under  article  15(c)  of  the
         Qualification Directive only.   The  Upper  Tribunal  may  wish  to
         consider whether this appeal should be stayed pending  the  outcome
         of the reconsideration of in [HM and Others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG
         [2010] UKUT 331 (IAC)].

4.   Since these words were written, HM (Iraq) has been found by  the  Court
    of Appeal in HM (Iraq) [2011] EWCA Civ 1536 to  be  vitiated  by  legal
    error and the Court remitted it to be heard by the Upper Tribunal.  The
    latter subsequently reheard the case and issued fresh country guidance,
    HM and others (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2012] UKUT 00409(IAC).  However,
    that determination has in turn been appealed to the  Court  of  Appeal.
    Permission has been granted and a hearing is due to  take  place  later
    this summer.

5.   The first  question  that  arises  is  whether  I  should  adjourn  the
    appellant's case to await the outcome of the latest HM  appeal  to  the
    Court of Appeal.  My answer is that the fact that permission to  appeal
    to the Court of Appeal has been granted is not a reason to continue  to
    apply existing country guidance: see SG (Iraq)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940.
    Further, I deem it contrary to the interests of  justice  that  a  case
    should be kept out of the lists for such a period  given  the  tortuous
    history of litigation relating to the applicability of article 15(c) in
    the context of Iraq so far - especially given that to date none of  the
    Court of Appeal decisions has commented adversely on the  substance  of
    the country guidance given.

6.   Turning to the appellant's appeal, I observe  that  the  terms  of  the
    remittal to the Upper Tribunal confine its scope to the general Article
    15(c) issue.  Permission to appeal has not been  granted  to  challenge
    the  primary  findings  of  fact  made  by   the   Immigration   Judge.
    Consequently the appellant is someone whose  asylum  account  has  been
    found not credible.  The only two characteristics  which  are  accepted
    about him are that he is from Kirkuk and that he is Kurdish.

7.   I observe that no fresh evidence as to the situation in Iraq  has  been
    adduced by either of the parties.  I must rely therefore on  the  state
    of the evidence such as it was before the Upper Tribunal in HM  (Iraq),
    mindful that more recent background country reports do not disclose any
    major changes.

8.   Applying HM (Iraq), I am satisfied that the  appellant  cannot  succeed
    on Article 15(c) grounds.  The evidence does not  demonstrate  that  he
    would be at risk merely by virtue of being a civilian or a civilian who
    is from Kirkuk and who is Kurdish.

9.   For the above reasons, the Immigration Judge erred in law.

10.  The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey


