
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: AA/06293/2014
                                                               AA/06291/2014
                                                               AA/06295/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th May 2019                     |On: 15th July 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                   SP + 2
                                     AS
                                     PS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Malik, Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION and REASONS

    1. The lead Appellant SP is a national of Sri Lanka born  in  1976.  His
       dependents are two of his minor children. The second Appellant AS  is
       his wife born in 1983, and the third, PS, is his minor child born  in
       2008. They appeal with permission  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Garbett) to dismiss their linked protection appeals.

    2. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appeal  because  it  did  not
       accept that the (lead) Appellant currently faced a well-founded  fear
       of persecution in  Sri  Lanka.  The  Appellant  appealed  on  various
       grounds, amongst them criticisms of the Tribunal's  approach  to  the
       facts, and to its assessment of his  sur  place  political  activity.
       The Appellant was refused permission  to  appeal  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, then by the Upper Tribunal. He applied to  Cart  judicially
       review the latter decision; permission to do so was  refused  by  Mrs
       Justice Cheema-Grubb on the 7th March 2016. The  Appellant  persisted
       and on the 27th May 2016 Lord Justice Irwin granted  him  permission,
       upon renewed application, to judicially review the  decision  of  the
       Upper Tribunal. The matter was settled by consent before the Court of
       Appeal, with an order being sealed by Master Meacher on the  1st  May
       2018. The 'Statement of Reasons' makes clear that Lord Justice  Irwin
       granted permission on limited grounds  relating  to  one  issue:  the
       Appellant's  claimed   involvement   with   banned   Tamil   diaspora
       organisation the 'Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam' (TGTE).

    3. The First-tier Tribunal had heard evidence to the effect  that  since
       he came to live  in  this  country  the  lead  Appellant  had  become
       involved with the activities of  this  group.  Paragraph  37  of  the
       decision reads as follows:

           "As regards the appellant's 'sur place'  activities,  these  are
           limited.  I accept that he  has  become  involved  in  the  LGTE
           (Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam), which is a  political
           organisation formed to win the freedom of the Tamil people, with
           the aim of creating Tamil Eelam, a state in the North  and  East
           provinces of Sri Lanka.  The appellant's  evidence  is  that  he
           attends their meetings; has attended one demonstration on 18 May
           2014 and attended the Martyrs Day celebration in  London  on  27
           November 2014.  He has also distributed leaflets in Coventry  on
           two occasions.  He has  not  supplied  any  photographs  of  his
           attendance at  these  events;  details  of  other  attendees  or
           meeting agendas.  He  has  provided  no  evidence  of  media  or
           internet coverage or evidence that these activities  would  have
           come to the attention of the Sri  Lankan  authorities.   I  find
           that any 'sur place' activities  that  the  appellant  has  been
           involved in are low level and not at a level that would put  the
           appellant at risk on return to Sri Lanka"

    4. Nothing arises from the  First-tier  Tribunal's  description  of  the
       group as the 'LGTE': it is accepted that this is a typing  error  and
       that the  determination  was  here  referring  to  the  TGTE.     The
       Tribunal goes on from this point in the determination to find no risk
       arising, having applied the risk categories  in  the  extant  country
       guidance of GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
       [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

    5. The point identified in the grounds was that this risk assessment was
       conducted  in  the  absence  of  the  relevant   country   background
       information. In granting  permission  Lord  Justice  Irwin  found  it
       possible that information in the public domain about how the TGTE are
       perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities might have made a  difference
       to the outcome of this appeal. Specifically, the Respondent failed to
       provide the Tribunal with evidence indicating that  the  TGTE  are  a
       proscribed organisation: UB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the
       Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 65.




       Error of Law

    6. At a hearing before me on the 18th March  2019  Mr  Melvin  submitted
       that the findings were qualified,  the  Tribunal  having  noted,  for
       instance, a lack of corroborative evidence about the Appellant having
       attended protests etc.  Whilst I would agree that the  Tribunal  does
       appear to draw some negative  inference  from  the  absence  of  such
       evidence it is plain from the second sentence of the  paragraph  that
       the sur place activity is accepted: that is clearly how the Court  of
       Appeal read those findings.  Mr Melvin further submitted that it  was
       open to the Tribunal to conclude that these limited  activities  were
       not capable of creating a risk. In the final analysis that  may  well
       be correct, but the point made - and  accepted  -  in  the  Court  of
       Appeal is that without the relevant country background material  this
       risk assessment was incomplete. It must therefore be remade.

    7. I was however not persuaded that it is open  to  me  to  revisit  the
       remaining grounds originally pleaded. That is because of the  limited
       terms in which Lord Justice  Irwin  granted  permission  on  judicial
       review application.




       The Re-Made Decision

    8. At the resumed hearing on the 14th May 2019  I  heard  live  evidence
       from the Appellant. He was called in order to update the evidence  on
       his involvement in the TGTE.  That was because  the  evidence  before
       the First-tier  Tribunal  had  been  based  on  a  witness  statement
       prepared and signed in 2014. Therein the Appellant stated that he has
       been a volunteer for the TGTE since October 2013,  attending  monthly
       meetings, annual 'Martyr's day' rallies on the 27th November  and  in
       2014 he had also attended a protest outside Downing St.

    9. It was the Appellant's evidence that this level  of  involvement  has
       continued to date. He has attended Martyr's Day meetings  every  year
       in November at the Excel Exhibition hall in Stratford, London.  There
       are normally about 200 people at  these  events.  He  confirmed  that
       there is usually a media presence at these  rallies.  He  knows  this
       because he can see cameras, TV crews etc.  He therefore assumes  that
       the events are reported on, but he has not seen the coverage himself.
        The Appellant stated that he does not simply attend these events. He
       goes to the hall beforehand and helps set out the chairs and anything
       else that needs doing. He travels  from  Coventry  with  about  50-60
       other attendees.  When the TGTE held its elections in April  of  this
       year the Appellant participated by voting,  and  shortly  before  the
       election distributed leaflets in Coventry. This was the  first  thing
       he had done for a while because the  TGTE  were  going  through  some
       internal issues and so had not been very active for a few years.

   10. In response to Mr Melvin's questions the Appellant confirmed that  he
       is a member of the TGTE. He stated that to  his  knowledge  they  are
       involved in organising the events he has described but he  could  not
       explain how he knows that to be the case. Asked about his  attendance
       at the various meetings the Appellant was  unable  to  point  to  any
       evidence that he had been there, such as agendas, minutes, or photos.
       Nor were there any witnesses in  attendance  who  would  be  able  to
       confirm that he had been there.

   11. The Appellant stated that the TGTE are not in Sri Lanka because it is
       too dangerous for them there.  If he were to be returned to Sri Lanka
       he would carry on supporting them but he could not do so publicly. He
       would  maintain  his  commitment  by  staying  in  contact  with  the
       organisation here.

   12. Mr Malik began his submissions by pointing to  the  Respondent's  own
       Country Policy and Information Note on Sri Lankan  Tamils:  the  June
       2017 publication Tamil  Separatism.  At  paragraph  6.3.1  this  CPIN
       states that eight organisations 'remain proscribed' by the Government
       of Sri Lanka. A hyperlink to the Sri Lankan government gazette  shows
       that since the 25th February 2014  the  Transnational  Government  of
       Tamil Eelam has been banned, for "terrorism  related  activities  and
       financing terrorism".   This  was  of  course  the  information  that
       sufficiently concerned the Court of Appeal to remit UB's case  (UB  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 85) to the
       Upper Tribunal. That, and the British High Commission letter that was
       at that time appended to the current version of the guidance:

           "Proscribed Terrorist Groups

           On 1 April 2014, the  government  of  Sri  Lanka  announced  the
           designation  of  16  Tamil  Diaspora   organisations   and   424
           individuals under the UN Security  Council  resolution  1373  on
           counter-terrorism. The order was  issued  by  the  Secretary  of
           Defence. The government asserts that this action has been  taken
           to stop attempts to revive the LTTE. The BHC [i.e. British  High
           Commission] has asked the government of  Sri  Lanka  to  provide
           evidence to support this decision.

           Among  the  organisations  proscribed  are   the   Transnational
           Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) and the UK-based Global  Tamil
           Forum (GTF) and British  Tamil  Forum  (BTF).  When  making  the
           announcement on 1 April, Brigadier Ruwan Wanigasooriya said that
           individuals belonging to these organisations would  face  arrest
           under anti-terrorism laws ... [T]o  date,  there  have  been  no
           known arrests based on membership of one of the newly proscribed
           groups."

   13. Mr Malik submitted that nothing had changed since the decision in UB.
       The  TGTE  remained  banned.  There  was  nothing  to  indicate  that
       Brigadier Wanigasooriya, nor anyone else in the Sri  Lankan  security
       apparatus, had changed their minds. The Appellant has  been  involved
       with this group since 2013. He has attended public events and he  has
       shown his  commitment  to  their  cause,  which  is,  ultimately,  an
       independent Tamil State. Given that this is the goal, it is  hard  to
       see how the Sri Lankan authorities could  do  otherwise  than  pursue
       members of the TGTE: in the language of GJ they  are  concerned  with
       undermining the unitary integrity of the state of Sri Lanka.

   14. Mr Melvin asked me to look with anxious scrutiny at the  evidence  in
       this case. Although the First-tier Tribunal had accepted  that  there
       was some sur place activity it is clear that  it  is  of  the  lowest
       level.  It had to be assessed in the context of the Tribunal's other,
       preserved findings that the historical claim of support for the  LTTE
       was devoid of credibility.  At its highest the  Appellant's  evidence
       is that he has been to some public meetings. He has had no particular
       involvement in them, and unlike UB he has not appeared in photographs
       online holding banners etc.  There is  not  even  any  evidence  that
       these events have any connection to the TGTE.  Whilst it is true that
       the Government of Sri Lanka have sophisticated intelligence  networks
       operating  in  the  diaspora  there  is  absolutely  nothing  in  the
       behaviour of this man that might give them  reason  to  think  he  is
       actually committed to the cause of Tamil separatism.   Nor  is  there
       any reason to believe that he would be asked any questions about  his
       support for the TGTE upon return to Sri  Lanka.  On  that  basis  the
       Secretary of State invited me to dismiss the appeal.

   15. I start with recording some findings of fact:

        i) The Appellant is accepted to be a Tamil, originally from Jaffna.
           He lived there from his birth in 1976 to 1991  when  his  family
           moved to India;

       ii) The Appellant returned to Sri Lanka to work from  2003  to  2005
           and until he came as a student to the United Kingdom in 2011  he
           was back living in India;

      iii) He has therefore spent long periods away from Sri Lanka;

       iv) The Appellant claimed to have had some association with the LTTE
           whilst living in India and to have been imprisoned  upon  return
           to Sri Lanka as a result. Judge  Garbett's  undisturbed  finding
           was that this was all untrue;

        v) Judge Garbett accepted  that  the  Appellant  has,  since  2013,
           undertaken some low-level political  activism  in  that  he  has
           attended meetings organised by the TGTE in the United Kingdom. I
           find that assessment to be consistent with the  evidence  before
           me which was that he attends approximately two events per year;

       vi) Whilst I am prepared to accept that as a Tamil the Appellant  is
           likely to have some sympathy towards the Tamil cause, there  was
           nothing before me to indicate that  such  sympathy  has  evolved
           into a political opinion held with  any  real  conviction.   The
           Appellant was, for instance, unable to give any  explanation  as
           to why the TGTE has been - in his words - "not very active for 3
           years", beyond saying "I don't know exactly - internal matters".
             He did not express, either in written  or  oral  evidence  any
           detailed explanation as to why he wishes to support the TGTE. He
           produced no literature, and did not call any witnesses who could
           corroborate his claim to hold a political  opinion  antithetical
           to the unity of the state of Sri Lanka.

   16. I now consider those facts against the country  background  material.
       In GJ the Tribunal identified a number of groups  still  at  risk  of
       harm in post-conflict Sri Lanka.  For the purpose of this appeal  the
       relevant country guidance remains:

           "(1)  This determination replaces all existing country  guidance
           on Sri Lanka.

           (2)   The focus of  the  Sri  Lankan  government's  concern  has
           changed since the civil war ended in May 2009. The LTTE  in  Sri
           Lanka itself is a spent force and there have been  no  terrorist
           incidents since the end of the civil war.

           (3)   The government's present objective is  to  identify  Tamil
           activists in the diaspora who are working for  Tamil  separatism
           and to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan  state  enshrined  in
           Amendment 6(1) to the Sri Lankan  Constitution  in  1983,  which
           prohibits the 'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.
           Its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence of  the  LTTE
           or any similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the revival
           of the civil war within Sri Lanka.

           (4)   If a  person  is  detained  by  the  Sri  Lankan  security
           services there remains a real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm
           requiring international protection.

           (5)   Internal relocation is not an option within Sri Lanka  for
           a person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
           government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka  and  Tamils  are
           required to return to a named address after passing through  the
           airport.

           (6)   There are no detention facilities  at  the  airport.  Only
           those whose names appear on a "stop" list will be detained  from
           the  airport.  Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the  Sri  Lankan
           authorities are or become interested exists not at the  airport,
           but after arrival in their home area, where their  arrival  will
           be verified by the CID or police within a few days.

           (7)    The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
           persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in
           detention or otherwise, are:

           (a)   Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
                the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  because  they
                are, or are perceived to have a significant role in relation
                to post conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or
                a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

           (b)   Journalists (whether in print or  other  media)  or  human
                rights activists, who, in either case, have  criticised  the
                Sri  Lankan  government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
                record, or who are associated with publications critical  of
                the Sri Lankan government.

           (c)   Individuals who have given evidence to the Lessons Learned
                and Reconciliation Commission  implicating  the  Sri  Lankan
                security forces, armed forces or the Sri Lankan  authorities
                in alleged war crimes. Among those who  may  have  witnessed
                war crimes during the conflict, particularly in the  No-Fire
                Zones in May 2009, only those who  have  already  identified
                themselves by giving such evidence would be known to the Sri
                Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at real  risk
                of adverse attention or persecution on return  as  potential
                or actual war crimes witnesses.

           (d)   A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
                accessible at  the  airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                against whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                warrant. Individuals whose name appears  on  a  "stop"  list
                will be stopped at  the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                appropriate Sri Lankan authorities,  in  pursuance  of  such
                order or warrant.

           (8)    The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
           sophisticated intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri
           Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know  that
           many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and
           also that everyone in the Northern Province had  some  level  of
           involvement with the LTTE during the civil war. In post-conflict
           Sri Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant only to
           the extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as
           indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state or the
           Sri Lankan Government.

           (9)   The authorities maintain a  computerised  intelligence-led
           "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch"  list  is
           not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport but will  be
           monitored by the security services after his or her  return.  If
           that monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a  Tamil
           activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  or
           revive the internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question
           is not, in general, reasonably likely  to  be  detained  by  the
           security forces. That will be a question of fact in  each  case,
           dependent on any diaspora activities  carried  out  by  such  an
           individual."

   17. It was Mr Malik's  case  that  it  was  reasonably  likely  that  the
       Appellant fell  within  the  fourth  'risk  category'  identified  at
       paragraph 7 of the headnote:

           "(d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
                accessible at  the  airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                against whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                warrant. Individuals whose name appears  on  a  "stop"  list
                will be stopped at  the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                appropriate Sri Lankan authorities,  in  pursuance  of  such
                order or warrant."

   18.  The  Appellant  has  not  demonstrated,  with   reference   to   his
       'historical' account, that there  are  any  extant  court  orders  or
       arrest warrants out against him.  Applying the guidance in GJ  it  is
       therefore difficult to see how or why his  name  would  appear  on  a
       'watch' or 'stop' list.   I  must  however  consider  whether  it  is
       reasonably likely that his name would have been placed on such a list
       as a result of his attendance at TGTE events in this country.

   19. The Appellant has, by his own admission, played a very minor role  in
       the TGTE. He has attended approximately two events per  year.  He  is
       not aware that his presence, or image, have been recorded. Given that
       he has had no previous involvement with Tamil politics  there  is  no
       reason  to  believe  that  the  Sri  Lankan  security  services  have
       connected him to any separatist activity. If there were informants at
       such meetings it is not reasonably likely that they  would  know  his
       name, or identify him as an active participant, given that he had  no
       involvement beyond setting out chairs and being one of  approximately
       200 attendees.  I am accordingly not satisfied that there is  a  real
       risk that he has been so identified, or that  his  name  would  as  a
       result have been placed on any 'list'.

   20. I must consider a third possibility. In UB the Court of  Appeal  were
       concerned with the potential risk arising from questioning on arrival
       at  the  airport  in  Colombo.  The  letter  from  the  British  High
       Commission  stated  that  people  being  deported  "will  always   be
       questioned about their overseas activities,  including  whether  they
       have been involved in one  of  the  proscribed  organisations".  That
       being the advice of the British High Commission, I see no  reason  to
       reject it. I accept that the Appellant is  reasonably  likely  to  be
       questioned on arrival in Colombo, itself a likelihood  in  this  case
       given his long history of absence from Sri Lanka.  It is course trite
       asylum law that the Appellant cannot be expected to  lie:  HJ  (Iran)
       (FC) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31,  RT
       (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  UKSC
       38.  He would have to tell the officer asking the questions  that  he
       has indeed since 2013 been a supporter of the TGTE, attending  events
       in London and elsewhere in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  question  is
       whether that officer would, as a  result,  be  reasonably  likely  to
       transfer the Appellant to detention, where, it is accepted, there  is
       a real risk of ill-treatment.

   21. This is a finely balanced case. If the Appellant is telling the truth
       he could tell the officer that he is not particularly  interested  in
       politics, or in the TGTE. His involvement has been  minimal,  and  in
       the main confined to marking Martyr's Day, in common with  many  tens
       of thousands of Tamils worldwide.  Given that the Sri Lankan security
       operation is now "intelligence  led"  that  might  be  sufficient  to
       persuade the officer that this  man  is  no  threat  to  the  unitary
       integrity of the state of Sri  Lanka,  and  the  Appellant  would  be
       allowed to go on his way. That is certainly a possibility.   I remind
       myself however that the standard of proof is low, and it is low for a
       reason. The consequences for the Appellant, if he is exposed to  harm
       at the hands of the Sri Lankan security  services,  would  be  grave.
       The question is whether there is a real risk that the Appellant's own
       disclosure of his attendance at TGTE events  in  the  United  Kingdom
       would give rise to a real risk of detention.

   22. Given the objective evidence before me I must conclude that it  does.
       The TGTE are a proscribed organisation, considered by the  Government
       of Sri  Lanka  to  be  terrorists.    The  Tribunal  has  long  since
       accepted, including in GJ, that in Sri Lanka detention  on  suspicion
       of terrorism is likely to bring with it a real risk of torture.    It
       follows that the appeal must be allowed.




       Anonymity Order

   23. This appeal concerns a claim for  international  protection.   Having
       had regard to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity
       Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the
       following terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  both  the
           Appellant and the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




       Decisions

   24. For the reasons set out above I am satisfied that the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law.  It is set aside
       to the extent identified by the Court of Appeal.

   25. I remake the decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  the  appeal  on
       protection grounds.

   26. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               8th July 2019
