




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06781/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                       |                                     |
|On 13 April 2016                       |On 22 July 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     ah
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Chapman, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on [ ] 1995.  On 12 August 2014
    a decision was made by the  respondent  to  refuse  to  vary  leave  to
    remain, with a removal decision under s47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The appellant appealed against those  decisions  and  his  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Kimnell ("the FtJ") on 12 August 2015.
     The appellant's mother was also an appellant before the FtJ.

 3. The result of the appeal was that the appellant's mother's  appeal  was
    allowed on asylum grounds but the appellant's  appeal,  on  asylum  and
    human rights grounds, was dismissed.   It  is  only  the  case  of  the
    appellant before me who is  the  subject  of  these  proceedings.   The
    respondent has not challenged the decision to allow the appeal  of  the
    appellant's mother.

 4. The first appellant's mother claimed asylum on the basis that her  life
    would be in danger in Iran because she is an  atheist.   When  she  had
    previously been in Iran she had completed a form in order to  obtain  a
    birth certificate but she left the question about her  religion  blank.
    She was asked to return  to  the  relevant  office  and  following  her
    departure from Iran was subsequently summoned by the authorities.

 5. The appellant's mother left Iran in March or April 2010  to  travel  to
    the UK on a visa with the appellant before me.  After a trip to  Canada
    the appellant's mother returned to  the  UK  in  April  2012  but  then
    returned to Iran in  June  2012  following  her  husband  having  heart
    surgery.  A further trip to the UK was made in  August  2012,  and  the
    appellant's mother last arrived in the UK on 3 February 2013  when  she
    made her claim for asylum.  She  said  that  she  had  previously  been
    arrested and detained in 2009 during which time she was  badly  beaten,
    and felt at risk on return, hence the asylum claim.

 6. At [11] the FtJ noted that notices of immigration decision were  served
    on the appellant and his mother and that both  had  lodged  notices  of
    appeal, although it had been explained  to  the  FtJ  that  the  second
    appellant is dependent on the first appellant for his claim.

 7. In summary, the FtJ concluded that the appellant's mother had  given  a
    credible account of past events.  He accepted that she was interrogated
    and ill-treated during an inquiry into her religious  belief  in  2009.
    He also accepted that she had applied for a new  birth  certificate  in
    2013 and failed to declare that she was Muslim.  He accepted  that  she
    had received summonses to attend the authorities on return to Iran.  He
    concluded that there was at least a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
    that having regard to the 2009 incident the appellant's mother would be
    interrogated again because of her failure to  answer  the  question  on
    religion in her latest application and that during  the  course  of  an
    interrogation there was a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  she
    would again be ill-treated.  He found therefore, that  the  appellant's
    mother had a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason,
    namely her religious belief "or lack of it".

 8. I quote in full what the FtJ said about this appellant, at [56]:

         "As regards the second appellant, Mr Hodson acknowledged, as he was
         bound to do in view of the evidence, that he could not make  out  a
         separate claim that he is at risk.  There  is  no  indication  that
         other family members living in Iran have  been  subjected  to  ill-
         treatment, certainly not the second appellant's siblings.   It  may
         well be that the first appellant having succeeded with her  appeal,
         representations will have to be made to the respondent to grant the
         second appellant leave in line with his  mother's  but  the  second
         appellant has no well-founded fear of persecution  and  his  appeal
         against the refusal of asylum cannot succeed.   No  separate  Human
         Rights argument has been put on his behalf."

     Grounds of Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 9. The grounds refer to the appellant having entered the  UK  on  2  April
    2012 with his mother, who had been granted leave to enter as a  student
    visitor until 2 March 2013.  The appellant at that  time  was  aged  16
    years and was granted leave to enter as her  dependent  child  for  the
    same period.  The appellant was included  in  the  application  of  his
    mother for asylum as his mother's dependant, he then still  being  only
    17 years of age.  In refusing to vary the appellant's mother's leave to
    remain on asylum grounds, the appellant's application for variation  of
    leave to remain was also refused.

10. The grounds accept that the appellant had never made a claim to  be  at
    separate or independent risk on return to Iran,  never  having  claimed
    asylum in his own right.  His application had at all times been that of
    a dependant on his mother's claim.  This is  also  how  the  respondent
    treated the appellant's application for variation of leave.

11. The grounds refer to paragraph 349 of the Immigration Rules,  and  what
    is said to be a clear distinction between, for example, a  minor  child
    who makes a claim for asylum in his own right and a child  who  applies
    as the dependant of an adult parent.  In the  case  of  a  minor  child
    applying for asylum in his own right, that  claim  will  be  considered
    individually in accordance with para 344.  However, it is  argued  that
    where  the  principal  applicant,  in  this  case  the  mother  of  the
    appellant, claims and is granted asylum, then any dependant minor child
    will be granted asylum and leave to remain for the same duration as the
    principal applicant.  It is argued that it is the circumstances at  the
    time  at  which  the  application  for  asylum   is   made   which   is
    determinative.

12. It is also contended that there has been no individual consideration of
    any purported claim by the  appellant  in  accordance  with  para  344,
    because he never claimed asylum in his own right.  He  had  never  been
    interviewed by the respondent and the reasons for refusal letter  deals
    exclusively with his mother's claim.  It is contended that it was wrong
    for the FtJ, in effect, to require the appellant for the first time  to
    show an independent basis of risk on return to Iran as a  condition  of
    his qualifying for asylum.  This it is argued directly  conflicts  with
    the policy  and  procedures  of  the  respondent  as  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules.  It is contended that the appellant's appeal  should
    also have been allowed on asylum grounds  in  line  with  that  of  his
    mother.

13. The grounds are elaborated on in their renewal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    ("UT") after the First-tier  Tribunal  ("FtT")  refused  permission  to
    appeal.  In terms of what was or was not  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant before the FtT, it is said that what was agreed to  was  that
    no evidence had been put forward to support a  claim  that  the  second
    appellant was at independent risk on return to Iran.  It is  said  that
    that was a concession about the state of the evidence but not about  it
    being a fact that the second appellant  was  not  at  such  independent
    risk.  It is contended that it was wholly unnecessary  for  the  second
    appellant to have put forward such an independent  claim  supported  by
    evidence because at all times he had been treated as a dependant on his
    mother's claim.  The respondent never required the appellant to provide
    evidence of any separate risk to him as an individual.

14. That, it is argued, remained the situation at the time of  the  hearing
    before the FtT, notwithstanding that the appellant had by  then  turned
    18 years of age.  That did not alter his status as a dependant  on  his
    mother's claim.

15. The respondent's 'rule 24' response relies on the fact that by the time
    of the hearing before the FtT the appellant was an adult of 19 years of
    age.  His representative at the hearing before the FtT accepted that he
    could not make out a separate claim that he is at  risk.   Accordingly,
    the FtJ was entitled to find that the appellant had not  established  a
    well-founded fear of persecution in  his  own  right,  there  being  no
    indication that other family members living in Iran had been  subjected
    to ill-treatment, including the appellant's siblings.

    Submissions

16. Although the final hearing before me was on 13 April 2016,  the  appeal
    was in fact listed on 15 March 2016 when  Ms  A.  Everett  appeared  on
    behalf of the respondent.  On that occasion I  heard  submissions  from
    the parties, Ms Chapman  representing  the  appellant.   Ultimately,  I
    adjourned the hearing to 13 April 2016, as explained further below.

17. On 15 March Ms Chapman relied on the grounds and referred  me  to  para
    349 of the Rules.  It was submitted  that  it  was  the  Home  Office's
    position that a former minor child would continue to be  treated  as  a
    dependant even after reaching majority.  It  was  accepted  that  if  a
    dependant  had  formed  an  independent  life,  or  had   a   different
    nationality for example, or there was criminal conduct, the  respondent
    would not be obliged to grant leave in line with a successful claim  by
    the person upon whom the minor was dependent.

18. Furthermore, Ms Chapman submitted that in principle, under refugee law,
    a person is a refugee from the time that they make  their  claim.   The
    appellant's mother was a refugee, having been found to  be  so  by  the
    FtT.  The Home Office does backdate a grant of status.   Therefore,  at
    the time of the application the appellant, being a minor dependant, was
    also a refugee.

19. She drew a parallel with  entry  clearance  appeals  in  terms  of  the
    significance of age at the date of application.  It was submitted  that
    just because an individual becomes an adult by the time of  an  appeal,
    he should not be treated as an adult for all  purposes.   The  FtJ  had
    failed to treat the appellant  as  a  dependant  of  his  mother.   The
    correct decision would have been to allow both appeals.  That would not
    be because he had his own basis of a fear of persecution but simply  as
    his mother's dependant.

20. I was referred to the date on which the asylum claim was made, being 18
    February 2013.  At that time the appellant was aged 17.  The only thing
    that had changed was the passage of time.

21. I was invited to find that there was a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the FtJ and to substitute a decision allowing  the  appeal.
    So far  as  para  349  is  concerned,  that  reveals  that  it  is  the
    circumstances  at  the  time  of  an  asylum   application   that   are
    determinative.  Certainly, that is true in the case of dependants.

22. Ms Everett accepted that it was not likely that  the  respondent  would
    have appealed if the appellant's appeal had been allowed in  line  with
    that of his mother.  I was referred to the  Asylum  Policy  Instruction
    ("API") which it was said indicated that if a dependant  is  under  the
    age of 18 at the time of the asylum claim, that person  would  normally
    be treated as a dependant at  the  time  of  any  decision.   The  word
    "normally" is used; subject to external factors.  Thus, it was accepted
    that where a dependant becomes over the age of  18  during  the  asylum
    process, that person would normally be granted leave in line  with  the
    adult.  That would not amount to refugee status  but  simply  leave  in
    line with the main applicant.

23. However, the case before the FtT was never run on the  basis  that  the
    respondent's  decision  in  relation  to  this  appellant  was  not  in
    accordance with the law (because of his  mother's  meritorious  claim).
    In fact, the FtJ could not have come to any other conclusion than  that
    which he came to.  It was submitted  that  para  349  does  not  really
    assist the appellant.  Had the argument before the FtT  been  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law on the basis of  a  failure
    to follow policy, that may have been an argument open to them.

24. In the circumstances, it is not clear on what basis it  could  be  said
    that the FtJ had erred in law.

25. In reply  Ms  Chapman  submitted  that  the  respondent's  position  is
    misconceived.  It would not have made sense for the second appellant to
    argue that the respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
    in terms of the initial decision by the respondent.  The focus for  the
    grounds was the risk to the appellant's mother on return to Iran.   His
    position was that he was her dependant.

26. Normally speaking, a decision by the FtT in these  circumstances  would
    be that a dependant appellant's appeal would succeed in line  with  the
    appeal of  the  main  appellant.   Dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    potentially puts him at risk of removal.

27. Albeit that the policy could be said to be rather ambiguous,  and  even
    if a dependant would not be granted the same  status  (as  a  refugee),
    they would normally be granted the same duration of leave as  the  main
    applicant.  These are matters for the discretion of  the  Secretary  of
    State.

28. In an attempt to resolve the issue at the heart of  the  appeal  before
    me, I decided that it would  be  useful  to  give  the  respondent  the
    opportunity  to  consider  the  matter  further.   To  that  effect,  I
    adjourned the appeal with a direction to  the  respondent  that  on  or
    before 13 April 2016 she was to confirm in writing to the Tribunal  and
    to the appellant whether or not she would grant leave to the  appellant
    in line with the leave to remain granted to the appellant's mother.

29. Thus it was that the appeal came back before me on 13 April  2016.   As
    it happened however, there was no representation for the respondent, at
    least not when the case was called on.  It was however  clear  that  no
    action had  been  taken  by  the  respondent  in  compliance  with  the
    direction that I gave on the last occasion.  I  was  informed  that  Ms
    Everett was instructed to appear but there was some difficulty  in  her
    being able to attend on time.

30. Mr Deller appeared initially, and informed me that enquiries  had  been
    put in train but the outcome of those enquiries in relation to what was
    proposed in terms of leave was not known.  He indicated that he was not
    aware of any obvious reasons as to why this appellant was  not  granted
    leave to remain in line with that of his mother.

31. Mr Deller was in fact only standing in for Ms Everett  and  had  to  be
    elsewhere.  Mr Clarke  then  appeared  on  behalf  of  the  respondent,
    although I put the case back to see if Ms Everett was in fact  able  to
    attend.

32. Ultimately, Mr Clarke proceeded to present the appeal on behalf of  the
    respondent.  In essence, he submitted that it was clear that there  was
    no error of law on the part of the FtJ.  All that could be done so  far
    as the respondent was concerned, was  to  reconsider  the  position  in
    terms of what leave if any was to be granted to the appellant.

33. Although the issue of the appellant withdrawing the appeal (or at least
    'his case', which is all that the UT procedure  rules  allow  for)  was
    canvassed, Ms  Chapman  indicated  that  she  had  no  instructions  to
    withdraw the appeal and  a  determination  of  the  issue  was  sought.
    Arguments previously advanced were repeated.

34. It was submitted that the FtJ did materially err in law  in  dismissing
    the appellant's appeal, in effect ceasing to treat the appellant  as  a
    dependant and treating him as an appellant in his own  right.   He  had
    not made any separate claim and was not required to have  done  so.  It
    was submitted that it were otherwise, all dependants would be  required
    to make a claim in their own right, whatever their  age.  I  was  again
    referred to the API in various respects.

    My assessment

35. It is clear  that  this  appellant  has  always  been  treated  by  the
    respondent as a dependant on his mother's claim.  At the time she  made
    her claim for asylum the appellant was still 17 years old.  The FtJ  at
    [11] noted that there were  notices  of  decision  in  respect  of  the
    appellant and his mother and that notices of appeal had been lodged  in
    both their cases, albeit  that  the  appellant  was  dependent  on  his
    mother's claim.  It is also true to say, as noted by  the  FtJ  in  the
    same paragraph, that this appellant's grounds of appeal  are  identical
    to those of his mother, as one would expect in the circumstances.

36. The respondent's decision in the case of this appellant,  and  that  of
    his mother, was made on 12 August 2014, by which  time  this  appellant
    was 18 years of age.

37. I have already quoted from [56] of  the  FtJ's  decision,  whereby  the
    appellant's legal representative acknowledged that this appellant could
    not, on the evidence before the FtJ, make out a separate claim  on  his
    own behalf that he was at risk.

38. It is as well to set out the legislative and policy provisions to which
    I was referred.  So far as material, para 349 provides as follows:

         "A spouse, civil partner, unmarried or same-sex partner,  or  minor
         child accompanying a principal applicant may  be  included  in  his
         application for asylum as his dependant, provided, in the  case  of
         an adult dependant with legal capacity, the dependant  consents  to
         being treated as such at the time  the  application  is  lodged.  A
         spouse, civil partner, unmarried or same-sex partner or minor child
         may also claim asylum in his own right. If the principal  applicant
         is granted refugee status or humanitarian protection and  leave  to
         enter or remain any spouse, civil partner,  unmarried  or  same-sex
         partner or minor child will be granted leave to enter or remain for
         the same duration. The case of any dependant who claims  asylum  in
         his own right will be also considered  individually  in  accordance
         with paragraph  334  above.  An  applicant  under  this  paragraph,
         including an accompanied child, may be interviewed where he makes a
         claim as a dependant or in his own right."

39. I do not consider it necessary to set out the provisions  of  para  334
    because I do not consider it of particular relevance to the issue to be
    determined.  Suffice to say, that aspect of the Immigration Rules deals
    with the circumstances in which an individual will be  granted  asylum.
    One of the conditions is that the individual is a refugee.

40. The  full  title  of  the  API's  is  the  Asylum  Policy  Instruction,
    Dependants  and  former  dependants  version  2.0,  dated   May   2014.
    Paragraph 1.1 explains the purpose of  the  instruction  which  is,  in
    summary, to give guidance to caseworkers as to how they should  process
    and consider asylum claims where a principal applicant has one or  more
    family members who are either a dependant  on  the  claim  or  claiming
    asylum separately in their own right, or both.

41. Paragraph 3.7, entitled "Children who reach the age  of  18  before  an
    initial decision" provides as follows:

         "A minor child included as a dependant in the  original  claim  who
         reaches the age of 18 before an initial decision on  the  principal
         applicant's claim should normally  continue  to  be  treated  as  a
         dependant for the purposes of the claim."

42. That paragraph goes on to state that they cannot continue to be treated
    as a dependant for removal purposes, for reasons explained.

43. Paragraph 3.10 is entitled "Applications for leave in line following  a
    decision".  It refers to various family members and the like  in  terms
    of the Family Reunion policy  in  circumstances  where  they  were  not
    included as dependants before a decision on the  principal  applicant's
    claim.  It refers to any leave being granted to family members  joining
    a refugee etc. being generally granted leave in line with that  of  the
    refugee.

44. Section 4 is entitled "Granting or refusing leave in line".  At 4.1  it
    states that:

         "Dependants of an asylum applicant who have been  included  in  the
         initial asylum claim will, if the principal  applicant  is  granted
         Asylum, HP, Family  or  Private  Life  leave  to  remain  (LTR)  or
         Discretionary Leave, normally be granted leave of the same duration
         and status as the principal applicant" (my emphasis).

    It then refers to para 349 of the Immigration Rules.

45. It goes on the state as follows:

         "Although it may not be appropriate to recognise some dependants as
         refugees, for example  if  they  specifically  request  not  to  be
         treated as a refugee or they are a  different  nationality  to  the
         principal applicant, they should still be  granted  LTE/R  for  the
         same duration as the principal applicant."

46. To summarise therefore, the respondent's policy as set out in the API's
    is to grant leave to those dependent on the principal applicant in line
    with the grant to the  principal  applicant.   They  should  "normally"
    continue to be treated as a dependant for the  purposes  of  the  claim
    even though they reach 18  before  an  initial  decision.   So  far  as
    relevant, para 349 of the Rules is to the same effect at least in terms
    of a dependant  being  granted  leave  of  the  same  duration  as  the
    principal applicant.

47. The submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  were  at  least
    consistent in terms of questioning as to how it could be said that  the
    FtJ erred in law.  Having  heard  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant I sought to distil what I considered to be the essence of the
    error of law contended for.  It  is  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  by
    treating this appellant as an appellant in his own right and not  as  a
    dependant of his mother.  Accordingly,  the  appeal  should  have  been
    allowed in accordance with the respondent's policy on  the  basis  that
    the appellant is a dependant.  That formulation of the alleged error of
    law was assented to on behalf of  the  appellant,  although  I  do  not
    necessarily suggest that that is the only  way  that  the  argument  as
    advanced could be framed.

48.  The  appellant's   grounds   contend   that   what   the   appellant's
    representative is recorded as having said at [56] of the FtJ's decision
    is that there was a concession about "the state of evidence" not  about
    it being a fact that the second appellant was not at independent  risk.
    That however, does not seem to me to  alter  the  position  as  it  was
    before the FtJ, namely that  it  was  acknowledged  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that the evidence before the FtJ  did  not  support  a  self-
    standing risk on return for the appellant.

49. It is the case that FtJ was bound to deal with the  grounds  of  appeal
    that were before him in the case of both appellants.  There is no doubt
    about the fact that, in form at least, this appellant was an  appellant
    in his own right before the  FtT.   There  was  a  separate  notice  of
    decision in his case and a separate notice of appeal, albeit  that  the
    grounds were identical to those of his mother.

50. It has not been suggested that para 349 of the Immigration Rules or the
    API's were brought to the FtJ's attention.  In that sense therefore, it
    could be said that the FtJ could not have erred in law for  failing  to
    deal with an argument that was not put before him.

51. On the other hand, the FtJ did plainly recognise  that  this  appellant
    was  a  dependant.   He  referred  at  [56]  to  the   possibility   of
    representations being made to the respondent for the  appellant  to  be
    granted leave in line with that of his mother.  Thus, the issue of what
    the outcome for the appellant as a  dependant  should  have  been,  was
    before the FtJ, regardless of whether the specific arguments which have
    been advanced before me were ventilated before the FtJ.

52. Para 349 is concerned with, so far as relevant to the matters in  issue
    before me, a minor child being granted leave to enter or remain for the
    same duration as the principal applicant.  It says  nothing  about  the
    status of the dependant as a refugee.  The API's are  to  like  effect,
    except for the fact that at paragraph 4.1 it  states  that  leave  will
    normally be granted "of the same duration and status" (my emphasis)  as
    the principal applicant.  Furthermore, it goes on to give  examples  of
    circumstances where  it  may  not  be  appropriate  to  recognise  some
    dependants "as refugees".  The implication is that dependants  will  be
    granted refugee status.  The respondent's policy  as  set  out  in  the
    API's therefore, is not simply about duration of leave but it  is  also
    about status.

53. Neither party referred me to  the  UNHCR  Handbook  on  Procedures  and
    Criteria for Determining Refugee Status,  but  I  have  considered  it.
    Chapter VI is headed "The principle of Family Unity".

54. The relevant paragraphs state as follows:

        "182. The  Final  Act  of  the  Conference  that  adopted  the  1951
        Convention:


        "Recommends Governments to  take  the  necessary  measures  for  the
        protection of the refugee's family, especially with a view to:


         (1) Ensuring that the unity of the refugee's family  is  maintained
        particularly in cases where the head of the family has fulfilled the
        necessary conditions for admission to a particular country.


        (2) The  protection  of  refugees  who  are  minors,  in  particular
        unaccompanied  children  and  girls,  with  special   reference   to
        guardianship and adoption."


        183. The 1951 Convention  does  not  incorporate  the  principle  of
        family unity in the definition  of  the  term  refugee.  The  above-
        mentioned Recommendation in the Final  Act  of  the  Conference  is,
        however, observed by the majority of States, whether or not  parties
        to the 1951 Convention or to the 1967 Protocol.


        184. If the head of a family meets the criteria of  the  definition,
        his dependants are normally granted refugee status according to  the
        principle of family unity.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  formal
        refugee status should not be granted  to  a  dependant  if  this  is
        incompatible with his  personal  legal  status.  Thus,  a  dependant
        member of a refugee family may be  a  national  of  the  country  of
        asylum  or  of  another  country,  and  may  enjoy  that   country's
        protection. To grant him refugee status in such circumstances  would
        not be called for.


        185. As to which family members may benefit from  the  principle  of
        family unity, the minimum requirement is the inclusion of the spouse
        and minor children. In practice,  other  dependants,  such  as  aged
        parents of refugees, are normally considered if they are  living  in
        the same household. On the other hand, if the head of the family  is
        not  a  refugee,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  any  one  of  his
        dependants, if they can invoke reasons on their  own  account,  from
        applying for recognition as refugees under the  1951  Convention  or
        the 1967 Protocol. In other words, the  principle  of  family  unity
        operates in favour of dependants, and not against them."

55. The UNHCR Handbook is not binding but is a  guide  to  the  Contracting
    States for the determination of refugee status. The respondent's policy
    as set out above is consistent with the guidance in the UNHCR Handbook.
    This appellant never claimed asylum  in  his  own  right  and  did  not
    advance such a claim  before  the  FtT,  notwithstanding  that  he  was
    formally an appellant in those proceedings.

56. In the circumstances, I do consider  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in
    considering the appellant as anything other than  a  dependant  on  his
    mother's claim, impliedly requiring him to  substantiate  a  claim  for
    asylum in his own right where on the facts that is contrary to way  the
    respondent had treated him and contrary to the respondent's policy.  It
    is unfortunate that the FtJ did not have the benefit of argument on the
    point, with reference to the materials to which  I  have  referred.  In
    terms of whether it was an error of law for the FtJ to have  failed  to
    deal with an argument that was not advanced before him,  I  repeat  the
    observations I have made at [51] above.

57. Having decided that the FtJ erred in law,  I  set  his  decision  aside
    (naturally only in so far as it relates to this appellant), in terms of
    his decision on Refugee Convention grounds. The only proper outcome  in
    those circumstances is for me to re-make the decision by  allowing  the
    appeal on asylum grounds.



    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds is set aside and the decision re-made, allowing the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 21/07/16
