
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06670/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 16th November 2016                    |On 01st December 2016               |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     RB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Obhi  made
    following a hearing at Birmingham on 30th June 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23rd October 1983.   She
    arrived in the UK, lawfully, on 2nd April 2011, and her  leave  expired
    on  31st  March  2012.   On  6th  July  2013  she  was  apprehended  by
    Immigration Officers and three months  later,  on  29th  October  2013,
    applied for asylum.  She was refused on 26th March 2015.

 3. The basis of the appellant's claim  is  that  she  fears  a  return  to
    Pakistan because of the attitude of her family  towards  her  marriage.
    She said that she married her husband against her  uncle's  wishes  and
    against the wishes of his  family.   In  2006  her  husband  was  badly
    assaulted by his family and three police officers.  The family moved to
    a number of different areas in order to avoid  them,  from  Multan,  to
    Faisalabad and finally to Karachi.

 4. In a lengthy determination the  judge  analysed  all  of  the  evidence
    adduced on the appellant's  behalf  and  concluded,  essentially,  that
    there was no truth in any of her claims.  She dismissed the  appeal  on
    asylum  grounds  and  with  respect  to  the  claims  made  under   the
    Immigration Rules regarding the appellant's private and family life.

The Grounds of Application

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds.  First,  that
    the judge had erred in law  in  assessing  the  medical  evidence  and,
    second, she had erred in her consideration of the document verification
    reports.

 6. The appellant had relied on a medical  report  produced  by  Dr  Juliet
    Cohen of the Medical Foundation, who is highly respected in this field.
     Dr Cohen makes a number  of  findings  in  relation  to  the  physical
    injuries sustained by the appellant's husband.  She concluded that  the
    scars were either highly consistent  or  typical  of  the  attributions
    claimed.  The grounds argued that the judge failed to  properly  engage
    with the medical evidence and indeed only considered the  report  after
    reaching conclusions on the credibility of the account.

 7. Second, the appellant had relied on three FIRs in support of her claim.
     The document verification reports claimed  that  all  three  were  not
    genuine.  However, in respect of  two,  the  appellant  had  reasonable
    explanations.  In respect of the first,  the  respondent  had  used  an
    incorrect reference number, and in respect of  the  second,  there  had
    been a  mistranslation  of  the  reference  number.   Furthermore,  the
    appellant  had  submitted  an  affidavit  from  a  local  attorney  who
    confirmed that he had attended each of the police stations and  checked
    to see  if  the  FIRs  existed.   The  judge  simply  disregarded  that
    evidence.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Brunnen on 16th  August  2016
    for the reasons stated in the grounds.

 9. On 7th September 2016 the  respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.





Submissions

10. Mr Symes took me through  the  documentation.   He  submitted  that  Dr
    Cohen's report was extremely strong, identifying a number of  different
    scars, which she concluded were either highly consistent or typical  of
    the attribution claimed by  him,  reminding  me  that  the  report  was
    properly referenced with the Istanbul Protocol.   The  judge  had  been
    unduly dismissive of important evidence which was  highly  relevant  or
    even determinative of the account.

11. The respondent and the judge had accepted that the appellant had  given
    consistent evidence - this is not a case where there  are  difficulties
    with the story itself.  More importantly, she had  not  considered  the
    medical evidence in the round as she was required to do, as a  part  of
    her assessment of credibility, but had reached her  conclusions  first,
    and considered the medical evidence afterwards.

12. So far as the FIRs were concerned, he took me to the  documents.   With
    respect to the first, the reference number on the FIR,  365/B-25-06  is
    clearly different from the reference number on the DVR, which is  given
    as 425/06.  So far as the second document was concerned,  there  was  a
    mistranslation of the reference number given as 1951867/07 in  the  FIR
    but the  document  from  Oracle  Translation,  which  acknowledged  the
    mistake, stated that the FIR number should have been  19501076/07.  The
    subtleties of the case had been misunderstood by the judge who had  not
    properly engaged with the evidence.

13. Mr Avery defended the determination.  He observed that  the  criticisms
    made did not undermine the judge's approach as a whole.  She had  taken
    into account the appellant's explanations and was clearly  troubled  by
    aspects of her evidence, particularly the fact that it appeared that an
    envelope containing documentation sent from Pakistan appeared  to  have
    been tampered with.

14. So far as the medical evidence was concerned,  he  submitted  that  the
    judge had indeed considered it as a part of her assessment as  a  whole
    and she was fully entitled to say that, whilst the husband had  clearly
    been mistreated, it was not possible  to  reach  a  conclusion  on  the
    context for that mistreatment.

Findings and Conclusions

The Medical Evidence

15. The appellant's case is that, in 2006, her husband was badly beaten  by
    two brothers-in-law from his first wife and three policemen.  So far as
    the scars are concerned, Dr Cohen stated:

      i) L1 was a 2.5 centimetre linear scar on Mr I's right cheek  that  he
         claimed he received from a blow from a pistol.  The scar was highly
         consistent with this attribution (paragraph 32).

     ii) L4 was a faint 0.5 centimetre scar  inside  the  upper  lip,  Mr  I
         claimed he received when hit with a rifle butt on  the  chin.   The
         scar was typical with this attribution (paragraph 35).

    iii) L6 was a 2 centimetre irregular shaped linear scar under the  chin.
         L7 was a 4 centimetre irregular shaped linear scar under the  chin.
         Both attributed to a blow from a rifle butt.  The  scars  "typical"
         of the attribution (paragraph 37).

     iv) L8 was a 4 centimetre x 0.5 centimetre scar on the right lower  leg
         and L9 was a  1.5  centimetre  scar  next  to  it.   L10  was  a  2
         centimetre depressed scar on the left lower leg.   All  three  were
         attributed to a dando, a type of baton with a metal round it.   The
         appearance was "highly consistent" with the attribution  (paragraph
         39).

16. The Istanbul Protocol defines highly consistent as  "the  lesion  could
    have been caused by the trauma  described,  and  there  are  few  other
    possible causes".  Typical of is defined as "this is an appearance that
    is usually found within this  type  of  trauma,  but  there  are  other
    possible causes".

17. The judge dealt with the evidence in the following way.   At  paragraph
    37 she described Dr Cohen's report and identified her conclusions.  The
    judge stated that  the  doctor  provided  alternative  causes  for  the
    injuries, such as a fall directly forwards but  recognised  that  being
    struck with a pistol or being hit  with  a  wooden  baton  were  highly
    consistent causes.  She also noted  that  Dr  Cohen  commented  on  the
    passage of time since the injuries were inflicted.

18. She then wrote as follows:

         "The report of Dr Cohen is heavily dependent on the account of  the
         appellant.  She has considered the scars and lesions based  on  his
         account and she has found them to be  highly  consistent  with  the
         account.  She does  comment  on  the  difficulty  of  dating  these
         injuries, and she provides an alternative explanation.  They  could
         be accidental injuries.  She thinks they are  not  because  of  the
         number of the  injuries,  but  she  is  unable  to  date  them  and
         therefore cannot say whether they all occurred at the same time  or
         were acquired during different events.  Though I find the report to
         be  very  helpful,  it  does  not  assist  me  with  assessing  the
         credibility of the accounts given by the appellant and her husband.
          I have to consider the findings of Dr Cohen in the context of  the
         remainder of the appellant's evidence.  I am also not entirely sure
         about the documents which were provided to her".

19. There can be no real  complaint  about  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    evidence of Dr Cohen.  The judge recognised Dr Cohen's  expertise,  and
    she said that the report was very helpful.  She does  not  dispute  the
    doctor's findings.  She correctly states that the medical evidence  has
    to be assessed in the context of the evidence as a whole.   It  is  not
    disputed that the appellant's husband bears scars, some  of  which  may
    very likely have been caused by having been hit with a rifle butt.  The
    medical report however can say nothing about the circumstances in which
    the injuries were sustained.

20. There is no merit in the suggestion that the judge  unlawfully  reached
    her conclusions on the credibility of the claim  first,  before  taking
    into account the medical evidence.  She was bound to have  to  consider
    all of the different strands of the evidence  in  turn.   She  says  in
    terms that the findings of Dr Cohen had to be assessed in  the  context
    of the remainder of the evidence.  The fact that the medical report was
    considered last does not mean that her conclusions were reached without
    having  properly  taken  it  into  account.   In  fact,   her   overall
    conclusions on credibility are not reached until paragraph  40  of  the
    determination where she summed up all of the evidence and decided  that
    the appellant and her husband had tried to "weave a careful account  of
    persecution by their respective families." It is  only  at  that  point
    that she finally concludes that the account is false.

21. Second, with regard to the  FIRs,  the  judge  took  into  account  the
    appellant's point in relation to the  wrong  reference  number  on  the
    first FIR.  She was entitled to observe in respect of  that  FIR,  that
    the rest of the information was correct  including  the  date  and  the
    other reference.  She was also entitled to consider that  the  envelope
    containing some of the documents had been cut in places where the  date
    and other information would have been stamped.

22. Moreover, the appellant  makes  no  specific  challenge  to  the  third
    document verification report concluding  that  the  last  FIR  was  not
    genuine.

23. In any event, the judge did not rely solely upon the conclusions in the
    document verification report in relation to the  first  two  FIRs  when
    reaching her decision that the appellant had not been truthful  in  her
    claim.  At paragraph 33 she sets out a number of different reasons  for
    doubting the credibility of her story.

24. First, it was not credible that she would have been allowed to work  if
    her uncle was as strict as she claimed or that he would wait until  she
    was 22 years of age before arranging a marriage for  her.   Second,  it
    was not credible that her husband, having married  only  a  short  time
    before into a wealthy and influential family, would be entering into  a
    relationship with another woman.  It was particularly unlikely that her
    husband's cousin's wife would be instrumental in introducing  them  for
    that purpose.

25. Most important, there was a substantial  delay  in  making  this  claim
    which was only made after the appellant had been refused further  leave
    to remain as a student.  Not only did she arrive here as a student, but
    she applied to extend her leave to remain on two occasions and  it  was
    only after these had been  rejected  that  she  decided  to  apply  for
    asylum.

26. This is a meticulously drafted determination.  The judge  analysed  the
    evidence in great detail and came to conclusions plainly open  to  her.
    The grounds disclose no arguable error.

Notice of Decision

27. The original judge did not err in law.  Her decision stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 26 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
