

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06459/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 15 July 2016                               |On 29 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           MR AHMED MOHAMMED ARIF

                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Lane        (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the appellant's appeal to the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
the permission of a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal, against a decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Juss hereinafter "the Judge") dismissing
his appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  of  15 August 2014
refusing to grant him asylum or any other form of international  protection.


2.    By way of background, the appellant, who is a  national  of  Iraq  and
was born on 1 January 1952, had come to the UK for temporary purposes.  He
is, it is accepted, Kurdish.  He says that he is from Kirkuk.  He also  says
that he  had,  along  with  his  business  partner,  been  the  owner  of  a
car company in Kirkuk.

3.    The appellant says that whilst he was lawfully in the UK  he  received
a telephone call on 25 December 2012 from one Abu Hamza, a man  based  in
Iraq, demanding money.  He says that he contacted his business  partner  who
said he did not know anything about it. However, on 1 January 2013 his home
was raided and money, some possessions  and  some  papers  were  taken.   He
asked his business partner to report the  incident  to  the  police  on  his
behalf.   There  followed  a  raid  upon  the  car company  and  a  further
telephone call from Abu Hamza demanding further money and  making  threats.
The business was then destroyed and his business partner fled.  A  neighbour
subsequently informed him that men had come to his  home  seeking  him  out.
The appellant claims that  the  persons  who  have  been  seeking  him  out,
stealing his property and  threatening  him  are  Shia militants  who  have
targeted him, in part, because he is a business man and they believe him  to
be wealthy.  He says that his business partner has now been killed.

4.    The asylum claim was refused because the Secretary  of  State,  whilst
accepting that the appellant is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity,  did
not accept anything else of substance concerning  the  account  underpinning
the claim.  The appellant appealed but his account  of  the  claimed  events
did  not  find  favour  with  the Judge  either.   In  saying  why  he  was
disbelieving the appellant the Judge said this:

      "     14.  First, this is a case where  the  appellant  and  his  wife
      came to the UK on the basis of an expressly stated intention to  visit
      family members in this country and then to return.  They purported  at
      the time to put themselves forward as a couple of some  substance  who
      had no difficulty whatsoever in Iraq.  Subsequently, it is being  said
      that the facts on the grounds have changed.  The facts on the  ground,
      however, as they apply to these appellants bear consideration.

            15.  Second, the facts that are being prayed in aid do not  make
      sense.  The appellant, who was never targeted in Iraq, is suddenly now
      approached by a man called Abu Hamza in the United Kingdom.  This was
      the evidence.  It is the evidence in his witness statement.   The  way
      he is approached, is not just by letters, which have been produced  at
      the hearing before us, but by 'a  phone  call  from  Abu Hamza'  (see
      paragraph 10).  It was never explained in evidence how this  man  was
      able to telephone the appellant at his home  in  the  United Kingdom.
      This evidence is wholly lacking in credibility.  Similarly lacking  in
      credibility, is the evidence that, if  the  appellant  was  a  Kurdish
      Muslim in Iraq, who stood to be targeted,  but  was  not  targeted  in
      Iraq, is now being targeted by way of letters being sent to him, which
      had been sent after he arrived in the country by Alminted Company.

            16.  Third, the  appellant's  evidence  was  that  his  partner,
      Abu Bakir Khalaf was spared, only because he was an Arab, and was not
      therefore at risk otherwise he would  have  been  targeted.   Yet  the
      witness statement then goes on to say  (see  paragraph 24)  'that  my
      business partner has been killed'.  The evidence is totally convoluted
      and is presented in whichever way suits the purposes of the appellant.



            17.  Fourth, the reason why the appellant himself  is  allegedly
      targeted is also lacking in credibility.  In his witness statement  he
      first states that, 'Abu Hamza was just prepared to get whatever money
      he  could  with  his  threats,  regardless  of  what   I   did'   (see
      paragraph 12).  Yet, later on he goes on to say that, 'I would like to
      emphasise that the issue of my business and the money were  never  the
      driving factor in why I have been targeted by Abu Hamza ...  I  have
      been targeted because I am a Kurdish Muslim' (see paragraph 23).

            18.  Finally, there is the witness statement of Tariq Arif, who
      did not attend to give evidence and who states that, 'I  confirm  that
      when my father came to visit he had intentions of returning  to  Iraq'
      (paragraph 6).   Yet,  he  also  now  states  that,  'he  had  never
      experienced any problems from the Shia militia whilst he was in Iraq'
      (paragraph 7).  If the appellant did not experience any problems from
      the Shia militia, which  were  still  active  at  the  time  that  the
      appellant set out to come to the UK, then it does not make  sense  why
      he would be targeted now.  It certainly is not credible that he  would
      be telephoned at  home  by  a  man  called  Abu Hamza.   The  witness
      statement of Tariq Arif also goes on to refer to 'this whole issue is
      really affecting my father's health' (paragraph 4) and gives  details
      in the way that the appellant himself did not, and in the way that his
      advocate himself did not emphasise.  All in all, I conclude  that  the
      asylum claim is a complete fabrication."

5.    The Judge then went on to consider whether or not the appellant might
be entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.  He was  required  to  do
that because it was being contended on  behalf  of  the  appellant,  amongst
other things, that he would be at risk at least in his claimed home area  of
Iraq as a result of there being an internal armed conflict  in  the  country
or, at least, in that part of the country.  It was also  contended  that  he
would not be able  to  safely  internally  relocate.   As  to  such  matters
the Judge said this:

      "     19.  As I found that the appellant is  not  a  refugee,  I  must
      also consider whether he qualifies  for  humanitarian  protection.   I
      found that  the  background  country  information  evidence  does  not
      indicate that such a person would be at risk of persecution or serious
      ill-treatment  of  any  kind.   I  have   taken   into   account   the
      22 August 2014 Country Information Report.  Having  found  that  the
      appellant is not a refugee because he  has  not  established  a  well-
      founded fear of persecution, by analogy, I  find  that  the  appellant
      could not qualify for humanitarian protection either."

6.    Permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  was  sought  and  was
initially refused by a judge  of  the  First-tier Tribunal.   However,  the
application was renewed on the basis that the Judge had failed  to  explain
why the appellant would not be  at  risk  on  the  basis  of  indiscriminate
violence resulting from an internal armed conflict and had (as I  understand
the grounds) made contradictory  or  irrational  findings.   Permission  was
granted by a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal and the  salient  part  of
that ground reads as follows:

      "The grounds assert that the Judge erred materially in law in failing
      to consider material matters  viz.  that  the  determination  has  not
      assessment  (sic)  of  the  'level  of  indiscriminate  violence  that
      substantial grounds exist  for  believing  that  an  applicant  would,
      solely by being present there, face a real risk  which  threatens  his
      life or person' [6].  Reference is also made to the  increased  levels
      of indiscriminate violence and worsening  of  the  armed  conflict  in
      Kirkuk City and Province [10].  Whilst Judge Juss touched upon  the
      issue of humanitarian protection at 19 it is arguable that he did not
      engage with the Article 15(c) test or provide  adequate  reasons  for
      finding  that  the  appellant  did  not   qualify   for   humanitarian
      protection."

7.    The grant of permission  was  not  limited.   Permission  having  been
granted the matter came before me for an oral hearing.   Representation  was
as stated above and I am grateful to both  representatives  for  their  oral
submissions.  I am also  grateful  to  Mr Lane  for  providing  me  with  a
skeleton argument in which it was contended that the Judge had indeed erred
in failing to consider the general security  situation  in  the  appellant's
home area when considering the  humanitarian  protection  aspect  and  that,
further, his assessment as  to  credibility  had  been  inadequate.   I  did
wonder whether the second point might have strayed  beyond  the  grounds  as
drafted but I think what is said therein is wide  enough  to  cover  such  a
contention and Mr Mills did not seek to suggest otherwise.

8.    Mr Lane, in his oral  submissions,  contended  that,  for  particular
reasons, all of the paragraphs of the determination explaining the  negative
credibility assessment were unsafe.  He also maintained  the  contention  in
the grounds and in his skeleton argument regarding what  was  said  to  have
been an inadequate assessment  as  to  the  humanitarian  protection  issue.
Mr Mills,  with  respect  to  the  credibility  side  of  things,  took  a
conciliatory stance and acknowledged that Mr Lane  had  put  forward  sound
arguments.  He did not seek to dissuade me from Mr Lane's  contention  that
the credibility assessment was flawed.  As to  humanitarian  protection,  he
accepted that that aspect had not been dealt with "as well as it could  have
been" but he suggested that  even  if  there  had  been  an  internal  armed
conflict in Kirkuk as at the date of  the  hearing  before  the Judge,  any
error in not so finding was not material because  it  was  obvious,  on  the
facts, that the  appellant  could  take  advantage  of  an  internal  flight
alternative.  As I understand it, though, Mr Mills did not actively  oppose
the contention that the determination ought to be set aside on the basis  of
the   adverse   credibility   finding   having   been   inadequate.     Both
representatives indicated that they thought, in the event of my setting  the
decision aside, remittal to  the  First-tier Tribunal  would  be  the  most
appropriate course of action.

9.    I have decided to set aside the determination of  the Judge.   As  to
the credibility assessment, the Judge stated, in effect, at paragraph 15 of
his determination that it had never been explained how Abu Hamza  had  been
able to telephone the appellant  at  his  address  in  the  United Kingdom.
However, whether it was to be believed or not, the appellant had offered  an
explanation which was to the effect that  Abu Hamza  had  obtained  his  UK
telephone number from one of his employees in Iraq.   That  explanation  is,
in fact, referred to it at paragraph 11(c)  and  (d)  of  the  reasons  for
refusal letter as Mr Lane points out.   As  to  the Judge's  comments  and
findings at paragraph 16 of  the  determination,  the  appellant's  account
appears to have been to the effect that he had  been  told  that  unless  he
paid money to Abu Hamza or his associates the business would  be  destroyed
and his  business  partner  killed  and  that,  subsequently,  that  killing
occurred.  So, there does not appear to have been the inconsistency  in  the
account which the Judge had thought he  had  identified.   Further,  whilst
the Judge thought (paragraph 17 of the determination) that  the  appellant
had been inconsistent as to why Abu Hamza  had  targeted  him,  his  having
suggested money was  the  motivation  at  one  point  and  then  his  having
suggested ethnicity was the motivation at  another,  that  was  to  overlook
what he had had to say at paragraph 11 of his witness statement  which,  in
effect, tied the two together.  So, it does seem to me that  the Judge  did
err in failing to fully consider what the appellant had had  to  say  before
rejecting his account.

10.    Mr Lane  did  make  certain  other  points  about  the  credibility
assessment but it does not seem to me to be necessary to say  anymore  given
the view I have already reached. I have decided that the decision should  be
set aside.

11.   In light of the above it is not  necessary  for  me  to  say  anything
about the other basis upon which the determination was attacked  either.   I
would just observe, in passing, that since the Judge made his decision  the
Upper Tribunal has decided the case of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG (2015)
UKUT 00544 (IAC) which will no doubt be of interest to the parties and  the
First-tier Tribunal which will have to rehear this case.

12.   I have decided, given what the representatives had to  say  before  me
about this, that the appropriate course is remittal.  That  is  particularly
so  because  given  the  conclusion  I  have  reached  as  to  the   adverse
credibility finding, an entirely fresh fact-finding exercise  will  have  to
be undertaken and that is best done by the First-tier Tribunal as an expert
fact-finding body.  I have, below, set out  some  directions  which  I  hope
will be of assistance to the First-tier Tribunal when it  comes  to  remake
the decision.

Directions

A.    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside  with  nothing
      preserved.  The appeal will have to be considered entirely afresh by a
      judge or panel of the First-tier Tribunal but should not involve  the
      judge who made the decision now set aside.

B.    The appeal shall, if practicable, be listed at  the  Bradford  Hearing
      Centre.  The time estimate will be  three  hours.   A  Kurdish  Sorani
      speaking interpreter will be required.

C.    There  is  contained  within  the  Upper Tribunal  file  the  various
      documents which were before the First-tier Tribunal and  those  which
      have been sent to  the  Upper Tribunal  and  received  by  it  as  at
      15 July 2016.  If either party  wishes  to  rely  upon  any  further
      documentary evidence, in whatever form, then that documentary evidence
      is to be sent to the First-tier Tribunal at Birmingham (with  a  copy
      being sent to the other party at the same time) in sufficient time for
      it to be received at least five working days prior to the  date  which
      will be fixed for the fresh rehearing.  Any such documentation  is  to
      be in the form of an indexed and paginated bundle.

D.    Any additional or updating witness statements which are to  be  relied
      upon must also be filed and served within five  working  days  of  the
      date which shall be fixed for hearing.

E.    Any party filing  documentation  not  in  accordance  with  the  above
      requirements should not assume that such documentation,  whatever  its
      content,  will  be  admitted   for   consideration   by   the   First-
      tier Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  Its decision is, therefore, set aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

I make no anonymity direction.

Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.

Signed:                                 Date: 29 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
