
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06413/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 February 2016                           |On 17 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     PL
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Neil Barnes,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Wallace dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

2) The appellant was born in October 1997 and is of Vietnamese  nationality.
    The appellant claimed asylum in April 2014 but he claims that he arrived
   in the UK as an unaccompanied minor around 10 months before that date.

3) According to the appellant he left  Vietnam  with  his  mother  in  2012.
   They were in Russia for about a month but the appellant travelled  on  to
   the UK alone.  His mother intended to follow him.  The  appellant  thinks
   that she did not  have  enough  money  for  both  of  them  travel.   The
   appellant travelled with about 24 other people from  Russia  to  Belarus.
   He was there for 7-8 months and finally succeeded in travelling to Poland
   hidden in a van.  From Poland the appellant travelled to France where  he
   stayed in the "jungle" near Calais for a further 3 months before entering
   the UK hidden in a lorry.  On arrival he was initially  detained  by  the
   police but released.  He was then collected by someone who knew about him
   and taken to a house.  After about a  month  there  he  was  taken  to  a
   restaurant where he was made to work for around  9-10  months.   When  he
   escaped from the restaurant he made his  way  to  Glasgow,  where  social
   workers provided him with accommodation and helped  him  make  an  asylum
   claim.

4) In April 2014  the  appellant  was  referred  to  the  national  referral
   mechanism for a decision on whether he was a victim of trafficking.  As a
   result of this process it was  decided  that  he  was  not  a  victim  of
   trafficking.  This aspect of the appellant's claim  does  not  appear  to
   have been pursued further before the First-tier Tribunal.

5) Since his arrival in the UK the appellant has had  no  contact  with  his
   mother.  He has approached the Red Cross for assistance in  locating  her
   but without success.

6) The reason given by the appellant for leaving Vietnam was that he  had  a
   fight with a boy whose family was powerful.  The boy's father was a  high
   ranking police officer, his uncle was an official, and  his  aunt  was  a
   Party secretary.  According to the appellant he had  endured  verbal  and
   physical abuse from this boy and, although  his  mother  advised  him  to
   restrain himself, the time came when he hit the boy with  a  stone.   The
   appellant said his mother later  told  him  that  the  boy  had  required
   emergency surgery and that the police were  looking  for  the  appellant.
   The appellant's mother had had her difficulties with the  authorities  by
   virtue of being a Catholic, which was regarded as  being  anti-Communist.
   The appellant's mother had been arrested in November or December 2011 and
   held for two days.  The appellant thought this  was  connected  with  her
   religious activities.

7) The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  find  the  appellant's
   evidence credible.  The judge recorded that the appellant was forthcoming
   in giving oral evidence and was candid in answering questions but, in the
   judge's opinion, this candour highlighted weaknesses in  the  appellant's
   claim.  The judge noted that the appellant himself  had  had  no  contact
   with the police and he did not have any first-hand knowledge of what  had
   happened to the boy whom he allegedly injured.   Although  the  appellant
   had asked his mother why she  had  been  arrested  she  seemed  to  avoid
   answering the question.  The appellant himself had  not  encountered  any
   problems because of his  religion.   He  had  not  received  any  adverse
   treatment from the authorities.

8) According to the appellant before they left the country his  mother  took
   him to Hanoi because the police were looking for him at the family  home.
   It was the appellant's mother who had told him after they left home  that
   the boy had required emergency surgery and that the police  were  looking
   for the appellant.  Only in Hanoi did the appellant tell his mother  what
   had happened.  This suggested to the judge that  the  appellant  and  his
   mother had moved from the family home to Hanoi for some other reason than
   the incident alleged by the appellant.  The judge concluded at  paragraph
   45 that all "that has been presented to the  court  is  evidence  sourced
   from hearsay".  She added that there  was  no  evidence  to  support  the
   appellant's assertion that he is, or indeed, ever had been, the focus  of
   attention from the Vietnamese authorities.

9) The judge also found that the appellant would be able to  relocate  to  a
   city such as Hanoi in order to avoid difficulties in his home area.

Application for permission to appeal

10) The grounds of the application for permission to appeal are lengthy  but
   they start with the judge's conclusion that all that  the  appellant  had
   presented to the court was evidence sourced from hearsay and  that  there
   was no evidence to support the appellant's assertions that  he  had  ever
   been the focus of attention by the Vietnamese authorities.  It is pointed
   out that independent or corroborative evidence  is  not  required  in  an
   asylum appeal.  It is further observed that the  appellant  was  only  14
   years and 3 months old when he left Vietnam.  The Red Cross  were  unable
   to locate any family members of his there.  The judge  did  not  identify
   any inconsistencies between the  appellant's  evidence  and  the  country
   situation in Vietnam.  She said that the appellant had been  very  candid
   in answering questions.  The judge's reason for rejecting the appellant's
   account on the basis that there was no evidence to support his  assertion
   that he was the focus of attention by the  Vietnamese  authorities  could
   not be maintained.

11) It was further submitted that  the  judge  was  wrong  to  describe  the
   evidence as hearsay.  The Tribunal was not bound by the strict  rules  of
   evidence.  There  was  nothing  in  the  decision  to  suggest  that  the
   appellant's credibility was rejected for anything other than  a  lack  of
   corroborative evidence.  Once it was accepted that there was  a  credible
   reason for the absence of corroborative evidence, it  was  irrational  to
   reject evidence purely because it was hearsay.

12) It was further submitted that the judge had  failed  to  give  rational,
   adequate reasons for doubting the substance of what the appellant claimed
   to have heard or been told.  The judge failed to take account of relevant
   considerations, such as the appellant's age and level of maturity at  the
   relevant time, in determining the significance of his inability to recall
   certain things, his lack of knowledge and his actions.    Had  the  judge
   taken into account the appellant's age  and  level  of  maturity,  it  is
   conceivable that she would  have  reached  a  different  conclusion  with
   regard to whether the  appellant  had  established  his  account  to  the
   required standard of proof.

13) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable  that
   the judge had failed to have regard to the fact that the appellant was  a
   minor on arrival in the UK and at the date  of  the  hearing  before  the
   First-tier  Tribunal.   No  reference  had  been  made   to   the   Joint
   Presidential Guidance of 2010 on Child, Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive
   Appellants.   It  was  further  arguable  that   the   judge's   apparent
   requirement for  corroboration  and  the  criticism  of  the  appellant's
   evidence as hearsay suggested that she had not considered the decision in
   ST (corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119.

Submissions

14) In his submission at the hearing Mr Devlin began  by  referring  to  the
   decision of the competent authority in relation to the trafficking claim.
   He said this had been challenged by way of a petition for judicial review
   lodged in December 2015.  As  a  result  of  this  the  decision  of  the
   competent authorities  was  withdrawn  on  23  December  and  no  further
   decision had been made as yet.

15) Turning to the grounds of the application for permission to  appeal,  Mr
   Devlin submitted that the judge was wrong to say there was no evidence to
   support the appellant's assertion that he had been the focus of attention
   by  the  Vietnamese  authorities.   There  was  the  appellant's  witness
   statement.  If the judge thought that there ought to be further  evidence
   the question to be asked was whether there was a good or credible  reason
   for the absence of such evidence, in accordance with TK  (Burundi).   The
   appellant had fled Vietnam at the age of  14.   He  had  been  unable  to
   contact his family since, even via the Red Cross.  The  judge  had  found
   the appellant had been candid in giving evidence but  commented  on  what
   she regarded as a lack of evidence.  This was an error of law.

16) Mr Devlin continued that the judge's second error  was  to  regard  such
   evidence as there was as hearsay.  Evidence  might  be  accepted  by  the
   Tribunal even if it would not be accepted under the strict rules.   There
   was  a  credible  explanation  by  the  appellant  as  to  the  lack   of
   corroboration.  It made no sense to reject the  appellant's  evidence  as
   based on hearsay.  There was  nothing  implausible  about  the  appellant
   saying he knew only what he had been told.  There was no  reason  not  to
   accept that the appellant had been told certain things by his mother.  If
   it was accepted that this is what he had been told  then  was  there  any
   reason not to believe it?  His mother had taken him  to  Hanoi  and  then
   they had left the country.  Was  there  any  reason  to  think  that  the
   evidence described by the judge as hearsay was inaccurate or  unreliable?
   There was no basis for this having regard to the low standard of proof.

17) Mr Devlin continued that  the  appellant's  evidence  should  have  been
   given a benevolent construction.  The Tribunal should not have read  into
   the evidence something that was not  there.   The  judge  had  not  given
   rational reasons.  The judge had not had regard to  the  appellant's  age
   and level of maturity.

18) Mr Devlin then drew to my attention that there was  a  sentence  missing
   from the grounds of the application for permission to appeal.  After  the
   seventh paragraph on page 5 there should have been  a  sentence  reading:
   "In all the circumstances the fact that the appellant had had  no  first-
   hand knowledge of the sequelae of the attack or the visit from the police
   could not  provide  a  rational  or  adequate  reason  for  doubting  the
   substance of what the appellant claimed to have heard and been told about
   the sequelae of the incident and the visit of the police."

19) Mr Devlin said the judge drew an adverse inference  from  the  appellant
   having told his mother about the incident with the  boy  only  in  Hanoi.
   The judge was wrong  to  draw  such  an  inference.   The  appellant  was
   referring to having told his mother about  the  details  of  the  attack.
   This was apparent from his use of the word "exactly" in Q47 of the asylum
   interview.  This account was anyway consistent  with  what  he  had  said
   about her telling him of the police visit.  It  was  not  appropriate  to
   assume that the appellant had not told  his  mother  anything  about  the
   incident and that therefore this could not have  been  their  reason  for
   leaving home and going to Hanoi.

20) On behalf of the respondent, Mrs O'Brien stated that a  rule  24  notice
   had been filed, although  unfortunately  this  did  not  appear  to  have
   reached the Tribunal's appeal file.  The thrust of the rule 24 notice was
   that the grounds  in  the  application  for  permission  to  appeal  were
   disagreements  with  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  and  that   the
   phraseology used by the judge had been misconstrued.

21) Mrs O'Brien pointed out that at paragraph 34 the judge made  a  positive
   finding in favour of the appellant about how candid he was  in  answering
   questions.  The difficulty for  the  appellant,  however,  was  that  his
   account lacked substance.  It was very vague.  It was  acknowledged  that
   there were no strict rules of evidence and that this meant that  the  use
   of the term "hearsay" by the judge could be misleading.  It was necessary
   however to look at the entirety of the reasons.   The  problem  with  the
   decision was one of terminology rather than of failure  to  consider  the
   evidence appropriately.

22) Mrs O'Brien further submitted that  the  appellant's  account  could  be
   seen as an instance of prosecution and he could be seen  as  evading  the
   consequences of criminality.  What the judge said was that there was  not
   enough evidence to make a positive finding even to the lower standard  of
   proof.

23) With regard to  the  question  of  the  appellant's  age.   Mrs  O'Brien
   pointed out that this judge was acknowledged to be an academic expert  on
   the human rights of children.  According  to  the  judge's  findings  the
   appellant left home with his mother without the mother being fully  aware
   of the facts.  This was why doubt  was  raised  as  to  the  reasons  for
   leaving home.  It was difficult to attribute the appellant's alleged fear
   of return to the possibility of being brought before an unfair  court  in
   Vietnam.  This might be  a  real  question  of  prosecution  rather  than
   persecution.

24) Mrs O'Brien further submitted  that  when  the  judge  referred  to  "no
   evidence" she was referring to the quality of the evidence.  There was no
   evidence of the current situation.  The Red Cross had not  been  able  to
   trace the appellant's mother and were silent  on  other  family  members.
   The question was whether the judge had done enough.

25) Mrs O'Brien further pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  been  given
   discretionary leave until he was 17�, which was the end  of  April  2015.
   It was pointed out that a further application by the appellant  had  been
   refused and a second appeal was pending.  The suggestion was made that if
   an error of law was found and the appeal was remitted then  both  appeals
   could be heard together before the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

26) Mrs O'Brien properly expressed the question in this  appeal  as  one  of
   whether the judge had done enough.  If the appellant had been of full age
   when he appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  might  have  been
   inclined to accept Mrs O'Brien's arguments in this regard and  find  that
   although the judge's use of phrases such as "no evidence"  and  "hearsay"
   were misleading, nevertheless having weighed the evidence the  judge  was
   entitled to make an adverse finding.

27) This is not the position, however.  The appellant was  an  unaccompanied
   child when he arrived in the UK and he was a minor at  the  time  of  his
   appearance before the First-tier Tribunal.  It  is  not  clear  from  the
   judge's decision what weight she gave to this as a  factor  in  assessing
   the appellant's account.  It is a matter which  should  have  been  taken
   into consideration.  The knowledge the appellant would have been expected
   to have about what had taken place in Vietnam and  the  position  of  the
   people concerned would have been much greater if he  had  been  an  adult
   than should be expected of a boy of 13 or 14.

28) Having regard to the appellant's  age,  the  judge  ought  to  have  had
   regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance.  This  would  have  drawn  the
   judge's attention to particular issues  which  may  arise  in  a  hearing
   involving a child, such as the possibility that  children  often  do  not
   provide as much detail as adults in recalling experiences and  may  often
   manifest their fears differently from adults.

29) When the appellant's age is taken into account, many of  the  criticisms
   made by Mr Devlin of the judge's  decision  acquire  significant  weight.
   The judge does not appear to have taken into account the appellant's  age
   when considering both the extent to which his knowledge depended on  what
   he had been told by adults, particularly his mother, and  the  extent  to
   which his knowledge of the circumstances surrounding  the  incident  with
   the other boy were affected by his age.  For example, the  appellant  did
   not know the rank in the police of the father of the other boy and he did
   not know the position occupied  by  the  boy's  aunt,  who  was  a  party
   secretary.  These things would not necessarily be known to a boy of 13 or
   14.

30) Mrs O'Brien suggested that the appellant's fear was one  of  prosecution
   rather than persecution but  this  was  not  the  basis  of  the  judge's
   reasoning.  Again, the age of the boys involved in the  violent  incident
   must be taken into account.  Different considerations may apply in  terms
   of juvenile behaviour from the behaviour of offending adults.

31) The judge's decision relies upon an  adverse  credibility  finding  made
   without taking into account that the areas where the appellant's evidence
   appeared to the judge to be vague, or based only on what he said  he  had
   been told, might be accounted for by the appellant's age at the  time  in
   question.  This constitutes an error of law which would  appear  to  have
   materially affected the judge's findings.  Accordingly  her  decision  is
   set aside.

32) The judge's error was  central  to  the  findings  which  she  made  and
   accordingly none of her findings should  be  preserved.   Fresh  findings
   should be made by remitting the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
   heard before a different judge.  If a combined hearing can be  held  with
   the appellant's current appeal that may  well  be  the  most  appropriate
   procedure.

Conclusions

33) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

34) I set aside the decision.

35) The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings
   preserved for hearing before a different judge.

Anonymity

36) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   As  the
   asylum appeal is continuing, however, and as the  appellant  has  made  a
   number of claims about what happened to him as a minor, I  consider  that
   such an order should be made in the following terms.  Pursuant to Rule 14
   of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I make an anonymity
   order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise, no report
   of these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or
   indirectly or indirectly identify the  original  appellant.   This  order
   applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to comply with this
   order could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
