
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06072/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 October 2013                            |On 1 November 2013           |
|Reserved judgment                             |                             |


                                   Before

                 THE PRESIDENT, THE HON MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                      MOHAMMAD ABSOLAH ELHABIB ABOSALAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (of counsel)  instructed by Broudie
Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

INTRODUCTION

[1]  This appeal originates in a decision of  7th  June  2013  made  by  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ("the Secretary  of  State")
    whereby the  Appellant's  application  for  asylum  was  refused.   The
    Appellant was then notified of a decision to remove him from the United
    Kingdom. His ensuing appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal ("the Tribunal")
    was unsuccessful.


THE APPELLANT'S IMMIGRATION HISTORY

[2]  The salient facts are uncontentious and we summarise  them  thus.   The
    Appellant is a Libyan national, born on 14th  January  1978.   On  27th
    December 2008, he was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom,  as  a
    student, expiring on 29th October 2009.  He  then  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in March 2009 for a relatively brief sojourn.  On 26th  October
    2009, he was again granted leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom,  as  a
    student, expiring on 30th December 2010.  Subsequently, he entered  the
    United Kingdom on 1st December  2009.  His  movements  and  whereabouts
    during the following year are unclear.  On 25th January  2011,  he  was
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom for a third time, again as  a
    student, expiring on 31st October 2011.  On 27th January 2011, he  flew
    from Libya to the United Kingdom.  Having made  a  timeous  application
    for extended leave to remain in the United Kingdom, as a  student,  his
    leave was extended to 30th March 2013.  On 1st May 2013, his  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom having expired, he claimed asylum.


THE APPELLANT'S CLAIM FOR ASYLUM

[3]  The record of  the  screening  interview  conducted  on  1st  May  2013
    discloses that the risk of persecution on return to Libya  asserted  by
    the Appellant had two strands.  The first was his claim to have been  a
    member of Colonel Gaddafi's Revolutionary  Guard.   This,  he  claimed,
    entailed pro-Gadaffi activism, including the promotion of the so-called
    "Green Book".  His membership dated from 1999 to  2007.   He  suggested
    that  around  half  of  the  Libyan  population  were  members  of  the
    Revolutionary  Guard.   Members  wore  a  green  military  uniform  and
    headgear, loaned to them, only on the occasion of Gaddafi  speeches  in
    public.  Membership conferred certain social and economic benefits  and
    enhanced the Appellant's prospects of  going  abroad  to  study.   This
    aspiration was realised in 2008, when he was granted a  scholarship  to
    study for a MA in the United Kingdom.

[4]  The second element of the asylum claim advanced by  the  Appellant  was
    his Touareg ethnicity.   He suggested that this was the reason for  the
    claimed suspension of  his  scholarship  and  his  asserted  consequent
    inability to complete his course in the United Kingdom.  In  interview,
    he stated:


         ".... Gaddafi brought some Touareg fighters from  Africa  to  fight
         with him and we were affected badly by this."


    He confirmed that the Touareg people had no involvement  in  the  anti-
    Gadaffi  movement.   The  ensuing  two  questions   and   answers   are
    noteworthy:


         "So are you saying that you have a  problem  now  because  you  are
         perceived to have been pro-Gadaffi? ...... Yes ......


         A:   Are all Touareg facing this problem, all perceived to be  pro-
         Gaddafi? ....  Yes in the south, from my city where I came from."



     [A reference to Al Uwaynat city.]

     The Appellant also stated:

         "My brother called and informed me in the  beginning  of  Feb  2011
         that I was wanted by the Libyan government.  I don't know why.   If
         I go back my life will end."


    The Appellant answered "No" when asked whether he  was  subject  to  an
    arrest warrant or wanted  by  any  law  enforcement  authority  for  an
    offence in any country.




[5]  In a subsequent letter, his solicitors indicated that having taken  his
    instructions they   wished to make the following "clarification":


         "I am wanted by the Militias now in control of Libya as  I  and  my
         family are now identified as supporters  of  the  former  President
         Gaddafi.  Also we are being persecuted on account of our  ethnicity
         as black tribes members from the south of the  country  as  we  are
         suspected of being affiliates of the former regime."


    This encapsulates the Appellant's application for asylum.  Finally, the
    Appellant's explanation for his delay in claiming asylum  was  that  he
    was ill following the "first interview" viz  the  screening  interview,
    which preceded the substantive interview by 15 days.  Duly analysed, he
    provided no explanation for his failure to claim asylum  prior  to  the
    expiry of his student visa on 30th March 2013. The formulation  of  the
    Appellant's case gained momentum following the lodgement of his  appeal
    to the Tribunal.  In a witness statement compiled for  the  purpose  of
    the first instance hearing, he added the following:


         ".....  All Libyans know that the very  fact  of  being  black  and
         Touareg places you at great risk now in Libya.  The  Militias  link
         your ethnicity with Gaddafi regardless of any  so-called  evidence.
         I am actually associated with Gaddafi but even if I was not I would
         be at risk and I know this ....  I would have to travel back to the
         south of Libya with all the dangers  of  being  stopped  or  killed
         present .....   The case worker is failing to  engage  with  how  I
         would arrive back at Tripoli and then travel 1,000 miles to my home
         area without being stopped .....


         My ethnicity will place me in the eyes of those who  are  concerned
         about these things in Libya as a friend of Gaddafi and therefore  a
         traitor and a person who should be killed."


    Two material facts which have at all  times  been  undisputed  are  the
    Appellant's Libyan nationality and his Touareg ethnicity.


DECISION OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL

[6]  The Tribunal made  two  principal  conclusions.   First,  there  was  a
    finding  that  the  Appellant's  case  was  incredulous.   This  was  a
    carefully reasoned finding.  Second, the Tribunal considered  that  the
    Appellant  could  travel  safely  from  Tripoli  airport  to  his  home
    district.  As this latter conclusion developed into the centrepiece  of
    the appeal to this Tribunal, it is appropriate to identify its  several
    ingredients, which were the following:

    (a)  Given the Appellant's  evidence  that  his  parents  and  siblings
         continued to live in his home area, apparently enjoying a  peaceful
         life, the Judge considered this to contraindicate  any  persecution
         of Touareg people on account of their ethnicity.

    (b)  There was no evidence that Touareg people  are  "automatically  at
         risk of persecution  or  treatment  prohibited  by  Article  3"  at
         Tripoli airport.

    (c)  The Appellant will be able to fly  from  Tripoli  airport  to  the
         airport at Ghat, in his home district.  From there he will be  able
         to travel home.

    (d)  There are friends and  family  members  available  to  assist  the
         Appellant with his internal travel arrangements.  This travel  will
         be feasible, even though it "may not be entirely comfortable".


[7]  As  highlighted  above,  the  Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  had  two
    elements.  The first of these, the "pro-Gadaffi" element, was dismissed
    by the Judge  in  uncompromising  terms.   While  this  aspect  of  the
    Determination formed one of the three grounds of  appeal,  it  features
    nowhere in the grant of permission to appeal and was not pursued by  Ms
    Patel (of Counsel).  For the avoidance of any doubt, we  consider  this
    aspect of  the  first  instance  Determination  unimpeachable.   It  is
    cogently reasoned and exhibits no semblance of an error of law.


THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL

[8]  The two grounds of  appeal  which  were  pursued  actively  are  inter-
    related.  They are formulated in these terms:

    (a)  The Tribunal erred in finding that Touaregs are  not  at  risk  of
         persecution in Libya by virtue of their ethnicity.

    (b)  The Tribunal erred in finding that the Appellant  could  access  a
         safe area in Libya.


    It is appropriate to observe that,  as  formulated,  neither  of  these
    grounds complains of any identifiable error of law. Properly  analysed,
    and subject to this observation, we consider that these two contentions
    combine to form a single, omnibus contention, namely the Tribunal erred
    in failing to conclude that  the  Appellant  is  a  refugee.   At  this
    juncture, we draw attention to the grant of permission to appeal, which
    is couched in admirably clear and reasoned terms :


         "The grounds are arguable, particularly in relation to the  country
         evidence .... The Judge records that  he  has  taken  into  account
         material  contained  in  the  Appellant's  bundle.   There  is   no
         substantial mention of this evidence, or of  the  country  evidence
         before the Tribunal, thereafter ......


         It is arguable that the Judge has, with respect, not  engaged  with
         the country evidence in the  Appellant's  bundle  which  shows,  as
         contended in the grounds, that many Libyans tend  to  identify  all
         Touareg people as supporters of the Gadaffi regime and  that  there
         is  a  Militia  presence  at  Tripoli  airport,  with  the  central
         government acting as bystanders.  It is arguable that  the  Judge's
         conclusion  that  there  is  no  risk   at   Tripoli   airport   is
         insufficiently reasoned as there may have been no  engagement  with
         this relevant country evidence."

     [Emphasis added.]

    As the grant of permission to appeal clearly demonstrates, the focus of
    attention for the First-Tier Tribunal was:


    (a)  the claim that all Touaregs are at risk of persecution in Libya on
         account of their ethnicity; and

    (b)  the claim that the  Appellant  could  not  safely  travel  through
         Tripoli Airport en route to a  safe  haven  in  the  south  of  the
         country.


THE COUNTRY EVIDENCE

[9]  The  country  evidence  was  contained  in  a  bundle  which  had  been
    presented to the First-Tier Tribunal.  Those aspects of  this  evidence
    which featured prominently upon the  hearing  of  the  appeal  in  this
    Tribunal were the following:

    (a)  An Amnesty International report dated 23rd May 2013.


    (b)  A UK Border Agency Operational Guidance  Note  ("OGN")  concerning
         Libya, dated May 2013.


    (c)  Extracts from a UKBA Country of Origin Information ("COI")  report
         dated 19th December 2012.


     The evidence also included certain internet materials documenting  the
    activities of Militia members at Tripoli airport on two dates, 4th June
    2012 and 4th August  2013.   In  addition,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal letter (dated 7th  June  2013)  rehearsed  certain  "background
    information":


         "Background information indicates that during and immediately after
         the Libyan  uprising,  all  dark-skinned  people  were  subject  to
         intense distrust and racism due to the Touareg involvement  in  the
         battle for Libya and that this led to  including  violent  attacks,
         robbery, beatings and abuses such as sexual violence  against  sub-
         Saharan nationals and dark-skinned civilians.  In relation  to  the
         situation of the Touaregs, background  information  indicates  that
         many Touareg were forced to leave their home town Ghadames ....  in
         the west of Libya and a number of them have not been able to return
         ......  [following a  period  of  armed  conflict  between  Touareg
         Militia and Ghadames Brigades  men  ....]   Background  information
         indicates that there were reports of Touaregs  being  removed  from
         their homes in Tripoli and held in detention centres  and  prisons,
         in the year 2012.  Despite searches of  reports  by  the  US  State
         Department, Crisis Group International  and internet searches  ....
         no evidence can be found to indicate that Touareg  people  in  your
         home area of Al Uwaynat, or elsewhere in Ghat district,  have  been
         subjected to persecutory treatment because of their  ethnicity,  or
         for any other reason, during or since the Libyan uprising."


    These passages constituted the foundation for the  "return  assessment"
    articulated in the next succeeding paragraph in the refusal letter:

         "It  is  considered  that  this  background   evidence   does   not
         demonstrate that there is a  general  level  of  ill  treatment  of
         Touaregs in your home area of Ghat district which gives  reason  to
         consider that you will be subjected to  such  treatment  on  return
         there."

    Notably, as  these  passages  demonstrate,  the  Secretary  of  State's
    refusal letter concentrated on the second of the two issues  identified
    above viz the ability of Touaregs to live safely in  certain  parts  of
    southern Libya but failed to engage with the first viz the  ability  of
    the Appellant to safely negotiate Tripoli  Airport  and  thereafter  to
    safely access one of these safe havens.

[10] We turn to consider the country evidence in a  little  greater  detail.
    The Amnesty International Annual Report for Libya, dated 23rd May 2013,
    contains the following summary:

         "Armed militias continued to commit  serious  human  rights  abuses
         with impunity, including arbitrary  arrests,  arbitrary  detention,
         torture and unlawful killings.  Thousands of  people  suspected  of
         formerly supporting or  fighting  for  Gaddafi's  Government,  over
         thrown in 2011, remained detained without charge or trial and  with
         no means of remedy.  Most were beaten or otherwise ill  treated  in
         custody; ten died after torture.  Tens of thousands of people  were
         forced to leave their homes in areas perceived  to  have  supported
         [Gaddafi] remained internally displaced and were at risk of revenge
         attacks and other abuses ....


         Impunity  remained  entrenched,  both  for   gross   human   rights
         violations committed in the  past  and  for  ongoing  human  rights
         abuses by armed militias ...."


    Elaborating, the report recounts the  emergence  of  large  numbers  of
    militias which filled the security vacuum following  the  overthrow  of
    the Gaddafi regime in 2011 and their continued activity :


         "Armed militias continued  to  seize  or  abduct  individuals  they
         suspected of having supported or fought for  Gaddafi's  government,
         taking them from their homes, workplaces, streets or check  points.
         Many were immediately beaten and had their homes looted and damaged
         ....


         Detainees  were  frequently  moved  from  one  makeshift  place  of
         detention to another ...


         The fate and whereabouts of some individuals abducted  by  militias
         remains unknown...


         Torture and other ill treatment remained  widespread,  particularly
         in detention facilities controlled by militias."


     In a brief reference to Tripoli Airport, the report states:

         "Four men from Tawargha [one  of  the  black  Libyan  tribes]  were
         arrested at Tripoli Airport on  6th  May  ....   [and]  were  still
         detained without trial .... at the end of the year."


     The report also records that some 58,000 people  were  reported  to  be
    internally displaced.


[11] The UKBA Operational Guidance note on Libya was also published  in  May
    2013. This report records the continuing  prevalence  of  revolutionary
    militias outside the main urban  centres  such  as  Tripoli.   In  many
    cases, these  groups  acted  as  self-appointed  security  forces.  The
    emergence of properly controlled and functioning central  military  and
    police forces was  sluggish.   The  pace  of  re-establishment  of  the
    judicial and prosecution systems was slow.  The interim government  had
    declared much of the southern part of the country, including  the  area
    around Ghadames, a "closed military zone", in an  apparent  attempt  to
    control population movements.   The  militias,  numbering  low  to  mid
    hundreds, constitute "the country's most  important  security  threat".
    Their  activities,  motivated  by  revenge,  include  "torture  against
    individuals   and   communities   suspected   of   being   loyal   [to]
    Gaddafi".These militias are described as "heavily  armed"  and  "a  law
    unto themselves".  They are prominent  particularly  in  the  east  and
    south of the country.  This report cautions:

         "The security and humanitarian situation in Libya remains fluid and
         some individuals may fall into an enhanced  risk  category  on  the
         basis of certain characteristics.  Each case must be considered  on
         its individual merits."


      In  this  context,  it  highlights  the  indiscriminate  detention  by
    militias of persons suspected of having supported the  Gaddafi  regime,
    including easily identifiable targets such as black  Tawarghas.   These
    activities were considered to be  of  diminishing  frequency.   It  was
    believed that there were maybe 7,000 such detainees.


[12] The OGM Guidance note also contains the following noteworthy passage:

         "Some minority groups and tribes associated with the Gaddafi regime
         remain internally displaced and have been targeted by rival groups,
         such as ......  the Touareg and Tebu ethnic groups ......


         It is likely that applicants in this category will be able to  show
         a need  for  international  protection.   Perceived  supporters  of
         Gaddafi and his regime are at  risk  of  extra-judicial  execution,
         arbitrary detention, torture, ill treatment and death in detention,
         both  by  authorities  of  the  Interim  Government  or  its  armed
         affiliates,  as  well  as  by  armed  militias  operating   without
         government control.  Communities perceived to be loyal  to  Gaddafi
         have also experienced forced displacement, indiscriminate shelling,
         looting and the burning of homes."

              [Our emphasis.]


     Given the issues raised by this appeal, this is a key  passage  in  the
    report.  In the  next  section,  the  improbability  of  safe  internal
    relocation by those belonging to this  category  is  acknowledged.   In
    other passages of the report one finds the following:

         "Applicants may make asylum and/or human rights claims based  on  a
         fear of mistreatment by either a state or non-state actors  due  to
         their membership of an ethnic group ....

              The principal minorities were Amazigh, Touareg and Debou ....

         There was  societal  discrimination  and  violence  originating  in
         ethnic differences.  Racial discrimination  existed  against  dark-
         skinned Libyan's .....   in  particular  due  to  allegations  that
         Gaddafi used African mercenaries during the  conflict.  There  were
         reports of dark-skinned Libyans as well as Touaregs  being  removed
         from their homes in Tripoli  and  held  in  detention  centres  and
         prisons.  In a section specially devoted to the Touareg tribe,  the
         report states:


             'Libya is home to  a  Touareg  community  of  roughly  100,000
             people ....   Many Libyans tend to  identify  all  Touareg  as
             regime supporters.  Near the desert  town  of  Ghadames  local
             Touareg were threatened by rebels seeking to expel them .....


             The Touareg tribes have been subjected to ethnic cleansing for
             the past 8 months.  the Ghadames tribe,  which  is  backed  by
             forces affiliated with the National Transitional  Council,  is
             allegedly carrying out  these  acts.  The  latter  burned  and
             destroyed hostels and stables belonging to the  Touareg  tribe
             and expelled them from the  city,  forcing  them  to  flee  to
             Algeria.  According to the escapees, many Touareg members were
             subjected to  illegal  detention  in  secret  locations  under
             inhumane conditions.  They added that members of the  Ghadames
             tribes are searching for Touareg members everywhere,  even  in
             hospitals, to kill and torture them.'"


    Having rehearsed this evidence, the report advises case workers in  the
    following terms:


         "Where it is accepted that an individual applicant is likely to  be
         perceived as supporting Gaddafi and that this places them  at  risk
         of attracting the adverse attention of militias brigades allied  to
         the Libyan  authorities,  a  grant  of  asylum  will  generally  be
         appropriate, subject to any exclusion considerations under  Article
         1F of the Refugee Convention .....   It is unlikely that a claimant
         of this profile will be able to internally  relocate  in  order  to
         escape the risk of persecution."

         [Paragraphs 3.12.31/32.]

     [Our emphasis]


[13] The third, and final, component of the country  evidence  is  the  UKBA
    Country of Origin ("COI") report.  This is of somewhat greater  vintage
    than the other two, being dated December 2012.  This also contains  (in
    paragraphs 19.17/19) a section specially devoted to the Touareg  tribe.
    This records not only the  widespread  recognition  that  many  Touareg
    Nomad tribes  had  supported  Gaddafi  during  the  war  but  also  the
    additional factor that they were alleged  to  have  committed  rape  in
    certain northern cities.


CONSIDERATION AND CONCLUSION

[14] The three country reports are demonstrably consistent inter  se.   They
    contain much material supportive of  the  Appellant's  claim  that,  if
    obliged to return to Libya, he would be at risk of persecution there on
    account of his Touareg ethnicity.   In  deciding  this  appeal,  it  is
    necessary to juxtapose the country evidence with the  Determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

[15] The Judge stated that he had considered  all  the  evidence,  including
    the country evidence.  He then made a finding that the Appellant was "a
    most  unimpressive  witness".    He   specifically   found   that   the
    Appellant's claim lacked credibility.  All of the several factors which
    he articulated in support  of  this  finding  were  of  the  subjective
    variety.  They related to matters touching on the timing and content of
    the Appellant's claim for asylum, its evolution and manifestations  and
    the supporting documentary evidence presented.  The analysis  that  the
    Judge  did  not  engage  at  all   with   the   country   evidence   is
    uncontroversial.  His  focus  was  exclusively  on  various  subjective
    aspects of the Appellant's asylum claim.  The Judge neglected  entirely
    the objective aspects, namely the country evidence.

[16] It is common case that the Judge was under a specific duty to  address,
    and resolve, the discrete issue of whether the Appellant  could  safely
    negotiate Tripoli Airport and, thereafter, safely travel to  a  Touareg
    occupied area unaffected by persecution risks.  The Judge stated:

         "..... There is nothing I can  see  before  me  to  establish  that
         Touaregs are automatically at  risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
         prohibited by Article 3 there [ie Tripoli Airport].   There  is  an
         Airport at Ghat in his home district to which he could make his way
         and from thence to his home.   He  has  friends  and,  indeed,  his
         family in the area who could assist him.  While the journey may not
         be entirely comfortable, it  is  feasible.   In  the  light  of  my
         general finding as to the Appellant's credibility, I  am  also  not
         prepared to accept what he says on this aspect of the case."

          [Emphasis added]

    We have two reservations about this important passage.   The  first  is
    the Judge's  continued  heavy  emphasis  on  the  subjectivity  of  the
    Appellant's case.  The second, inter-related, is the Judge's failure to
    address the objective country  evidence  and,  in  particular,  how  it
    sounded on his assessment of safe internal travel.  Furthermore,  there
    is no engagement with the case specifically  made  in  the  Appellant's
    witness statement or the  "background  information"  rehearsed  in  the
    Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  or  the  documentary  evidence
    containing a report of an incident where armed militias seized  control
    of Tripoli Airport, on 4th June 2012. We acknowledge that  the  further
    documentary evidence of a similar incident,  occurring  on  4th  August
    2013, which we are prepared to admit in the exercise of our  discretion
    under Rule 15[2A], was not before the Judge.


[17] We consider that, in making his decision,  the  Judge  was  obliged  to
    address the country evidence, make an assessment of it  and  spell  out
    his findings and conclusions accordingly.   There was a failure  to  do
    so.  This is a freestanding error of law.  We further consider  that  a
    related error of law occurred consequently, namely a failure to provide
    an adequately reasoned judgment.  We are also of the opinion  that  the
    Judge erred further in law  in  his  failure  to  appreciate  that  his
    credibility findings adverse to the Appellant  were  not  determinative
    per se of the asylum claim, as this was underpinned by a  body  of  not
    insubstantial  objective  evidence.   These  three  errors  are  inter-
    related. Their materiality is beyond question.


DECISION

[18] For the reasons elaborated we set aside the decision of the  First-Tier
    Tribunal.

DIRECTIONS

[19] In principle, we are of the view that this Tribunal should  remake  the
    decision.  However, we shall afford both parties an opportunity to make
    written representations on the following issues:

    (a)  whether the remaking exercise should be conducted in this forum or
         upon remittal to a differently constituted First-Tier Tribunal.

    (b)  whether, in the event of retention in this forum, a  further  oral
         hearing is required.


    The parties' written representations on these  issues  must  be  lodged
    within 21 days of the date of promulgation hereof.  On a purely prosaic
    note,  both  parties  should   take   care   to   ensure   that   their
    representations are clearly marked for the attention of  the  President
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins.



                           Signed:   [pic]

                                    Mr Justice McCloskey,
                                               President   of   the    Upper
     Tribunal

                             Dated:     30  October  2013

