
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06931/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd March 2016                            |On 1st July 2016              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                     bS
                           (anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Seddon of Counsel instructed by Sookias &
Sookias
For the Respondent:    Ms M Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Telford promulgated on 28 October 2015 brought with the  permission  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted on 12 January 2016,  permission  to
    appeal having initially been refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Ford
    on 7 December 2015.


2.   In granting permission to appeal Judge Jordan considered  that  it  was
    "arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to engage with  the
    evidence about the Appellant's claim to have converted to  Christianity
    or to provide adequate reasons for his conclusion".

3.   The Appellant is a young man from Pakistan.  His personal  details  are
    a matter of record on file and I do not reproduce them here in the body
    of this decision in keeping with the  anonymity  order  that  has  been
    previously made and is to be continued in these proceedings. Suffice it
    to say at the present time he is currently 25 years old.


4.   In terms of his immigration history, the Appellant entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 1 April 2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Student with leave  valid
    until 31 August 2010.  In due course and after an  initial  refusal  he
    was granted further leave from 16 July 2013 until  16  September  2013,
    and thereafter a further period of leave in  the  same  capacity  as  a
    student on 13 September 2013 until 30 October 2014.  On 20 October 2014
    he claimed asylum. In due course the Appellant was interviewed  by  the
    Secretary of State both by way of an initial screening interview on  20
    October 2014 and then at a substantive asylum  interview  on  26  March
    2015.  The Appellant's application for asylum was refused  for  reasons
    set out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 7  April  2015
    and in consequence a decision was taken to refuse to vary his leave  to
    remain and also to remove him from the UK.


5.   The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal on asylum grounds.


6.   The Appellant's asylum claim was based on  his  claimed  conversion  to
    Christianity.  He said in effect that this would put  him  at  risk  in
    Pakistan as an apostate, that  he  would  face  harm  from  his  family
    members and also from wider society, and there  would  be  no  adequate
    state protection.  He also in his initial claim indicated a fear of the
    possibility of prosecution as an  apostate  and/or  a  blasphemer.   He
    claimed to be a member of the congregation at Christ  Church  in  North
    Finchley and to have been baptised there on 12 October 2014.


7.   The Respondent, in the RFRL accepted that  the  Appellant  had  been  a
    practising Muslim whilst in Pakistan,  but,  for  reasons  set  out  at
    paragraphs 18-27 of the RFRL, did not accept that he had  converted  to
    Christianity.  I do not propose  to  rehearse  the  entirety  of  those
    paragraphs but because of their particular relevance to the matters  to
    which I shall refer in due course it is appropriate to  quote  passages
    from paragraph  23  of  the  RFRL,  in  particular  the  following  two
    passages:

         "You correctly identified that Christmas and Easter  are  important
         celebration days and that Christmas is celebrated  on  25  December
         every year to mark when Jesus was born.  However you did  not  know
         whether Easter was celebrated on the same day every year, what Good
         Friday is, or what Lent is.  You were able to  identify  that  East
         celebrated Jesus' resurrection and he rose three days  after  being
         crucified by Pontius Pilate.";


    and:


         "In your  asylum  interview  you  were  able  to  provide  a  vague
         description about what the book of Genesis contained stating it  is
         about 'Adam and Eve' however you did not mention that it  contained
         about how the earth was created by God or any of the other  events.
         You did correctly state that Adam and Eve were believed to  be  the
         first people on earth, that they were created in 'God's image'  and
         that they lived in the Garden of Eden.  You did not know from which
         part of Adam's body God used to create Eve."


    It may be seen from those passages that the  Appellant's  knowledge  of
    Christianity could not be said to be non-existent but in some  respects
    was reasonably detailed, albeit there were some gaps in his  knowledge.
    It is essentially on the basis of such gaps in his knowledge  that  the
    Secretary of State determined that the Appellant was not a  person  who
    could be considered a convert to Christianity.




8.   At his appeal the Appellant  was  supported  by  three  witnesses  from
    Christ Church.  Those witnesses were Ms  Pauline  Roberts,  the  Parish
    Administrator, the Reverend David Walker who was the  Vicar  at  Christ
    Church, and Mr James Weaver, an Assistant Minister at the church.


9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the Appellant had  attended
    Christ Church and had undergone a ceremony of  baptism.   However,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept that the Appellant was genuine
    in his conversion.


10.  In effect the Judge gave three reasons in support  of  his  conclusion.
    Essentially these were:

         (i) that the timing of the Appellant's claim for asylum cast  doubt
         on his credibility;


         (ii) that there was an  inconsistency  and  implausibility  in  the
         Appellant's account in respect of informing his mother of the  fact
         of his baptism; and


         (iii) that there were gaps in  the  Appellant's  knowledge  of  his
         faith in circumstances where he could provide no  real  excuse  for
         such gaps.


    It seems to me that if any of those three strands might be said to have
    been arrived at by error amounting to an  error  of  law,  the  overall
    decision is in jeopardy because not  one  of  these  three  strands  is
    readily amenable to being untangled from the others, and in my judgment
    no single factor as identified by the Judge could  be  marginalised  as
    being immaterial to his overall consideration.


11.  In my judgment there are problems with each of the three strands.


12.  In respect of the timing of the Appellant's claim the Judge  says  this
    at paragraph 11 of the decision:

         "I cannot ignore the immigration history of the appellant  in  this
         case.  He came into the UK in 2009 as a  student.   He  stayed  and
         then applied for further visa extensions as a student.   Whilst  it
         does not of itself determine the matter, it does speak to me  about
         an ability of the appellant to time his claim very finely according
         to his expiry of student visa and time it on very important issues.
          I take into account  Section  8  of  the  asylum  and  Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 in  regard  to  his  asylum
         claim not having been made at the earliest opportunity when,  after
         he arrived in the UK he delayed making a claim from  early  to  mid
         2014 to 20 October 2014, 8 days after baptism and  receipt  of  his
         certificate and 10 days before his final student visa  was  due  to
         expire.  He claimed he had reason not to return because of  threats
         which built up over time from many close family including his uncle
         between April 2014, July 2014 and through the Summer.  He would not
         have needed to wait until a formal baptism in order to claim he had
         in fact changed his religion and was in genuine fear for  his  life
         if he returned home.  I find that his  late  if  welcome  admission
         that he is an illegal  worker  seeking  to  gain  funds  to  be  an
         admission that he always came here not as a true refugee but as  an
         economic migrant.  He had many opportunities to claim and his delay
         in moving to the UK for one month undermines his account because he
         would have been at risk in that time."


13.  The first thing to  observe  in  respect  of  this  paragraph  is  that
    section 8 of the 2004 Act did not feature in the Secretary  of  State's
    reasons set out in the RFRL at all.  Nor was there any other  reference
    to the Appellant's credibility being damaged by reason of any delay  in
    making his asylum claim. Nor is it the  case  that  the  Appellant  was
    cross-examined by the Secretary of State's  representative  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal in respect of any matters relevant  to  the  issues
    identified by the Judge in the context  of  section  8.   I  have  been
    provided with, as indeed had the parties, a transcript of  the  Judge's
    Record  of  Proceedings  and  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State today acknowledges that there  is  nothing  in  that
    transcript to indicate either that the Secretary of State  was  raising
    any point in respect of delay and/or section 8 or that the Judge  asked
    the Appellant any questions relevant to delay and/or section  8  -  and
    indeed it is evident from the Record  of  Proceedings  that  delay  and
    section 8 formed no part of the closing submissions of the Respondent's
    representative.


14.  On behalf of the Appellant, in the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and also in the submissions made by Mr Seddon today  expanding
    upon those grounds, it is essentially said that  had  the  matter  been
    raised with the Appellant he would have had much  to  say  on  it.   In
    particular he would have perhaps made reference to the fact that he was
    two years into a three year degree course and would have been  able  to
    continue in his capacity as a student at the end of the  leave  due  to
    expire at the end of October 2014 but for the fact that in response  to
    his conversion to Christianity his uncle, who had been  sponsoring  his
    education, had decided to withhold funding.   In  short  the  Appellant
    might have said to the Tribunal that his circumstances were  such  that
    he did not need to claim asylum until such time as it became impossible
    for him to try to continue his studies in the United  Kingdom.   It  is
    also said that the Appellant might have wanted to point out that whilst
    it was mid 2014 that he began to explore Christianity it was not  until
    some time much closer to the eventual date of his application  that  he
    decided to make the commitment to convert - which  is  what  he  claims
    puts him at risk - and therefore the delay is not as extensive  as  the
    Judge identifies.


15.  On the face of it there does seem  to  be  a  failure  to  put  to  the
    Appellant at any  stage  in  the  proceedings  important  and  relevant
    matters that turned out to inform a significant  part  of  the  Judge's
    overall adverse  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  credibility,  and  I
    consider that in all of the circumstances that amounts to a  breach  of
    natural justice and therefore an error of law.


16.  If I am wrong in this regard, there  is  in  any  event  an  additional
    aspect of challenge in that the final section of paragraph 11 bears  no
    resemblance to the facts of the Appellant's case.  It  is  the  section
    that is in these terms:

         "I find that his late if welcome admission that he  is  an  illegal
         worker seeking to gain funds to be an admission that he always came
         here not as a true refugee but as an economic migrant.  He had many
         opportunities to claim and his delay in moving to the  UK  for  one
         month undermines his account because he would have been at risk  in
         that time."




17.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe accepts that this  cannot  possibly  refer  to  the
    Appellant whose claim is based on being a  refugee  sur  place  and  so
    issues of delay in leaving his country of origin do not arise.  Nor  do
    issues arise as to opportunities to claim asylum en route to the United
    Kingdom.  Moreover there was no admission that  the  Appellant  was  an
    illegal worker or that he was an economic  migrant.   These  references
    appear to have found their way into this decision from some other  case
    and necessarily this undermines the aspect of required anxious scrutiny
    with regard to the Judge's considerations at paragraph 11.


18.  I also bear in mind that the context of  paragraph  11  is  essentially
    the Judge saying that the Appellant is so cynical in his timing that he
    is essentially manipulative enough to engage in  an  appearance  of  an
    interest in the faith for the simple reason of  making  an  application
    prior to the expiry of his leave in order to prolong his  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It seems to me that necessarily the Judge's evaluation
    at paragraph 11 is an important block in the overall  building  of  the
    adverse credibility finding and, as I say, is not possible  to  unravel
    from the other aspects of the decision to an extent that the error - as
    I find it is - was plainly material.  In my  judgment  this  in  itself
    would be enough to justify setting aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal.


19.  However, nonetheless, I turn to another of the  three  strands  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's reasoning  -  the  level  of  knowledge  of
    Christianity  displayed  by  the  Appellant  as  a  signifier  of   the
    genuineness of his faith or otherwise.


20.  The Judge at paragraph 9 -  bearing  in  mind  the  criticisms  of  the
    Respondent's approach that had been made on the Appellant's  behalf  in
    the course of the grounds of appeal, the written  submissions,  and  no
    doubt oral submissions - observes this:

         "I do not adopt the approach of considering  Christianity  as  only
         being something shown or proved on any standard applicable to  this
         case by satisfying a series of questions which have been  described
         as amounting to a 'tick list' of requirements."


21.  Notwithstanding  that  apparent  self-direction,  it  appears  that  at
    paragraph 14 the Judge does indeed evaluate the  Appellant's  faith  by
    reference to an expectation of what he 'ought' to  know  as  a  genuine
    Christian.  Paragraph 14 in its entirety is in these terms:

         "He had relied on a number of different views on what  was  somehow
         essential to being Christian.  He  had  criticised  the  scope  and
         understanding and  methodology  of  the  Respondent's  approach  to
         asking him questions about Christian tenets.  Some of  his  answers
         were correct.  Others were not and he explained these by reason  of
         lack of teaching of him by the Church he attended.  However, I find
         that a lack of teaching is no real excuse for not investigating for
         oneself which is what he had claimed to have done initially when he
         first attended a church.  I find it inconsistent to explore  for  a
         while and then when one has broken through so to speak into  a  new
         world of  ideas  and  beliefs,  to  stop  without  seeking  further
         knowledge.  It was as if he was saying that he had done  enough  to
         make a pretty good case for being a Christian and that was  somehow
         enough and he would travel no more on that  journey  of  mental  or
         spiritual exploration."




22.  The Secretary of State, as I have already identified, very much put  at
    the core of the rejection of the Appellant's case, the ability  of  the
    Appellant to demonstrate knowledge of his faith.  In order  to  address
    this, the Appellant made detailed evidence-based submissions before the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Those submissions were set out in the  main  part
    at paragraph 8 of the Appellant's Skeleton Argument before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, which contains no  less  than  nine  sub-paragraphs  and
    covers some seven pages.  It is a carefully  drafted  submission  which
    cross-references both the RFRL and  the  supporting  testimony  of  the
    Appellant's witnesses.  In  essence  it  was  a  careful  and  detailed
    submission to attempt to demonstrate  that  the  Appellant's  level  of
    knowledge of Christianity  at  the  time  of  his  interview  with  the
    Secretary of State was entirely consistent with the amount of  time  to
    which he had been exposed to that religion, the teachings that  he  had
    received within the church, and in respect of the  materials  that  the
    church had directed him to read, as it were, in his own time.


23.  By way of illustration, and bearing in mind the  passages  to  which  I
    have already referred in  the  RFRL,  it  is  instructive  to  consider
    certain aspects of the witness statements of the Reverend David  Walker
    and the Assistant Minister, Mr James Weaver.


24.  At paragraph 3 of his  witness  statement  Reverend  Walker  identifies
    that after first meeting  the  Appellant  he  had  suggested  that  the
    Appellant read the Gospels.  Mr  Seddon  emphasises  that  that  is  an
    illustration that the Appellant's learning in respect  of  Christianity
    was right from the beginning being guided by the church.  At paragraphs
    7-11 of his witness statement Reverend Walker identifies  the  specific
    teachings to which the Appellant would have  been  exposed  during  the
    relatively short period that he had been involved with the church up to
    the date of the substantive asylum interview.  Those paragraphs include
    at paragraph 8 an explanation in respect of the  extent  to  which  the
    Appellant might have been expected to be able to identify  the  meaning
    of Good Friday and the inconsistency of the calendar  date  upon  which
    Easter is marked in the United Kingdom.


25.  Mr  Weaver  similarly  in  his  witness  statement,  in  particular  at
    paragraph 6, addresses the areas in  which  the  Appellant  would  have
    received guidance and teaching and expressly includes an acknowledgment
    that the Appellant would not have been taught about the  Old  Testament
    but that he "will  have  better  understanding  of  the  Old  Testament
    teaching in a few months' time".


26.  I pause  to  observe  that  the  latter  observations  -  about  future
    teaching - runs contrary to the Judge's reasoning  that  the  Appellant
    had acquired a certain amount of knowledge  and  then  stopped.  It  is
    plain from the thrust of both the witness statements - and  indeed  the
    witness statement of the church warden - that  it  was  said  that  the
    Appellant was continuing to  receive  tuition  and  guidance  from  the
    church: to that extent it is not clear upon what evidential  basis  the
    Judge could have reached the conclusion that the Appellant  had  ceased
    to continue "seeking further knowledge".


27.  Be that  as  it  may,  such  passages  in  the  Appellant's  supporting
    witnesses' statements were picked  up  in  the  Skeleton  Argument,  in
    particular at sub-paragraphs 8(3), 8(4) and 8(5), to construct detailed
    submissions addressing specifically those passages in the  Respondent's
    RFRL critical of the Appellant's knowledge of his faith.


28.  Regrettably, there is no attempt in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to demonstrate any engagement by the Judge with the thrust  of
    those submissions and the supporting evidence.


29.  Indeed, insofar as the Judge considers the supporting  evidence  he  in
    effect marginalises it at paragraph  15  on  the  basis  that,  in  the
    Judge's evaluation, all three witnesses have essentially been duped  by
    the Appellant because they are "so kind and unquestioning".  It  is  as
    if the Judge has determined that because  he  has  concluded  that  the
    Appellant is not a genuine Christian that  the  witnesses  must  be  in
    error in what they have said.  It is not so apparent - because there is
    no other  analysis  of  the  careful  and  detailed  testimony  of  the
    witnesses - that the Judge has reached his conclusion  'in  the  round'
    and in particular only after a careful consideration of the  weight  to
    be attached to the witnesses' evidence and the supporting  submissions.
    Indeed in my judgment, appropriate criticism is  made  of  the  Judge's
    observation that the witnesses were  'unquestioning'  in  circumstances
    where their evidence is exactly designed to address and engage with the
    issues in the RFRL and necessarily is based on their own  consideration
    and questioning of the substance of what is said therein, which in turn
    inevitably involves them asking questions of themselves  and  answering
    those questions as to what they make of the Appellant's faith in  light
    of the Secretary of State's evaluation.


30.  The Judge otherwise essentially relies upon  an  expectation  that  the
    Appellant had "no real excuse" for not investigating his  faith  beyond
    the guidance that he was receiving from his church.  In my judgment, in
    a case involving the lower  standard  of  proof  and  requiring  proper
    anxious scrutiny, it is a step too far  essentially  to  criticise  the
    Appellant on the basis that he has not pursued, as it were,  sufficient
    extracurricular Bible study and religious  study  beyond  the  specific
    instruction he was receiving through his church. No relevant  yardstick
    or benchmark is identified by the Judge, and indeed no such measure  is
    readily identifiable: necessarily therefore it  become  problematic  to
    place determinative weight  on  not  having  reached  some  unspecified
    'standard'.


31.  In all such circumstances, in my judgment the Judge's approach to  this
    aspect of the case is in serious error; moreover, given that it lies at
    the core of the reasoning of the Secretary of State, the error  affects
    the core of the Judge's assessment on appeal.


32.  In those circumstances it is not really necessary  for  me  to  address
    the remaining point  in  respect  of  the  supposed  inconsistency  and
    implausibility of the Appellant's  conduct  in  contacting  his  mother
    immediately after his baptism to inform her of  that  event.   Were  it
    necessary for me to descend to  any  detail  in  this  regard  I  would
    observe that  I  am  troubled  by  the  reference  to  the  discrepancy
    identified at paragraph 29 of the RFRL which in my judgment,  in  fact,
    does not reveal any discrepancy but is based on  a  misreading  of  the
    screening interview by the author of the RFRL. I  would  further  sound
    the usual note of caution that is appropriate where a  Judge  seeks  to
    rely on implausibility in circumstances where an event might be at best
    said to be unlikely, or conduct unreasonable  or  unwise,  rather  than
    actually implausible.  Again, having said  that,  I  bear  in  mind  in
    context  that  the  Appellant  had  addressed  the  question   of   the
    appropriateness of his conduct in contacting his mother  -  and  it  is
    suggested that it was  entirely  consistent  with  the  nature  of  the
    dialogue that he had been having with her in respect of his exploration
    of Christianity.  Be that as it may, it is not for me  to  re-try  this
    issue now: suffice to say that were it necessary for me to explore this
    further I would very likely find  further  error  in  respect  of  this
    remaining strand of the Judge's reasoning.


33.  Be that as it may, for the  reasons  already  given  I  find  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  is  in  error  of  law  and
    requires to be set aside. It is common ground that it should be reheard
    with all issue at large before the First-tier Tribunal.


         e hHe

Notice of Decision

34.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  contained  material
    errors of law and is set aside.


35.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Telford with
    all issue at large.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 11 March 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
