
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP/KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06124/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Upper Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th November 2015                |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                           mr ashley milroy joseph
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzari, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 20th  June  1982.   The
    application for an extension of his student visa was  refused  on  16th
    March 2015 and renewals of his applications were both refused, the last
    one being on 3rd January 2014.  On 7th May 2014 he claimed  asylum  and
    was issued with an IS151A as an overstayer.  He  has  three  dependants
    namely his wife and two children; the children being born  respectively
    on 14th December 2011 and 22nd February 2013.   His  claim  for  future
    fear is that on returning to Sri Lanka he will  be  persecuted  by  the
    authorities as he left the country whilst he was meant to be  reporting
    to the police and was accused of helping  the  LTTE.   The  Appellant's
    application for asylum was rejected by the Secretary of  State  on  6th
    August 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Herbert sitting at Taylor House on 3rd June 2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 19th June 2015 the Appellant's application
    was dismissed.

 3. On 7th July 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 20th July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade  granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge McDade noted that  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal asserted that it was purely  speculative  for  the
    Judge to have stated that it would have been well-known that the lawyer
    who verified the Appellant's documents had been suspended at the  time,
    and that the Judge did not give anxious scrutiny to correspondence from
    the second lawyer, did  not  refer  to  the  three  relevant  documents
    submitted by the Appellant and erred in his assessment as to whether or
    not the Appellant's name  appeared  on  a  stop  list.   Judge  Herbert
    considered that those points were arguable  in  putting  "the  apparent
    absence of these issues being adequately reasoned in the decision".  In
    addition he considered it was arguable that the Judge had erred in  law
    when in his decision he applied the lower standard of proof required of
    the Respondent before finding a document was not genuine.

 4. On 30th July 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24 contending the findings were perfectly open to the
    Judge and that it was for the Appellant to  demonstrate  the  documents
    relied upon were reliable and that the Judge had properly considered in
    the  round  following  Tanveer  Ahmed.   The  Respondent  concludes  by
    contending that the grounds were a mere disagreement with the  findings
    that were open to the Judge and that no  material  errors  in  law  are
    disclosed.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Ms Anzari.  Ms Anzari is extremely familiar with this  matter.
    She appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and she is  the  author  of
    the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Miss Johnstone.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Ms Anzari relies on her typewritten Grounds of Appeal pointing out that
    there are four grounds and that the first two relate to evidence  being
    produced from attorneys and that the documentation is to  be  found  at
    pages 21 to 25 of the Appellant's bundle.   It  is  accepted  that  the
    first attorney was subject to criminal proceedings in Sri Lanka and she
    refers me further to pages 21 to 29 of the  supplemental  bundle  which
    was produced before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is her submission that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in finding that the Appellant's
    reliance on a verification letter from a Sri Lankan lawyer who, to  use
    the Judge's words:

         "On the face of it  being  suspended  from  practice  substantially
         undermines the Appellant's credibility  as  suspension  would  have
         been well-known and occurred in 2011 some time  before  the  letter
         from the lawyer was obtained."

 7. Ms Anzari submits that the  suggestion  that  the  lawyer's  suspension
    would be "well-known" is purely  speculative  particularly  considering
    that the lawyer's name appears on the  current  register  of  attorneys
    able to practise in Sri Lanka despite  the  alleged  suspension  period
    continuing.  She  submits  that  to  suggest  that  this  substantially
    undermines  the  Appellant's  credibility  in  these  circumstances  is
    unreasonable.  She submits that the Judge has  failed  to  engage  with
    this evidence and to give any clear reasons.  And that she further errs
    in suggesting that the

         "... subsequent correspondence from another  lawyer  does  not  get
         round the fact that the first lawyer  engaged  by  the  Appellant's
         family had no entitlement to practise at the material time that she
         wrote the letter authorising the court warrant".

 8. She submits that the Judge has not looked at a genuine  arrest  warrant
    and that it was incumbent upon the Judge to apply anxious  scrutiny  to
    the assessment of the Appellant's appeal.  She  further  contends  that
    the correspondence provided from the second lawyer went to the issue of
    whether the warrant was genuine independent of any concerns surrounding
    the suspension of the first lawyer and that the Judge has  applied  the
    wrong standard of proof and has failed to provide reasons  for  placing
    no weight on the second lawyer's evidence.  Further, she  submits  that
    that part  of  the  determination  headed  "my  findings  of  fact  and
    credibility in relation to this application" is devoid of any reference
    or  assessment  of  salient  corroborative  evidence  specifically  the
    receipt on arrest dated 20th October 2010, the report filed by TID, and
    the detention order and that the  Judge  errs  in  law  in  failing  to
    provide sufficient reasons for dismissing these document  stating  that
    it is incumbent upon the Judge to provide reasons and to indicate  what
    weight has been given to the documents and that that is starkly missing
    within this determination.

 9. Further she submits that the Judge erred in his assessment  of  whether
    the Appellant's name will feature on a stop list and that the  Rule  24
    response provided is wrong given the Judge's findings in  paragraph  53
    of his  determination  which  she  submits  is  inconsistent  with  the
    principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed.  In such circumstances  she  asked
    me to find that there are material errors of law in the decision,  that
    it is unsafe and asked me to remit the matter back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing.

10. In response  Miss  Johnstone  submits  that  the  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraphs 47 to 59 are adequate and that he has looked at the warrants
    and the delay before the arrest warrant was obtained on 22nd July 2011.
     She submits that the position is summarised at paragraph 58  and  that
    the Judge  has  looked  at  all  matters  in  the  round.   She  argues
    paragraphs 54 to 57 effectively set out the Judge's reasons and looking
    at the chronology of the claim made the findings were open to the Judge
    and the Judge was entitled to reject these documents and does not  need
    to give a reason for everything raised in the proceedings.

11. She points out that the Judge has noted  at  paragraph  60  whilst  the
    Appellant claims to  have  been  tortured  in  detention  there  is  no
    evidence of the type of medical treatment he sought and that the  Judge
    was entitled to conclude at paragraph 63 that the Appellant was  not  a
    person whose name would appear on a computerised stop list which  would
    have to be accessible at the airport.

12. She takes me to paragraphs 27 to 29 of the decision.  She submits  that
    there is reference therein to the purportedly  disbarred  lawyer  still
    being on the register of lawyers at the Sri Lankan  Bar.   She  submits
    that the Judge is entitled to prefer the evidence that he did and  that
    the burden of proof set out at paragraph 53 is  correct  and  that  the
    burden rests with the Respondent.  She asked me to  find  there  is  no
    material error of law and to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. I start by reminding myself that I am not retrying  the  issues,  I  am
    merely determining whether or not there is  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  For the reasons given below
    I conclude that there is.  When looking at evidence in the round it  is
    necessary for a Judge to make conclusions about individual documents or
    how they are obtained and to make findings in his conclusions that  the
    evidence of an Appellant was or was not  substantially  credible.   The
    problem with this determination is that there is a lacking of  findings
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   I  agree  with  Ms
    Anzari that the suggestion that the first lawyer's suspension would  be
    well-known is purely speculative, particularly  as  the  lawyer's  name
    appears on the current registers of attorneys able to practise  in  Sri
    Lanka.

16.  Further  there  are  documents  which,  as  mentioned  above  in   her
    submissions by Ms Anzari, the Judge has failed to make findings  on  in
    his determination.  Evidence is provided from a  second  lawyer  and  I
    agree with Ms Anzari that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    provides insufficient reasons for  placing  no  weight  on  the  second
    lawyer's evidence.  When all these factors are looked at in the round I
    am satisfied  that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  reflect  more  than  mere
    disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and  that  a
    failure to show the relevant  level  of  weight  that  was  applied  to
    documents is not apparent in the decision  and  that  the  decision  is
    unsafe.  This is not to say that  on  a  rehearing  of  this  matter  a
    further Judge may not come to the same  conclusion  as  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  There is  however  a  requirement  on  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to give full reasons and these are not apparent.

17. In such circumstances I find that there is a material error of  law  in
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   I  set  aside  the
    decision and I remit the matter back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing.  The directions  for  the  rehearing  are  set  out  in  the
    decision paragraph below.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  a  material
         error of law and is set aside.

      2) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

      3) The matter is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
         Manchester to be heard on the first available date  28  days  hence
         with an ELH of three hours.

      4) That the hearing is to be  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         other than Immigration Judge Herbert.

      5) That there be leave to either party to file an up-to-date bundle of
         evidence along with any witness statements, skeleton arguments  and
         authorities upon which they  seek  to  rely  at  least  seven  days
         prehearing.  Copies of such bundles are to be sent to the  opposing
         parties' legal representatives.

      6) That there be a Sinhalese interpreter.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

