

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06466/2014
                                                               AA/06468/2014
                                                               AA/06470/2014
                                                               AA/06472/2014
                                                               AA/06475/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|on 1 July 2015                           |On 8 July 2015                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                              RAFIQUE MUHAMMAD
                                SAIMA JEBEEN
                               SMAVIA RAFIQUE
                                AAMNA RAFIQUE
                               SALIHI RAFIQUE
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Naz of Morden Solicitors LLP (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge J.W.H Law promulgated on the  30th  January  2015  following  a
       hearing at Stoke on 23rd January 2015, in which the  judge  dismissed
       the appeals of this family  unit  against  the  direction  for  their
       removal to Pakistan following the refusal of their claims for  asylum
       or any other form of international protection.

Background


    2. All appellants are citizens of Pakistan. The first appellant was born
       in 1968. The remaining appellants are his  wife  and  children  whose
       claims for international protections stand or fall 'in-line'.

    3. It was not disputed before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  first
       appellant worked for various NGO's and set up a girl's school in  his
       village to educate young girls. The first appellant claimed that as a
       result he was targeted by the Taliban. The respondent did not  accept
       the incidents were attributed to the Taliban and considered  that  an
       internal flight option existed in any event.

    4. The judge clearly considered the evidence with the required degree of
       anxious scrutiny and has given  adequate  reasons  for  the  findings
       made.

    5.  The  judge  sets  out  the  findings  from  paragraph  35   of   the
       determination. At paragraph 42 the judge finds:

       "42.   It is said that the appellant failed to substantiate  that  Mr
           Alam was "definitely a Taliban member" (paragraph 34).  The same
           criticism is made of the appellant's unsubstantiated belief that
           the person responsible for the attacks in  2001  and  2002  were
           Taliban members.  With regard to Mr Alam, the appellant said  in
           reply to question 69 that "the things he used to tell me and the
           messages he used to bring gave me the  impression  that  he  was
           working for them".   Given  the  well-known  opposition  of  the
           Taliban to the education for girls, I find that the  appellant's
           belief was quite plausible. Likewise, he described  the  persons
           involved in the attacks as wearing beards  and  turbans  of  the
           Taliban.  At several points during the  hearing,  the  appellant
           said that he had never had any rows or problems with anyone else
           and against his background of being involved in the education of
           girls (which the respondent accepts)I find that his belief  that
           the Taliban were behind the threats was reasonable."

    6. The judge accepted the reason the appellant  left  his  home  in  his
       village was as a result of the threats  leading  to  the  finding  at
       paragraph 49 that:

       "49.   I have therefore determined the appellant's asylum claim  (and
           Article 3 claim, to the extent it stands or falls  with  it)  on
           the basis that the appellant's claim is credible and the  events
           on which he relies did happen.  I find the  attacks  on  him  in
           2001 and 2002 did amount to persecution and that he continues to
           have a subjective fear of persecution, which is well-founded  in
           so far as it relates to his home area."

    7. The issue of internal relocation was raised in the refusal letter and
       considered by the judge who found an internal flight option available
       that it was not unreasonable/unduly harsh for the appellants to  make
       use of.

    8. The grounds on which permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was
       sought assert  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in
       considering the  question  of  internal  relocation,  by  failing  to
       consider relevant facts, by failing to apply relevant  case  law  and
       consider the background evidence

Discussion


    9. The judge correctly considered the claim by reference  to  events  in
       the appellant's home area first, which is the village of  Birr  which
       lies between Peshawar and Islamabad in North-East Pakistan.

   10. The first appellant claimed he was forced to leave his home area as a
       result of threats and moved to other cities in Pakistan from which he
       had to move as he believed the Taliban had located him there.

   11. The findings of the judge are every specific, namely that  the  first
       appellant continues to have a subjective fear of  persecution,  which
       is well founded as far as it relates to his home area [para 49]. This
       is not challenged in the grounds  which  is  of  importance  for  two
       reasons which are (i) there is no finding of a well-founded  fear  in
       any part of Pakistan other than the home area, and (ii) there  is  no
       finding such a subjective fear is objectively well founded.

   12. It is accepted that the  question  whether  someone  is  at  risk  of
       persecution for a Convention reason should be looked at in the  round
       and all the relevant circumstances brought into account. This is what
       the judge arguably did.

   13. Paragraph 339O  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is  intended  to
       incorporate the Directive, states:

       '(i) The Secretary of State will not make:

           (a) a grant of asylum if in part of  the  country  of  origin  a
           person would not have a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted,
           and the person can reasonably be expected to stay in  that  part
           of the country; or

           (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part of the country
           of return a person would not  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
           serious harm, and the person can reasonably be expected to  stay
           in that part of the country.

       (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or  country
       of return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of State,  when
       making his decision  on  whether  to  grant  asylum  or  humanitarian
       protection, will have regard to the general circumstances  prevailing
       in that part of the country and to the personal circumstances of  the
       person.

       (iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles  to  return  to
       the country of origin or country of return.'

   14. If it is accepted the judge found not  only  a  subjective  but  also
       objectively justified fear of persecution  in  the  appellants'  home
       area then the judge was obliged to consider the question of  internal
       relocation.

   15. The challenge to the finding this is not an available option is based
       upon three key submissions which are (i)  as  the  appellant  claimed
       they were found when they relocated there is no  safe  place  in  any
       part of Pakistan. This was not accepted or found  to  be  so  by  the
       judge which is an  unchallenged  finding,  (ii)  that  reach  of  the
       Taliban is throughout all Pakistan. This  is  not  supported  by  the
       objective material which refers to the North-West  frontier  and  the
       Tribal Areas near the border of Afghanistan as being the core area of
       this group (which included the Swat Valley and other areas which have
       been recaptured by the Pakistan Army)  and  (ii)  that  even  if  the
       Taliban were unaware of the Appellants' return they would have to use
       their identity cards to obtain housing and other services which would
       allow them to be traced by the Taliban.  This  challenge  is  without
       arguable merit for the reason set out below.

   16. As stated, there  is  no  finding  of  a  real  risk  throughout  all
       Pakistan. It is also the case that there  was  insufficient  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal to support the claim the Taliban  have
       a presence in all of Pakistan such that a person of interest in their
       home area  for  a  specified  reason  can  be  located  and  targeted
       throughout that country of 190 million people covering 310,000 square
       miles. It has not been shown on the evidence available to the  First-
       tier or this tribunal that the Taliban would  risk  adverse  interest
       from the security forces in areas outside  their  control  for  those
       such  as  the  first  appellant  or  his  family.  It  has  not  been
       demonstrated on the evidence that the  reach  and  influence  of  the
       Taliban in Pakistan is such that if the appellants use their identify
       cards, which may reveal their  home  area  for  obtaining  access  to
       housing or other services will be communicated elsewhere  and  result
       in a real risk to the  first  appellant  and  his  family.  For  this
       submission to succeed the Upper Tribunal would have  to  accept  that
       having relocated to another area there is a possibility that in using
       their ID card for services information may get  back  to  their  home
       area, that there is  a  possibility  the  person  who  receives  that
       information will be connected to the Taliban and inform them  of  the
       fact of return and location, that the Taliban would  themselves  have
       access to such information otherwise, that there  is   a  possibility
       that if the Taliban were aware of the appellants presence they  would
       consider him a target of such interest that they would be willing  to
       risk supporters/members to harm him when they had the opportunity  to
       do so in his home area where he was  threatened  but  not  killed  as
       those who are targeted by the Taliban usually are, and who  was  able
       to live in other parts of Pakistan with little evidence of a credible
       adverse interest in the past away from his home area.

   17. This family have relocated to the UK  and  so  the  physical  act  of
       living elsewhere is a matter  of  which  they  have  experience.  The
       internal relocation is within their home country with which they  are
       familiar. The country material does not state that  all  teachers  in
       Pakistan are at risk and it has not been made  out  that  the  family
       cannot be economically active in their chosen career areas elsewhere.

   18. The reasonableness of the  decision  was  considered  and  adequately
       reasoned.

   19. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
       appeal has been made out on the facts. The determination shall stand.

Decision

   20. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   21. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
       45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
       2005.

       I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6th July 2015

