
IAC-HW-MP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06013/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8 January 2015                             |On 27 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     NN
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter of Counsel instructed by Vasuki
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka born in 1993.  On 28  May
    2014 he arrived in the United Kingdom  and  on  23  June  2014  claimed
    asylum because he feared persecution on return to Sri Lanka on  account
    of the connection of his father and himself to the Liberation Tigers of
    Tamil Eelam (LTTE) and on account of  his  association  in  the  United
    Kingdom with the TNG or the TGTE.

 2. On 31 July 2014 the Respondent refused the Appellant's application  for
    international surrogate protection and made directions for his  removal
    to Sri Lanka.  The reasons for the decision were contained in an  annex
    to the Respondent's letter of 31 July 2014 (the reasons letter).

 3. On 20 August 2014 the Appellant lodged notice of appeal  under  Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds assert generally that the situation for  Tamils
    in Sri Lanka is unsafe; that the Respondent had given undue  weight  to
    minor discrepancies in the Appellant's account and  that  there  was  a
    verifiable record of his involvement with the LTTE and  arrest  by  the
    Sri Lankan authorities.  The grounds refer to  the  Refugee  Convention
    and to Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the European Convention as  well  as  the
    Qualifying Directive.

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 3 November 2014 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Telford dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds.   He  also
    made an anonymity direction.

 5. The grounds for appeal complain the Judge focussed exclusively  on  the
    Appellant's his refugee sur place claim and therefore failed adequately
    to deal with his claim based on his activities in Sri  Lanka  where  he
    had been detained and tortured.

 6. On 26 November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal R  A  Cox  granted
    permission to appeal because it was arguable the  Judge  had  erred  by
    failing to address the Appellant's claim based on events in  Sri  Lanka
    and had given inadequate consideration  to  the  judgment  in  MP  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ.829.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 7. I noted the grounds for permission  to  appeal  acknowledged  that  the
    application for permission was made out of time and Judge Cox  had  not
    dealt with that point when granting permission.  The grounds explain in
    paragraph  2  the  reason  for  the  delay  in  making  the  permission
    application arose  because  of  personal  difficulties  experienced  by
    Counsel.  Having regard to paragraph 2 of the grounds and what is  said
    in paragraph  3  about  the  Appellant  having  poor  English  and  the
    importance of the outcome of this appeal to his  life  and  liberty,  I
    found that it would be unjust not to extend time and time is  extended.
    I reached this decision in my capacity as a  Designated  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Mr Slatter for the Appellant submitted  the  Judge  had  erred  in  not
    adequately addressing the Appellant's claim to have  been  detained  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities and tortured in 2014.  Further, the  Judge's
    analysis of the factual evidence about arrangements for  the  screening
    of persons entering Sri Lanka, and in particular  Sri  Lankan  citizens
    returning to Sri Lanka contained in paragraph 19 of the  determination,
    was inadequate.  The Appellant's claim based on what happened to him in
    Sri Lanka was sufficient to merit success in the  appeal  even  if  his
    'sur place' claim was rejected.   He  submitted  that  Counsel  at  the
    hearing before the Judge may have  made  himself  less  than  clear  in
    presenting the case.

 9. Mr Melvin for the Respondent  referred  to  the  Respondent's  response
    lodged pursuant to Procedure Rule 24.  The Respondent  relied  on  what
    the Judge had said.  At the hearing before the Judge the parties stated
    the issues were limited to safety on return as a refugee  'sur  place':
    see paragraphs 4 and 5.  There was no  response  from  Counsel  at  the
    hearing to gainsay the Judge's understanding of the position.

10. The Judge had dealt at length with the refugee 'sur  place'  claim  and
    the grounds were at least in part  an  attempt  to  re-argue  what  had
    already been put to the Judge and rejected by him and following MP, the
    determination in GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) remained applicable.

11. He continued that if the  Appellant  wished  to  maintain  reliance  on
    events which happened to him in Sri Lanka it would be unusual  for  him
    to place the thrust of his appeal in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  his
    'sur place' activities.  The reasons letter  had  addressed  his  claim
    based on what he said had happened in Sri  Lanka  and  had  taken  such
    events into account.

12. Mr Melvin referred me generally to the judgment in MP (Sri  Lanka)  and
    also to paragraph 12 of the judgment in MN (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ.1601 which states:-

         ... because of the Tribunal's finding that even if the  Appellant's
         account were accepted at face value and he had  been  detained  and
         tortured by the army as he described, he  would  no  longer  be  of
         interest to the authorities if he were to return to Sri Lanka.  The
         basis of the finding appears to be that, following the  suppression
         of the LTTE, the authorities' attention is  now  directed  only  to
         those elements of the population and  members  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         diaspora who are thought  to  have  a  desire  and  an  ability  to
         undermine the regime.  There  was  nothing  about  the  Appellant's
         activities, either in Sri Lanka or this  country,  which  suggested
         that he might fall into that category.

    The Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others had found that individuals who are,
    or are perceived to be, a threat to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka  as  a
    single state because they have, or are perceived to have a  significant
    role in relation to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora
    and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka were at real  risk  on
    return, whether in detention or otherwise.  This was emphasised by what
    Underhill LJ had said at paragraph 50 of MP (Sri Lanka).  There was  no
    evidence the Appellant was likely to be seen as a significant threat by
    the Sri Lankan authorities on  return.   The  grounds  were  simply  an
    attempt to re-argue the case.

13. For the Appellant Mr Slatter submitted the Judge had not given  anxious
    scrutiny  to  the  Appellant's  claim.   At   paragraph   19   of   his
    determination the Judge had presumed  the  Appellant  would  have  been
    photographed and had then gone on to note that despite this he was  not
    stopped on departure.  This finding was  unsafe,  particularly  in  the
    light of the Appellant's claim that he had been tortured shortly before
    leaving  Sri  Lanka.   The  Judge's  emphasis  on  facial   recognition
    equipment was unsafe and the determination contained errors of law such
    that it should be set aside.

Consideration

14. It is evident from the Judge's record of proceedings that at the outset
    the parties agreed that the Appellant's father had been a supporter  of
    the LTTE.  The Appellant asserted he had been detained and tortured  by
    the Sri Lankan authorities and this was the trigger for  his  departure
    from Sri Lanka to claim international surrogate protection.  The record
    also shows that the only submissions made for the Appellant related  to
    his 'sur place' claim.  There is no explanation evident from the record
    why the Appellant's Counsel did not pursue the claim  based  on  events
    claimed to have happened in Sri Lanka.  The record simply notes that at
    the outset of the hearing the parties agreed as a matter of  fact  that
    the Appellant's father had been a member  of  the  LTTE.   There  is  a
    statement that the evidence was that the Appellant's scars were typical
    and diagnostic  to  show  that  he  had  been  tortured  and  that  the
    photographs were not in dispute.

15. There was a  substantial  amount  of  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to show that the Appellant was  pursuing  a  protection  claim
    based in part on his fear of return because of what had happened to him
    in Sri Lanka.  Even if the advocates at  the  hearing  did  not  pursue
    this, it was incumbent on the Judge to address the evidence before him.
     The record does not  show  the  claim  had  been  abandoned.   On  the
    contrary, it records there was agreement between the  parties  on  some
    aspects of the claim, such as his father's membership of the  LTTE  and
    the scarring.

16. At paragraph 19 of the determination the Judge appears to have  assumed
    that the checks on departure from airports in Sri Lanka are the same as
    the checks on arrival.  There  is  no  reference  to  any  evidence  to
    support this assumption which indeed could not be made  in  respect  of
    the United Kingdom.  Further, the Judge considered only the risk to the
    Appellant on arrival at the airport  but  failed  to  consider  whether
    there would be any risk to the Appellant in the event that he was  able
    to pass through the airport  without  being  detained.   He  needed  to
    consider whether the Appellant would be at risk in his home area.

17. These matters are sufficient to amount to a material error of law  such
    that the First-tier Tribunal's determination must be set aside and  the
    appeal re-heard.

18. Mr Slatter stated that notwithstanding the Tribunal's  directions  sent
    on 2 December  2014,  he  was  not  in  a  position  to  proceed  to  a
    substantive re-consideration of the appeal.

Anonymity

19.  No submissions were made whether  the  anonymity  direction  should  be
    continued. Having made an error of law finding, I am satisfied that  an
    anonymity order should be made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained  errors  of  law
    such that it is set aside in its entirety and the appeal is to be heard
    afresh.


    Anonymity order continued.


    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a Judge other than Judge P Telford.


    Tamil (Sri Lankan dialect) interpreter required.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. i. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

