

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: AA/06102/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8 December 2014                     |On 9 December 2014        |
|                                       |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


                             MISS ISHRAT BATOOL
                        (no ANONYMITY Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Alexander, Counsel
      (instructed by Rashid & Rashid)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge  VA  Osborne  on  3  November  2014  against  the
           decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Buchanan  made  in  a
           determination promulgated  on  9  October  2014  dismissing  the
           Appellant's asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
           appeals.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 13 March  1982.
           She  had  appealed  under  section  82   of   the   Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the Respondent's refusal
           to grant her asylum and to remove her from the  United  Kingdom.
           The Appellant had claimed that she  was  at  risk,  among  other
           matters, because she was a woman  at  risk  of  honour  killing.
           Judge Buchanan found that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  credible
           witness and could return safely to Pakistan.


      3.    When granting permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Osborne considered that it was arguable that Judge Buchanan  had
           erred  in  his  assessment  of  the  evidence  surrounding   the
           Appellant's alleged gunshot  injuries,  and  as  to  her  secret
           wedding against the wishes of her own family.


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24  indicating  that  the
           appeal was  opposed.   Standard  directions  were  made  by  the
           tribunal and the appeal was listed for adjudication  of  whether
           or not there was a material error of law.




      Submissions


      5.    Mr Alexander for the Appellant relied on the grounds of  onwards
           appeal earlier submitted and the grant of permission to  appeal.
           The  judge's  assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  which  the
           Appellant had produced showing that she had injuries to her  arm
           was erroneous.  The judge had  relied  on  his  own  assessment,
           without any relevant medical expertise, when concluding that the
           Appellant's injuries were caused by pellets rather than bullets,
           and that there had thus been no  intention  to  kill  her.   The
           conclusions he reached were improperly  reasoned,  for  example,
           his discussion of the lack of exit wounds.  It had  not  been  a
           fair assessment of the medical evidence.  The judge had gone too
           far, especially as it was accepted that the Appellant would have
           to have surgery to her arm.


      6.    Counsel further submitted that the issue of the secret  marriage
           had not been addressed when it ought to have been as it  was  an
           essential element of  the  Appellant's  case.   There  were  two
           families in Pakistan of whom the Appellant was afraid,  yet  the
           judge had made no proper findings at all on that issue.


      7.    Mr Jarvis for the Respondent relied on the Respondent's rule  24
           notice.  The sum of  the  submissions  made  for  the  Appellant
           amounted to mere disagreement with proper findings.   There  was
           neither perversity nor irrationality.   The  judge  had  engaged
           with the evidence in the country  context.   Y  v  Secretary  of
           State [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 had been followed, in that the  judge
           assessed the facts in  accordance  with  local  conditions  when
           determining plausibility.  The reasons for  refusal  letter  had
           set out the objective evidence and the issue  for  the  tribunal
           was the Appellant's credibility.  Underlying  the  claim  was  a
           property  dispute  to  which  the  judge  had  made   sufficient
           reference.  The option of relocation had been  relevant  to  the
           credibility assessment.


      8.    In reply, Mr Alexander submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
           deal with the Appellant's  core  account.   There  had  been  an
           inadequate engagement with the case.




      No material error of law


      9.    The tribunal  accepts  Ms  Jarvis's  submissions.   Indeed,  the
           tribunal  considers  that  the  grounds  of  onwards  appeal  as
           submitted were in truth merely a disagreement  with  a  properly
           reasoned decision.  The grant of  permission  to  appeal  was  a
           generous one.


      10.   The background evidence concerning the evil of  honour  killings
           Pakistan was not in dispute and informed the judge's approach to
           the case.  Credibility to the lower standard  was  central.   It
           was contended that the judge had in effect set himself up  as  a
           medical  expert  when  weighing  the  evidence  surrounding  the
           wounding of the Appellant in the arm.  That was not the  judge's
           approach at all.  Rather he analysed the evidence put forward by
           her and on her behalf, which, in addition to the Appellant's own
           inconsistent testimony, consisted of two  medical  reports  (one
           from Pakistan and one from the United Kingdom)  The judge  noted
           that  "radio  opaque  foreign  bodies   of   metallic   density"
           (Pakistani report) and "pellets" (English report) had been found
           in the soft tissue by the doctors.  It was open to the judge  to
           find that such foreign bodies would have  been  likely  to  have
           been described as bullets had  that  been  the  opinion  of  the
           author of either report and, in support of that finding, it  was
           reasonable to have expected that, had the  Appellant  been  shot
           with murderous intentions as she had claimed, there  would  have
           been exit wounds.  In further support  of  his  conclusion,  the
           judge also found that the  Appellant  had  not  been  critically
           injured as she had claimed, and had the financial  resources  to
           have had the foreign bodies removed in Pakistan or in the United
           Kingdom prior to her appeal hearing, at her option.   The  judge
           set out further detailed findings about the  alleged  attack  in
           his determination: see, e.g. [6.21], completing  a  careful,  in
           the round assessment conducted with anxious scrutiny.


      11.   All of those findings were reached following a logical  analysis
           to  the  lower  standard.   The  judge  made   no   plausibility
           assumptions about local conditions.  He weighed up the materials
           which the Appellant had presented, and assigned weight  for  the
           proper reasons he gave.


      12.   The subsidiary argument advanced by Mr Alexander that the  judge
           had failed to make findings about the secret marriage  similarly
           was not supported by a sensible reading  of  the  determination.
           The analysis to which the  tribunal  has  already  referred  was
           reached in the context of the Appellant's claim to have  made  a
           secret marriage against her family's wishes  and  those  of  her
           spouse: see, e.g. [6.6 and 6.7] where the  judge  set  out  that
           context.  The judge went on to show that the Appellant's claimed
           fears  were  incredible:  see  [6.22]  and  [6.23].   Again  his
           reasoning is careful and logical.


      13.   Thus the tribunal finds that there was no error of  law  in  the
           determination.  There is  no  basis  for  interfering  with  the
           judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's  appeal,  which
           dismissal must stand.


      DECISION


      The tribunal finds that there is no  error  of  law  in  the  original
decision,   which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




