
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06984/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th February 2015                         |On 24th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                                     N H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against  a  decision  to  remove  him  from  the
    United Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge P-J  S  White
    ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on  12th  December  2014.   The
    appellant claimed to be at risk on return to Eritrea in consequence  of
    his religious faith as a Pentecostal Christian.   The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant's core claims were not made out and  found  that  he
    would not be at risk on return on asylum  grounds  or  in  relation  to
    Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  No Article 8 case was
    advanced at the hearing by the appellant's counsel.

2.   The appellant applied for permission  to  appeal.   He  was,  by  then,
    unrepresented.  In his grounds, he noted that the  judge  accepted  his
    claim that he had spent the first  seventeen  months  of  his  life  in
    Eritrea.  He stated that it followed that  the  judge  had  "indirectly
    accepted" his forced  deportation  to  Ethiopia.   The  judge  did  not
    properly weigh the evidence given by the appellant's witness, a  pastor
    at a church in Swansea and ought not to have held against the appellant
    his failure to approach  the  Eritrean  Embassy  for  evidence  of  his
    nationality. Similarly, the judge gave undue  weight  to  the  apparent
    absence of evidence of contact between the appellant and his  uncle  or
    cousin.  So far as his faith was concerned, the appellant stated in his
    grounds that he was able to answer many questions about it.  He did not
    claim to be a pastor  or  an  evangelist.   The  judge  ought  to  have
    accepted the evidence of the appellant's pastor in this regard.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on 13th January  2015,  on  the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge failed to take into account or give
    due weight to his acceptance of the fact that the appellant was born in
    Eritrea and lived there for seventeen months,  and  lived  there  again
    between February 2000 and December 2002.  The judge's finding that  the
    appellant had not shown that he was an Eritrean national  was  arguably
    in conflict with the earlier findings.

4.   In a rule 24 response from the  Secretary  of  State,  the  appeal  was
    opposed.  The  judge  directed  himself  appropriately.   His  findings
    regarding nationality and other matters were open to  him  and  he  was
    entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant's  core  account  was  not
    credible.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   There was no appearance by or on behalf of  the  appellant.   Enquiries
    made through my usher revealed that no messages had been left with  the
    Tribunal.  The address given by the appellant in  his  application  for
    permission to appeal was the same as the address relied upon earlier in
    the proceedings and the Upper Tribunal sent out notice of  the  hearing
    on 21st January 2015 to that address, by first class post.   There  was
    nothing to show any failure of service.  I took into account rule 38 of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   I  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had been notified of the hearing and considered that
    it was in the interests of justice to proceed in his absence.   Further
    delay would be of no benefit to either party and the appellant,  having
    identified the basis on which he contended that the judge had erred  in
    law, had been given sufficient time to prepare his case.

6.   Miss Isherwood said that the judge had not erred in law  materially  or
    at all.  The appellant was represented by  counsel  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  His grounds in support of the  application  amounted
    to a disagreement with the judge's findings.

7.   The decision was a detailed  one  and  the  judge  included  a  careful
    summary of the evidence.  It was clear that the Secretary of State  had
    not accepted the appellant's case.  The judge,  in  contrast,  accepted
    part of it, including the appellant's claim  that  he  had  resided  in
    Eritrea for a period of time.  However, the judge gave  cogent  reasons
    for concluding, overall, that the appellant had not shown that he would
    be at risk on return as a Pentecostal Christian.

8.   The judge properly took into account  salient  features  of  the  case,
    including the absence of an approach by the appellant to  the  Eritrean
    authorities, for evidence regarding nationality,  and  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had heard about National Service in Eritrea,  although
    this was apparently not a feature of his claim to be at risk on return.



9.   In his  grounds,  the  appellant  contended  that  the  judge  was  not
    independent but the decision showed that he had acted properly  in  his
    judicial role throughout.  Paragraphs 8, 29  and  30  showed  that  the
    judge accepted that the appellant had lived in Eritrea  for  the  first
    seventeen months of his life and then again between 2000 and 2002.  For
    most of his childhood, the appellant was in Ethiopia.  In this context,
    the judge was entitled to find that  if  the  appellant  had  lived  in
    Eritrea for a period and  then  spent  years  out  of  the  country  in
    Ethiopia, he would, nonetheless, have been aware  of  National  Service
    and the onerous  obligations  falling  on  Eritrean  citizens  in  this
    regard.  The judge's reasoning was clear throughout.  He accepted  some
    of what the pastor  had  said.   The  appellant's  case  was  carefully
    summarised.  Although the pastor believed the appellant's  claims,  the
    judge properly reached his own conclusion.  The balanced nature of  his
    assessment is also shown by his finding that parts of the Secretary  of
    State's case should not be given much weight, including the appellant's
    failure to claim asylum before arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    judge looked at everything in the round.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  The decision is extremely thorough and has been carefully  prepared  by
    an experienced judge.  As Miss Isherwood submitted,  he  carefully  set
    out in summary form the evidence before him.  He accepted parts of  the
    appellant's case and concluded that  parts  of  the  respondent's  case
    should be given little weight, including  the  appellant's  failure  to
    claim asylum earlier.  There can be no doubt that the judge had all the
    salient features clearly in mind throughout.

11.  The judge was entitled  to  give  adverse  weight  to  the  appellant's
    failure to approach the Eritrean authorities here, for evidence of  his
    nationality.  He recorded the evidence in this context at paragraph  21
    and his assessment appears at paragraph 36 of the decision.  So far  as
    National  Service  in  Eritrea  is  concerned,  his  summary   of   the
    appellant's evidence appears at paragraph  22  and  his  assessment  at
    paragraph 32 of the decision.  The judge was entitled to find that  the
    absence of a claim to be at risk as a draft  evader  was  a  surprising
    omission in the asylum claim and was entitled to take this aspect  into
    account as an adverse factor in the overall assessment.

12.  So far as the appellant's core claim to be at  risk  as  a  Pentecostal
    Christian  is  concerned,  the  decision  contains  a   very   thorough
    assessment indeed, at paragraphs 41 to 47 and there is also  a  careful
    assessment of the issue of illegal exit from Eritrea, at paragraphs  39
    and 40, as there is of  the  appellant's  account  of  his  escape,  at
    paragraph 49.

13.  The judge's overall conclusions that the appellant had  not  shown,  to
    the  applicable  standard,  that  he  is  an  Eritrean  national  or  a
    Pentecostal Christian, or that he left Eritrea illegally, were open  to
    him in the light of the evidence.  The parties were represented by very
    experienced advocates and the decision shows that the cases  were  well
    put.  The judge weighed the evidence carefully, took into  account  the
    submissions  made  on  behalf  of  the  parties  and  made  sustainable
    findings.  I accept Miss Isherwood's submission that the grounds amount
    to a disagreement with  the  outcome.   The  appellant  has  failed  to
    identify an error of law in the decision.  The decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no error of  law,  shall
stand.

ANONYMITY

The judge made an anonymity direction and  I  maintain  it.   The  direction
shall apply to both parties until or  unless  varied  by  another  court  or
tribunal.






Signed                                  Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



