
-
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06792/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 February 2015                  |On 18 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     T L
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Lewis, Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing an  appeal  by  the  applicant  against  a
    decision made on 22 August 2014 to remove him following the refusal  of
    his claim for asylum. In this decision I will refer to the  parties  as
    they  were  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  applicant  as  the
    appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 15 May 1990. He applied
    for a tier 4 student visa on 7 May 2011. This was  issued  on  22  July
    2011 valid until 30 December 2012. He arrived in the  UK  on  6  August
    2011 and subsequently applied for extensions of  his  visa  which  were
    granted until 19 April 2015. He claimed asylum on 29 July 2014. He said
    that in 2005 during the April school holidays he went to Jaffna with  a
    friend called J to visit his uncle. He got to know J's cousin,  K,  who
    worked with the LTTE and they were invited to go to  Vanni  where  they
    stayed in a camp  with  LTTE  members,  were  shown  videos  about  its
    achievements and were invited to undertake training. This was held in a
    building that looked like a school and lasted for 3 weeks. It  included
    weapon training and how to move  about  without  making  noise  in  the
    night. He also went to political classes and was told  about  the  1983
    communal riots and how Tamils  had  to  fight  for  their  freedom.  He
    claimed that he had received weapon training after 5 days of  attending
    political classes and had learned about the AK47.

 3. After 3 weeks he had to return to Colombo because he needed to go  back
    to school. He said that after the training he had not had  any  contact
    with the LTTE until October 2008 when he was asked to book hotel  rooms
    in Colombo for other LTTE members. J's cousin phoned him and asked  him
    if he could help. J also booked rooms for LTTE members. They were asked
    to help because people coming from the North  and  East  of  Sri  Lanka
    could not book hotels in Colombo at short notice and it was easier  for
    him as a resident to do so. He claimed that he also booked a hotel room
    in January 2009 and he had not encountered any problems as a result. He
    had agreed to do this because even though he was aware of  the  danger,
    he had been asked by J because the LTTE were fighting  for  the  Tamils
    and he saw it as a small contribution from him. He had also helped  the
    LTTE in 2011 when he was asked by S, someone whom he had met through K,
    to rent a house for the LTTE and was told by S that this was  for  LTTE
    members who had escaped from a refugee camp and were going  to  Colombo
    before being sent on to Middle Eastern countries. The appellant claimed
    that he had been arrested on 19 May 2011 because he and a friend G were
    suspected of involvement with the LTTE as G had ID from Jaffna. He  was
    detained for a day but his father went to the police station and showed
    his education certificates and he was released without conditions.

 4. However, he had received a call from his mother  on  20  February  2014
    telling him that S had been arrested and that the army had been to  the
    house looking for him. They had asked his parents if they knew  S's  or
    the appellant's whereabouts. Their house  was  searched,  his  identity
    card was taken and his parents were informed  that  the  appellant  had
    been working for the LTTE intelligence and had sent  people  to  Middle
    Eastern countries to re-group the LTTE. His father  had  been  arrested
    and detained for 1 and half months. It was the appellant's belief  that
    S must have told the  army  about  him  because  his  family  had  been
    approached after his arrest.

 5. The respondent did not find  this  account  to  be  credible.  For  the
    reasons set out in the detailed reasons for  refusal  letter  dated  22
    August 2014, she took the view that the appellant's account  was  vague
    and  that  there  were  both  internal  and  external  inconsistencies,
    suggesting that he could have fabricated his  account  to  bolster  his
    asylum claim. The decision letter commented that the description he had
    given of dismantling an AK47 was very general, he was unable to provide
    any documentary evidence to substantiate his claim to have booked hotel
    rooms and he had not provided any documentary evidence to show that the
    authorities in  Sri  Lanka  were  looking  for  him.  Accordingly,  his
    application was refused.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard at Hatton Cross on 29 October 2014. He  gave  oral  evidence  and
    further documentary evidence was produced  in  support  of  his  appeal
    including a medical report from Dr Martin, a report from Dr Zapata  and
    a letter from a Sri Lankan lawyer.  The  appellant  also  relied  on  a
    statement from his father which had been faxed  from  Sri  Lanka.  When
    asked about that statement at the hearing the appellant  said  that  he
    had told a friend in Sri Lanka that he wanted a  document,  the  friend
    had contacted the appellant's father who had been helped by the  friend
    to write the statement in English and it had then been faxed  from  Sri
    Lanka [23].

 7. The judge accepted that the appellant's evidence was  credible  finding
    that it was both internally and externally consistent [28]. He accepted
    that the appellant had assisted  in  obtaining  accommodation  and  had
    sustained injuries [29]. Regard had to be had to the  low  standard  of
    proof and it appeared to the judge that there was ample evidence  of  a
    medical nature that the injuries had occurred [29]. He  said  that  the
    appellant's position when he arrived  in  the  UK  was  that  what  had
    happened in Sri Lanka was behind him, so he had not claimed asylum. But
    matters had changed in February 2014 when he heard  about  his  father.
    The judge accepted to the  low  standard  of  proof  that  S  had  been
    tortured and had provided information which then caused the Sri  Lankan
    authorities to look for the appellant but not finding him,  they  found
    his father [30]. In summary, the judge said that he considered that the
    appellant was of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities, had  a
    well founded persecution and  had  already  been  tortured.  For  these
    reasons the appeal was allowed on asylum grounds.

The Grounds and Submissions

 8. In the respondent's grounds it is  argued  that  the  judge  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for his findings of fact and why  the  account
    was accepted as credible. They refer to the decision  in  MK  (duty  to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 00641 and to Budhadhoki (reasons for
    decisions)  [2013]  UKUT  00341.  It  is  submitted  that  the  judge's
    acceptance of the appellant's account amounted to a bare statement that
    he was credible and internally and externally consistent.  No  adequate
    reasons were provided to support the findings and to  this  extent  the
    judge had erred in law. Secondly, the  grounds  argue  that  the  judge
    materially misdirected himself by failing to make any reference to  the
    risk factors in the country guidance case of GJ and Others (post  civil
    war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT00319. The failure to apply the
    country guidance case, so it is argued, was a clear error of law.

 9. Mr Avery adopted the grounds arguing that the judge had failed to  deal
    adequately with the  issues  raised  in  the  decision  letter  and  in
    particular he had failed to take any account of inconsistencies in  the
    appellant's account such as the time  it  would  take  to  travel  from
    Jaffna  to  Puthukudyiruppu  and  more  generally  to  the  vague   and
    inconsistent nature of his evidence. He had given an account of booking
    a room at an Omega Inn and then at a Suntan Lodge but  the  details  he
    gave  about  their  locations  were  not   consistent   with   external
    information.

10. Mr Lewis submitted that the judge had reached a decision properly  open
    to him. He had taken into account  the  medical  evidence,  the  expert
    evidence and the evidence from a Sri Lankan lawyer and was entitled  to
    treat this as corroborating the appellant's evidence. He argued that it
    was plausible that if evidence had been extracted  by  torture  from  S
    that he may well have named the appellant. He pointed to the fact  that
    the appellant had had an adverse inference drawn from the fact that  in
    his interview he had  said  that  he  had  been  told  about  the  1983
    "communal rights" when in fact there had been riots in 1983 not  rights
    ([37] of the decision letter). The appellant had also produced  at  the
    hearing evidence to contradict the  assertions  made  in  the  decision
    letter about the length of  travel  distances  relating  to  the  hotel
    rooms. He further argued that it could not be an error of law  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal not to refer to the risk categories in GJ  when  on
    the judge's findings of fact the appellant clearly  fell  within  those
    categories.

Consideration of whether there is an error of Law

11. It is the respondent's submission  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing to give adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  of  fact  or  to
    identify and  resolve  the  key  conflicts  in  the  evidence.  Whether
    adequate reasons have been given depends very much  on  the  particular
    circumstances of each appeal. I have  been  referred  to  the  Tribunal
    decisions in MK and Budhadhoki and these decisions reflect the guidance
    given in Atputharajah [2001] Imm AR 566  that  when  assessing  whether
    reasons are adequate, two issues arise whether the  claimed  inadequacy
    of reasons is such that it gives rise to a real concern  that  relevant
    matters may not have been taken into account and,  if  so,  whether  in
    fact that would have made any difference to the outcome.

12. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant about his  purpose  in
    coming to the UK [6], the ill treatment that he had received  from  the
    Sri Lankan authorities [7] and [9], whether and why  he  did  not  give
    more detailed answers at interviews [11] and the  issues  arising  from
    his answers about whether he had an ID card [14]. He  was  asked  about
    what had happened to S and K [17-8] and the statement from  his  father
    which had indicated that the  appellant  had  been  seriously  tortured
    [19]. He was also asked about whether there were any arrest warrants or
    police reports to vouch for the fact that his father had been  arrested
    [20]. The judge asked about the statement obtained from the appellant's
    father and he explained how it had been obtained and sent to him [23].

13. It was argued in the submissions on behalf of the respondent before the
    judge that the appellant's account was vague and he  had  not  given  a
    full account when interviewed. The judge was entitled to take the  view
    that if the respondent had wanted more information the appellant  could
    have been asked the relevant  questions  and  to  show  his  scars.  He
    commented that the fact that a witness was not expansive and  chose  to
    confine his answers did not necessarily indicate that the answers given
    were not truthful [25]. So far as the matter of the identity  card  was
    concerned it appeared to him that  this  was  really  probably  just  a
    mistake. He accepted that the appellant had  been  able  to  leave  the
    country without difficulty, but that was because at that stage when  he
    arrived in the UK what had happened in Sri Lanka was behind him  so  he
    had not claimed asylum [30].

14. As Mr Lewis pointed out in his submissions what  had  happened  in  Sri
    Lanka before the appellant came to this country was part of the history
    and the substance of the appeal had related to recent events  when  his
    father had been arrested because the authorities was  looking  for  the
    appellant. His evidence was believed by the judge who rightly  reminded
    himself of the low standard of proof and I am not satisfied that it can
    be said that it was not open to the judge to find that the  appellant's
    account was credible or that his findings of fact were not  within  the
    range of findings properly open to him.  The  findings  may  have  been
    generous but they cannot be categorised as unreasonable or irrational.

15. It is correct that the judge has  not  referred  to  a  number  of  the
    detailed criticisms of the appellant's evidence in the decision  letter
    but there is no reason to believe that he was  not  aware  of  them  or
    indeed of the explanations and responses  the  appellant  gave  at  the
    hearing. Further, the appellant's evidence found some  support  in  the
    medical evidence, the report from Dr Zapata and the statement from  the
    appellant's father. The judge's task was to assess that evidence and to
    make findings of fact in accordance with the lower standard of proof. I
    am satisfied that the  judge  reached  findings  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence. The fact that he did not deal expressly  with  each  item  of
    evidence does not satisfy me on the particular facts of this case  that
    there is any reason to believe that he left any relevant  evidence  out
    of account when reaching his conclusions or that he  erred  in  law  by
    failing to give adequate reasons for his decision.

16. So far as the second ground of appeal is concerned the failure to refer
    to the country guidance in GJ is not without more an error of law.  The
    findings  of  the  judge  put  the  appellant  squarely  in  categories
    identified in GJ as putting someone at real risk  of  serious  harm  on
    return to Sri Lanka.

17. In summary, I am not satisfied that the judge erred in law as argued in
    the respondent's grounds. It follows that the  respondent's  appeal  is
    dismissed and the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands.  No
    application has been made to vary or discharge the anonymity order made
    by the First-tier Tribunal and that order remains in force.



Signed        Date 4 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
