
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06490/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Notification issued:         |
|on 15 January 2014                            |On 16 January 2014           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              NEZAM NOORE MAGED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Rea, of Maguire, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                         NOTIFICATION OF WITHDRAWAL


 1. This is an appeal against a determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Mr Peter  A  Grant-Hutchison,  promulgated  on  27  August  2013.  That
    determination was set aside in terms of  a  decision  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Bruce  issued  on  27  November  2013.   The  respondent
    conceded  that  there  was  error  of  law  (1)   by   conflating   the
    proportionality exercise  with  the  question  whether  there  was  any
    arguable case outside the rules, and  (2)  by  failing  to  assess  the
    reasonability of expecting the appellant's partner to go to  Iraq;  the
    appellant's relatively long residence in the UK; and  the  significance
    of some apparent delay in further decision-making by the respondent.




 2. Pursuant to a transfer order by Principal Resident Judge Southern,  the
    case came before me for further decision.

 3. Mr Matthews said that while he did not acknowledge that the case  ought
    to succeed under Article 8, either within or  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, a grant of discretionary leave under paragraph 353B of the Rules
    now appeared to be appropriate, subject to satisfactory security checks
    on the appellant.  There had not been time since he received the papers
    to have those checks carried out prior to the hearing.

 4. Mr Rea said that the appellant was confident that  nothing  adverse  to
    him would emerge from such checks.  He  did  not  oppose  Mr  Matthews'
    application to withdraw.

 5. In terms of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  Rule
    17, the case for the respondent (i.e., the respondent's decision  under
    appeal) is recorded as having been withdrawn  orally  at  the  hearing,
    without objection by the appellant, and with the consent of  the  Upper
    Tribunal.


                                    [pic]
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               15 January 2013



