
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06900/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 30 March 2015                     |On 16 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                              AHMAD REZA NAEMI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mandubuike for AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hillis promulgated on 4 November  2014  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born on 2 June 1976 and is a national of Iran.

 4. On 20 March 2014 the Appellant applied for asylum  in  essence  on  the
    basis that he was a convert from Islam to Christianity.

 5. On 27 August 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant's account as to whether his friend  Sohail  had  been
         arrested was inconsistent.

      b) The Appellant's account of how he came  to  the  attention  of  the
         authorities was inconsistent.

      c) The Appellant's claim that the Armenian  Christians  in  his  group
         evangelised was contradicted by the background material.

      d) The Appellant's claim that the Armenian Church was targeted by  the
         authorities was inconsistent with the background material.

      e) The Appellant's lack of knowledge of those parts of  the  bible  he
         claimed to have read did not support his claim to have been part of
         Bible study group.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Hillis  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

    (a)     The  Appellant's   claims   about   Armenian   Christians   was
         inconsistent with the background material.

    (b)    the Judge did not find the Appellant's  willingness  to  prepare
         Christian crosses for Nooshin was credible or why  she  would  risk
         approaching him to make them.

    (c)    The Appellant's limited  knowledge  of  the  Bible  afforded  no
         support for his claim.

    (d)    The Judge took into account Dorodian (01/THO/1537) and  gave  no
         evidential weight to the evidence of the Pastor who attended  court
         to give evidence as he was not involved in the  assessment  of  the
         Appellant for baptism  and  his  knowledge  of  the  Appellant  was
         limited. The pastor who was involved in such assessment provided  a
         letter but no explanation as to why he could not  attend  court  to
         give evidence.

    (e)    The Judge did not accept that the Appellant wasa genuine convert
         to Chrisitanity.

    (f)    The Judge did not find that the Appellant fell into any  of  the
         risk categories in SB (risk on return-illegal exit) Iran CG  [2009]
         UKIAT 00053.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged extending to some 19 paragraphs but  with
    no clear indication of what the error of law was in the decision.

 8.  On 19 December 2014 first-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes  gave  permission
    to appeal on the basis that the Judge had  arguably  erred  in  finding
    that the Appellant had been  introduced  to  Christianity  by  Armenian
    Christians.

 9. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mandubuike on behalf of  the
    Appellant having advised him to assist me by identifying errors of  law
    in his grounds. While relying on the grounds as  drafted  he  submitted
    that :

      a) The Judge had made a mistake of fact in finding that the  Appellant
         was converted to Christianity by Armenian Christians. This was  not
         the case as the Nooshin was a convert from  Islam  to  Christianity
         and not an Armenian as the Judge found.

      b) The Judge misunderstood the background material which did  not  say
         that Armenians did not proselytise.

      c) The findings at paragraph 8 and 9 were not open to  the  Judge  and
         involved him speculating.

      d) At paragraphs 12- 17 the judge applied too high a standard of proof
         to the evidence before him.

      e) The Judge at paragraph 18 misapplied SB

      f) The Judge did not did not consider  the  Appellant's  rights  under
         Article 8.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Mc Vitie submitted that :

      a) Given the short period that the Appellant and his family  had  been
         in the United Kingdom and that they  would  return  to  Iran  as  a
         family there was no breach of Article 8.

      b) The judge found that part of the Christian group that the Appellant
         joined was made  up  of  Armenian  Christians  and  the  background
         material showed that they do not proselytise.

      c) The judge's findings in  relation  to  whether  a  Christian  would
         approach someone who was not a Christian to make  crosses  was  set
         against the background material about Iran and was open to him.

      d) The  findings  about  the  Appellant's  bible  knowledge  were  not
         determinative in the appeal and were open to the Judge.

      e) The Judge was entitled to find  that  the  internet  article  about
         Sohail did not support his case.  There  are  people  charged  with
         apostasy and Sohail was not.  The  fact  that  the  Appellant  knew
         Sohail did not support his claim to have converted.



Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

12. At the heart of the Appellant's claim (questions 34-37  of  the  asylum
    interview) was that he was a convert to  Christianity  and  part  of  a
    group that included two people who were Armenian Christians  (Arax  and
    Alenoosh) and two who were converts from Islam (Noorshin and Sohail )In
    setting out his findings the Judge described Noorshin  as  an  Armenian
    Christian at paragraph 28 and this was therefore a factual error.

13. However I am satisfied that this factual error was not material to  the
    outcome of the decision because although he stated that  his  claim  to
    have been introduced to Christianity by Armenian Christians was at odds
    with the  background  material  he  also  found  that  the  Appellant's
    knowledge of Armenian Christians in general was inconsistent  with  the
    background material.  Specifically  the  Appellant  was  asked  at  Q70
    whether Armenian Christians try to convert  Muslims  and  he  responded
    'yes, to evangelise or to tell others about their religion is  part  of
    their faith always.' The Judge was entitled to consider the  background
    material  referred  to  at  paragraph  16  of  the  refusal  letter  as
    inconsistent with this view. I am satisfied that the Judge  interpreted
    this paragraph correctly and I do not  agree  with  the  interpretation
    argued by Mr Mandubuike at paragraph 6 of the grounds. The  COI  report
    clearly distinguishes between Ethnic Christians who  include  Armenians
    and Non Ethnic Christians and in the third paragraph states that  "non-
    ethnic Christians, however have faced great  pressure  because,  unlike
    the  "ethnic"  Christians,  they  are   involved   in   proselytising"'
    (paragraph  19.33)  If  there  was  any  doubt  the  fact  that  ethnic
    Christians who are Armenians do not actively proselytise is repeated in
    the 5th paragraph.

14. The grounds challenge that it was not open to  the  Judge  to  find  it
    incredible that a Christian would approach a Muslim and request he make
    crosses and ask him to deliver them to her home  (paragraph  28)  I  am
    satisfied that this was a finding open to  the  Judge  given  that  the
    Appellant's own account was that it was illegal for such  items  to  be
    made especially by Muslims which the Appellant was at the time  of  the
    initial approach.

15. The Judges findings in relation to the Appellant's lack of knowledge of
    Christianity at paragraph 31 are challenged. I am  satisfied  that  the
    findings are balanced and very fair in that  the  Judge  is  clear  the
    issue is not determinative, he specifically recognises the low level of
    the Appellant's education and the relatively short period during  which
    he had studied the bible. I am satisfied  that  he  does  not  make  an
    adverse finding against the Appellant but  rather  concludes  that  the
    level of his knowledge does not positively assist his claim.

16. The Judge's finding that the internet article regarding Sohail also did
    not assist his claim to have been a convert to Christianity because the
    article did not state that Sohail was arrested because of any religious
    behaviour contrary to Islamic law. It was open to  the  Judge  to  find
    additionally that the fact that the Appellant knew Sohail as  evidenced
    by having a photo of them together did not mean that he was involved in
    any way in Sohail's activities. This was a finding open to the Judge.

17. Having found that the Appellant was not a convert to  Christianity  the
    Judge was entitled to conclude that he did not fall  into  any  of  the
    risk categories in SB.

18. The grounds at paragraph 19 challenge the  Judge's  failure  to  assess
    Article 8 in relation to his wife and child. While this was  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal the argument was not advanced before the Judge as
    he records at paragraph 45. Given that they could not be argued to meet
    any of the requirements of Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE  and  given
    his finding that they had been in the Uk for less than  12  months  and
    would be returning as a family unit and failure to  address  Article  8
    would have had no material effect on the outcome of the decision.

19. I find that the reasons given were adequate and the Appellant cannot be
    in  any  doubt  about  why  the  appeal  was  dismissed:   his  alleged
    conversion to Christianity was not accepted and therefore he was not at
    risk on return.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 7.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

