
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
AA/06798/2015
                                                               AA/06799/2015
                                                               AA/06800/2015
                                                               AA/06801/2015
                                                               AA/06802/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 June 2016                        |On 4 July 2016                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                     SB
                                     AA
                                     NA
                                     ZA
                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants: not represented
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. The anonymity direction  that  was  previously  made
   shall continue.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellants, a husband and wife and  their  three
   children, against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Siddiqi
   promulgated on 21 August 2015  which  dismissed  the  Appellants  appeals
   against the decision of the Respondent to remove the Appellants from  the
   UK following the decision to refuse the Appellant's claim for asylum  and
   the decision to vary the  second,  third,  fourth  and  fifth  Appellants
   applications to vary their leave such that there was none remaining.

4. The Appellants were not represented. Accordingly,  I  explained  to  them
   that the hearing was to determine whether the Judge had made an error  of
   law in her decision to refuse their appeals as they  suggested  in  their
   grounds. I ensured that they had received a copy of  and  understood  the
   permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on  30  November  2015
   and told them I would  take  into  account  the  grounds  that  they  had
   presented in their first application and  the  renewed  grounds  together
   with the skeleton argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal in  so
   far as it was relevant. I indicated to Mr Harrison that I  required  that
   he address each of the arguable errors as summarised  by  Upper  Tribunal
   Judge Plimmer in her grant of permission.

Background
5. The first Appellant is a female citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  21  November
   1973; the second Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq born  on  4  January
   1968; the third Appellant is a male citizen of Iraq  born  on  4  January
   2009; the fourth Appellant is a female citizen of Iraq born on 26  August
   2005 and the fifth Appellant is a female  citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  26
   August 2005.
6. On 13 January 2014 the Appellants entered the UK:  the  second  Appellant
   had a Tier 4 visa valid from 13 December 2013 until  8  October  2014  to
   study for a PhD at Anglia Ruskin University following an English Language
   course in Manchester at EF International School and his wife and children
   entered the UK as his  dependents.   The  PhD  was  due  to  commence  in
   September 2014 but it transpired that the offer letter  provided  by  the
   language school was a fake. He received an offer from Swansea  University
   dated 8 May 2015 to begin a PhD in July 2015.
7. On 6 October 2014 the first Appellant applied for asylum.  The  basis  of
   the claim was that in September 2014 the Appellant and her husband  found
   out that her brother and uncle had been killed and their niece  kidnapped
   after a phone call from the second Appellants brother. They were told not
   to return to Iraq because the militia would  also  target  them  as  they
   would be perceived to be collaborators with the American forces  in  Iraq
   because the first Appellants cousins had worked for the  Americans  as  a
   translator in 2004 and the second Appellant had on occasions assisted him
   at the American base. The militias it was  claimed  could  not  find  the
   cousins who left Iraq in 2014 so were targeting other family members.
8. On  30  March  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) The Appellants account  was  not  credible  because  although  it  was
      claimed that the second Appellant had assisted the Americans  in  2004
      he had remained in Iraq for another 10 years  and  confirmed  that  no
      incidents had occurred that suggested the militias had an interest  in
      him even though he held a post in a University that  made  him  easily
      locatable.
   b) The claim was speculative and based on a phone  call  from  the  first
      Appellants brother in law and there was no detail to indicate how  and
      in what circumstances the brother and uncle died.
   c) The Appellants were at no greater risk than the general population  of
      Iraq from the militias.
   d) Even taken at its highest the first  Appellant  was  a  Kurd  and  the
      family could relocate to Kurdistan.
The Judge's Decision
9. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and at that  time  they
   were legally represented. First-tier Tribunal Judge Siddiqi ("the Judge")
   dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's decision. The Judge :
   a) Found that the issue was one of credibility.
   b) She accepted that the background material and caselaw  suggested  that
      there  was  a  risk  on  return   to   collaborators   and   perceived
      collaborators.
   c)  She accepted  that  the  first  Appellants  cousins  worked  for  the
      Americans as interpreters in 2004.
   d) She found that the suggestion the deaths of the uncle and brother were
      at the hands of the militia as a result of the cousin's work with  the
      Americans was purely speculative.
   e) She found that the email from the Appellants brother did not  say  who
      killed the brother and uncle or link their deaths to their  work  with
      the Americans. The date of the email was unclear.
   f) She did not find it credible that assisting the cousins on 3 occasions
      7-8 years ago for a total of 90 minutes would put the second Appellant
      at risk noting that in the years that followed the Appellants  had  no
      problems in Iraq,
   g) She noted that the Appellants now claimed that two incidents  occurred
      in 2012 when the second Appellant was nearly run over  by  a  car  and
      when the Second Appellant and his friend were chased by a car  on  the
      way to work were threats by the militia but these incidents  were  not
      mentioned in the asylum interview nor were any threats issued  at  the
      time to link them to militias.
   h) She gave reasons why he did not find the  documentation  produced  was
      unreliable.  Reasons  were  given  why  she  gave  no  weight  to  the
      threatening letter.
   i) She  found  that  the  timing  of  the  asylum  claim  undermined  the
      Appellants general  credibility  in  that  the  second  Appellant  had
      apparently had an offer to study for a PhD at University which  turned
      out to be false and rather than returning to Iraq and making  a  fresh
      application (because he did not receive a fresh offer until  May  2015
      from Swansea University) an asylum application had been made.
10. Grounds of appeal were lodged and permission was initially  refused  but
   on 30 November 2015 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  gave  permission  to
   appeal.

11. At the hearing I heard submissions from the Appellants that :

   a) They were content to rely on their grounds and the permission  of  UTJ
      Judge Plimmer

   b) The Judge failed to take into account that the  family  had  relocated
      after the incidents in 2012 and  that  is  why  they  had  no  further
      problems.

12. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Harrison :

   a) Relied on the Rule 24 Response 22 December 2015 which he went  through
      in detail.

The Law

13.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. If a point of evidence of significance has  been
   ignored or misunderstood, that is  a  failure  to  take  into  account  a
   material consideration. In Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367  Buxton  LJ
   said this in relation to challenging such findings:
   "Where, as in this case,  complaint  is  made  of  the  reasoning  of  an
   adjudicator  in  respect  of  a  question  of  fact  (that  is   to   say
   credibility), particular care is necessary to ensure that  the  criticism
   is as to the fundamental approach of the adjudicator, and does not merely
   reflect a feeling on the part of the appellate  tribunal  that  it  might
   itself have taken a different view of the matter from that that  appealed
   to the adjudicator."
15. In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641  (IAC),  it  was
   held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination disclosed clearly the
   reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal found oral evidence
   to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document to be worth  no
   weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in  the  determination  and
   for such findings to be supported by reasons. A  bare  statement  that  a
   witness was not believed or that a document was afforded  no  weight  was
   unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. I note the suggestion that the Judge may have set an impermissibly  high
   standard of proof in this case but I am satisfied that the Judge that the
   Judge directed herself appropriately as to the law and  the  standard  of
   proof in paragraphs 3-8.  I can find nothing in her decision  to  suggest
   that this was not the standard she applied in her decision.

18. I am satisfied that while the Judge accepted that the  first  Appellants
   cousins had worked for the Americans in  2004  there  was  no  basis  for
   concluding that militias had any interest in the Appellant or her  family
   and she gave sound reasons for that conclusion.  She  took  into  account
   even on the Appellants account the involvement of  the  second  Appellant
   with the cousins work was both extremely limited  in  duration  but  took
   place 7-8 years before the claim with nothing happening to the Appellants
   since(paragraph 30)  It was open to her to find that the Appellants claim
   that two incidents occurred in 2012 which  amounted  to  attacks  on  her
   husband by the  militia  would  have  been  referred  to  in  the  asylum
   interview had they taken place(paragraph 26) nor was there any indication
   even taken at its highest that these incidents  were  linked  to  militia
   rather than to simple  lawlessness.  I  also  note  that  the  Appellants
   suggest in their grounds of appeal and the grant of permission  that  the
   Judge failed to  take  into  account  that  they  relocated  after  these
   incidents which was why  they  had  no  other  problems  in  Iraq:  I  am
   satisfied that in fact this assertion is inconsistent with the Appellants
   claim not to have  mentioned  these  incidents  in  2012  in  the  asylum
   interview because she did not at that time believe they  were  caused  by
   the militia.

19. It was suggested in the grounds that  the  Judge  failed  to  take  into
   account that there was a direct threat made to the Appellants  but  I  am
   satisfied that the Judge addressed and gave clear reasons in paragraph 33
   why she placed little weight on the threatening letter noting that it was
   not credible that a threat would be addressed to the first Appellant  and
   no other female member of the extended family. The Judge also gave  clear
   reasons for placing little weight on the email from the second Appellants
   brother in that the date of the email was  unclear  and  while  asserting
   that family members had been killed did not  identify  their  killers  or
   link their deaths to the work they had done with the US Army.

20. It was also open to the Judge to remark on the timing of  the  claim  in
   that the warning phone call from the second Appellants brother came  just
   when they found out that his offer from Anglia Ruskin was not genuine and
   the family's leave was due to expire.

21.  The  Judge  also  set  out  in  some  detail  at  paragraph  32   those
   inconsistencies which undermined the Appellants claim that  other  family
   members were in hiding: that although they received a threatening  letter
   in January 2014 they did not go into hiding until October 2014.

22. I remind myself of what was said in   Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:
   set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

23. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

24. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

25. The appeal is dismissed.

26. Under Rule 14(1) the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) rules 2008  9as
   amended)  the  Appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout   these
   proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise.  An
   order for anonymity was made in the First-tier and shall continue.






Signed                                                              Date
3.7.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

