
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06031/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 December 2015                  |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     E S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Collins, Counsel instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was not granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings  despite
the fact that the First-tier Tribunal Presidential guidance  Note  (No.2  of
2011) recommends that a direction will normally be made in  cases  involving
children and vulnerable people. The appellant is not yet 18  years  old  and
for this reason I find that it is appropriate to make  a  direction.  Unless
and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify her or any member of her family. This  direction  applies  both  to
the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant says that he entered the UK clandestinely on 10  October
    2013. The exact date  when  he  claimed  asylum  is  unclear  from  the
    evidence currently before the Tribunal. The appellant claims that he is
    at risk on return to Albania as a result of a blood feud. He says  that
    the feud arose with a family in Tirana when his  paternal  cousin  shot
    and seriously injured a member of their family.

2.    The respondent refused the application in a decision dated  08  August
    2014. She did not consider it plausible that he would be at risk  as  a
    child because it was asserted that  Kanun  law  did  not  sanction  the
    targeting of children. He was unable to provide sufficient detail as to
    why the police were  unable  to  provide  protection  when  his  father
    reported the matter. The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant
    was likely to be at risk as a result of  a  blood  feud.  However,  the
    appellant was granted Discretionary Leave to Remain until 07  May  2016
    pursuant to the respondent's policy  on  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
    children.

3.     The  appellant  appealed  under  section  83  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") (as applied at the time).
     As such, the appeal was  confined  to  consideration  of  whether  the
    appellant  should  be  recognised  as  a  refugee  or   qualified   for
    Humanitarian Protection.

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 31 July 2015.  He  accepted  that  there  was
    evidence to support the claim that there had been a  shooting  incident
    in Tirana. He went on to find that there was no evidence to show that a
    blood feud had arisen as a result of  that  incident.  The  person  was
    eventually arrested and prosecuted for the  crime.  The  appellant  had
    been vague in his evidence about what happened when his father reported
    the blood feud to the police [17]. There was no evidence to  show  that
    his father reported the matter to the police or sought  reconciliation.
    He found that the fact that the  newspaper  articles  relating  to  the
    shooting in Tirana did not mention a blood feud was "highly indicative"
    that a blood feud did not exist [18]. The judge went on  to  find  that
    the appellant's evidence was vague and lacking in cohesive  detail.  He
    did not find it plausible that the appellant's father  would  not  tell
    him where he was going when he left in January  2013  or  that  it  was
    plausible that the appellant no longer had any contact with any members
    of his family. He  inferred  from  this  that  the  appellant's  family
    members were still likely to be living in his home area [19].

5.    Although the judge made clear that he did not accept  the  appellant's
    account he went on to consider the case in  the  alternative.  Even  if
    strangers had come to the appellant's village asking about  his  family
    he concluded that the appellant did not know who they were and  it  was
    "pure speculation" that they were from the family who he says  declared
    a blood feud. For this reason the judge concluded that the  appellant's
    subjective fear was not objectively well-founded [20]. In [22] he  made
    the following finding:

         "The appellant was unsure as to how his father  was  informed  that
         the [other] family had declared a blood feud against  him  and  his
         father. The appellant's claim is vague throughout and I  find  even
         allowing for his age that had been significant events  occurred  as
         claimed that the appellant would have more knowledge that he  does.
         I find that the appellant's lack of knowledge lack  of  ability  to
         provide a cohesive detail is because the appellant has simply based
         a fabricated asylum claim upon a  reported  criminal  act  and  has
         learnt a series of facts and is unable to vary from that script."

6.    He went on to find that  there  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  the
    appellant's family tried to seek protection from  the  authorities.  He
    referred to background evidence to suggest  that  effective  protection
    was likely to be available [23]. He took into  account  the  fact  that
    other members of  the  appellant's  family  had  moved  to  Greece  and
    concluded that there was a pattern of  family  migration  for  economic
    betterment. He found that it was likely that the appellant was sent  to
    the UK for this reason and to further his  education  [24].  The  judge
    then referred to the country guidance  decision  in  EH  (blood  feuds)
    Albania [2012] UKUT 00348 and noted what was  said  about  blood  feuds
    being more prevalent in the north of Albania. He took into account  the
    fact that the shooting incident took place in Tirana and found that  it
    was reasonable to infer from this fact that the appellant was  in  fact
    from Tirana (and not from the north as claimed). He was  not  therefore
    likely to be involved in a  blood  feud  [25].  For  these  reasons  he
    concluded that the appellant would not be at risk on return [26].

7.    The appellant seeks to appeal the decision on the following grounds:

    (i)    In assessing the credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  the
         First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  consideration  to  the
         fact that the appellant was a child and was  even  younger  at  the
         date of the material events. For this reason he may not  have  been
         able to provide as much detail as might be expected of an adult.

    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal's finding that  the  appellant's  family
         members were still likely  to  be  in  the  family  home  was  pure
         speculation and not rooted in any evidence.

    (iii)  The judge erred in his analysis of whether there was  sufficient
         protection available in light of the fact  that  the  appellant  is
         from the north of Albania where Kanun law predominates.  He  failed
         to  adequately  consider  the  country  guidance  outlined  in   EH
         (Albania), which states that in areas where Kanun law  predominates
         there was unlikely to be sufficient protection.

Decision and reasons

8.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

9.    The fact that  an  asylum  seeker  is  an  unaccompanied  child  is  a
    material consideration when assessing the credibility of  his  account.
    The UNHCR Handbook on Procedures and Criteria for  Determining  Refugee
    Status (revised 2011) makes clear that the assessment of a child's case
    must be done according to his mental development  and  maturity.  Where
    the child is an adolescent it  will  be  easier  to  determine  refugee
    status as in the case of an adult, although this will still  depend  on
    the child's actual degree of maturity. The assessment of a claim from a
    minor may call for a liberal application of the benefit  of  the  doubt
    (paragraphs 214-219).

10.   While the judge could have framed his credibility findings in  a  more
    structured way that took into account the appellant's age at each stage
    I find that it is quite clear from an overall reading of  the  decision
    that he did, as a matter of fact, take into account the appellant's age
    to an adequate extent when assessing the credibility  of  his  account.
    The judge outlined the fact that  he  had  been  granted  Discretionary
    Leave to  Remain  as  an  unaccompanied  minor  [2]  and  elsewhere  he
    mentioned that the respondent accepted that the appellant was  a  minor
    [8]. In summarising the respondent's reasons for  refusal  he  outlined
    the fact that the respondent had taken  into  account  the  appellant's
    young age at the time of the claimed events  [9].  He  also  noted  the
    evidence given by the appellant in his witness statement  (he  was  not
    called to give evidence) in which he  explained  that  he  had  limited
    knowledge of some of the events that led him to leave  Albania  because
    of his young age at the time [12].

11.   The mere fact that the judge noted those parts of the  evidence  would
    not be sufficient if, as a matter of fact, there  was  no  evidence  to
    show that he had considered the appellant's age as part of his  overall
    assessment of  the  credibility  of  his  account.  While  the  judge's
    reasoning in paragraph 22 of the decision is brief I am satisfied  that
    it is at least sufficient to make clear that the judge had  taken  into
    account  the  appellant's  young  age  when   assessing   the   overall
    credibility of his account. As such, I conclude that there is no  error
    of law in relation to the first ground of appeal.

12.   The judge did not make his findings in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    family in a vacuum. He was entitled to make reasonable inferences  from
    the appellant's own evidence. The appellant was aware of the fact  that
    other family members were living in Greece. There clearly  was  contact
    between the appellant  and  other  family  members  who  had  travelled
    abroad. In those circumstances it was open to  the  judge  to  conclude
    that it was implausible that the appellant, even at his young age,  did
    not know where his father was. Similarly, I find that it was reasonable
    for the judge to conclude that it was implausible  that  the  appellant
    would have been sent to the UK by  his  mother  without  any  means  of
    contacting her to say that he had arrived safely. Those  findings  were
    open to the judge to make on the evidence and disclose no error of law.



13.   While I consider that there may be more merit to the final  ground  of
    appeal because the judge did not adequately engaged  with  the  country
    guidance relating to the availability of protection from blood feuds in
    Albania;  any  error  is  immaterial.  While  the  appellant  no  doubt
    disagrees with his conclusions the  judge's  credibility  findings  are
    sustainable. He rejected the  appellant's  account  and  made  a  clear
    finding that there was insufficiently reliable evidence to show that  a
    blood feud was  in  existence.  As  such  any  error  relating  to  the
    assessment of the availability of protection would not be  material  to
    the overall outcome of the appeal.

14.   For the reasons given above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  The
    decision shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed       [pic]     Date 07 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

