
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06892/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 2nd August 2016                       |On 15th August 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                          mr Jerome Delan RUBENDRAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V P Lingajothy (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.   His  appeal  against  a
    decision to refuse his protection claim  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Quinn ("the judge") in a  decision  promulgated  on  4th
    November 2015.
2.   The judge heard evidence from the appellant and also from  his  mother.
    He refused an application to adjourn the case, pending the  outcome  of
    the  appellant's  father's  asylum  claim,  noting  that  two   earlier
    applications to adjourn had been  refused.   The  judge  found  neither
    witness to be credible and noted that neither  the  appellant's  sister
    nor his aunt had  provided  witness  statements  or  attended  to  give
    evidence on his behalf.  He  took  into  account  and  weighed  medical
    evidence  which  showed  that  the  appellant  was  experiencing   some
    psychotic symptoms.  Overall, the judge found that  the  appellant  was
    lucid and coherent at the hearing and understood the questions  put  to
    him.  The evidence did not show that  his  mental  ill-health  was,  at
    present, particularly serious.  He concluded that the appellant was not
    a refugee, was not entitled to humanitarian  protection  and  that  his
    removal to Sri Lanka would not breach any of his human rights  (or  the
    human rights of anyone else).

3.   In grounds in support of an application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was contended that the judge erred in failing to adjourn  the  hearing.
    The author of the grounds stated that the appeal hearing "could not  go
    ahead in the absence of a duly prepared medical report" and  the  judge
    relied on hearsay evidence suggesting that the misuse of drugs may have
    caused the appellant's psychotic symptoms.   Contrary  to  the  judge's
    express finding, the appellant was a credible witness who would  be  at
    risk of persecution or ill-treatment on return, not  least  because  of
    his father's involvement with the LTTE.  In the grounds, parts  of  the
    appellant's case are rehearsed, including claims that he  was  detained
    and ill-treated by the authorities in Sri Lanka.  The cause of his PTSD
    could only be established by independent  medical  evidence  which  the
    judge "effectively stopped the  appellant  from  having".   His  family
    members all lived in the United Kingdom and the appellant  also  relied
    on Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

4.   Permission to appeal was refused by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  but,
    following renewal of the application,  granted  by  an  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge.  She found that  in  essence  the  grounds  asserted  procedural
    unfairness in two respects.   First,  in  refusing  to  adjourn  for  a
    medical report and, secondly, for failing to await a  decision  in  the
    appellant's father's case.  The Upper Tribunal Judge noted the apparent
    failure to produce a medical report in accordance with directions given
    by the Tribunal when the appeal was adjourned on an earlier occasion in
    June 2015, but found that it was arguable that  the  causation  of  the
    appellant's current psychiatric state was left uncertain in the absence
    of an adjournment.

5.   In a Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State made on 20th  January
    2016, the appeal was opposed.  The decision showed that the  judge  had
    clearly addressed the entirety of the  appellant's  case  and  directed
    himself appropriately.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Lingajothy began by making a  further  application  to  adjourn,  to
    enable the appellant's father's protection claim to  be  completed  and
    resolved.  The appellant himself had never been a member  of  the  LTTE
    whereas his father had a prominent role and the Home Office might  very
    well be making checks before deciding to  grant  refugee  status.   The
    appellant's sister had made an independent claim for protection, albeit
    on the basis of her father's circumstances.  If the  Tribunal  were  to
    adopt a business like approach, costs might well be saved and  the  son
    and daughter would benefit from their father's case.  As  it  was,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge decided to  hear  the  appellant's  case  and
    picked up on aspects of the medical evidence regarding alleged cannabis
    use, but none of this had  any  bearing  on  the  appellant's  father's
    circumstances.  In  the  interests  of  fairness,  a  decision  on  the
    appellant's father's case was needed.

7.   Ms Ahmad opposed the application.  The substance of the  father's  case
    was not relevant to the issue  before  the  Tribunal,  which  concerned
    whether or not the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a
    material error of law.  Mr Lingajothy made  a  brief  response,  saying
    that the appellant had suffered a breakdown as a result of  torture  in
    Sri Lanka, his case being essentially linked to his father's case.

8.   I decided to proceed and declined to adjourn the error of law  hearing.
     I noted from the case management file that the appellant's  solicitors
    made applied on 19th July 2016 to adjourn the hearing  listed  for  2nd
    August, to allow time for a decision to be  made  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's father.  The application was  refused  the  following  day.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins found that the status of  the  appellant's
    father might be something to consider if an error of law were shown  in
    the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  but  there  was  no  reason  why
    uncertainty over the father's status prevented a fair  hearing  on  2nd
    August 2016.  I  respectfully  agree  and  find  that  this  assessment
    remains entirely sound.  There is  no  certain  timetable  regarding  a
    decision on the appellant's  father's  case  and,  in  any  event,  his
    particular protection claim, or the state of it, does not assist in the
    task of deciding whether the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  contains
    material errors of law.

9.    Mr  Lingajothy  proceeded.   He  drew  attention  to  the  appellant's
    circumstances, including the ill-treatment claimed to have occurred  in
    Sri Lanka.  The appellant had a breakdown in the United Kingdom and was
    admitted to hospital but there was, at least at  that  time,  no  clear
    diagnosis regarding the cause of his ill-health.  He  was  hospitalised
    for a number of days and then discharged.  His  family  said  that  the
    breakdown in his health was a consequence of the  brutal  treatment  he
    received in captivity in Sri Lanka.   If  that  were  established,  the
    appellant's case could be seen properly in context and his  credibility
    would be enhanced.

10.  The judge heard from the appellant and his mother  and  there  were  no
    inconsistencies in their accounts.  The appellant's  grandmother,  said
    to have been responsible for mention of cannabis use, was not called to
    give  evidence.   Nor  was  the  appellant's  sister.   Both  of  these
    witnesses were present on 2nd August, outside the  hearing  room.   The
    judge heard only hearsay evidence regarding  what  someone,  perhaps  a
    family member, had said.

11.  Mr Lingajothy said that the refusal to adjourn resulted in  unfairness.
     All the written grounds were relied upon.

12.  I asked Mr Lingajothy about the applications to adjourn the  First-tier
    Tribunal appeal, made between June and October  2015.   Adjournment  on
    8th June that year was expressly on the basis  that  a  medical  report
    might be obtained, but subsequent applications to adjourn instead  drew
    attention to the appellant's  father's  circumstances.   Mr  Lingajothy
    replied that the family expected that the father's case would be  dealt
    with soon after the appellant's appeal was adjourned, but this had  not
    happened.  The  family  relied  on  NASS  support  and  were  based  in
    Birmingham.  They had travelled to London to attend the Upper Tribunal.



13.  Ms Ahmad responded on behalf of the Secretary of State.  She handed  up
    copies of the Upper Tribunal decision in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418  and
    the Court of Appeal judgment in TK (Burundi) [2009] EWCA Civ  40.   The
    judge's reasons for refusing to adjourn the appeal were  clear  and  he
    took into account all relevant matters in that context.  As  was  clear
    from Nwaigwe, the critical  issue  was  one  of  fairness.   Here,  the
    appellant's representatives had made earlier  applications  to  adjourn
    which all failed.  The appeal was initially adjourned in June  2015  so
    that a medical report could be obtained, but it appeared that none had.



14.  The appellant made a protection claim based on  his  own  circumstances
    and it was clear that the judge did not fail in any  respect  to  allow
    the appellant to put his case.  The judge's reasoning was clear and his
    conclusions were open to him.

15.  Even if the judge did err in declining to adjourn, the  error  was  not
    remotely material.  He rejected the  appellant's  explanation  for  the
    delay in claiming asylum, for the purposes of Section 8 of the 2004 Act
    and went on to find that  the  appellant  had  used  deception  in  his
    immigration history and was not a credible  witness.   The  judge  made
    further adverse findings regarding the absence of documentary  evidence
    from Sri Lanka.  So  far  as  the  appellant's  mental  ill-health  was
    concerned, the judge  properly  considered  this  aspect.   Even  if  a
    medical report had been before the judge, the overall assessment  might
    well have been the same.

16.  In a brief response, Mr Lingajothy said  that  the  ultimate  objective
    was the fair disposal of the appeal.  This required an  adjournment  of
    the appellant's case.  An application under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 had been made shortly before  the
    hearing at Field House, to enable further evidence to be  adduced.   Mr
    Lingajothy mentioned witness statements made by the appellant's  sister
    and grandmother but I noted (and drew to his attention) that the  Upper
    Tribunal's file contained only a statement from the appellant's sister.
     There was no sight of anything from his grandmother.

17.  Mr Lingajothy said that the judge's  error  had  the  effect  that  the
    appellant had no chance to challenge or rebut some of the evidence  and
    was unable to rely on his sister's evidence.


Conclusion on Error of Law

18.  Ms Ahmad is quite  right  to  draw  the  Tribunal's  attention  to  the
    guidance given in Nwaigwe.  The test to be applied in relation  to  the
    adjournment applications  is  that  of  fairness  and  in  refusing  to
    adjourn, the critical question is this: was there  any  deprivation  of
    the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

19.  In the present appeal, an important  part  of  the  background  is  the
    litigation history.  The appeal was listed for hearing on 8th June 2015
    but adjourned on the appellant's application (opposed by the  Secretary
    of State's representative).  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  noted  on
    that occasion that the appellant's  father's  asylum  claim  awaited  a
    decision and that a medical report was sought.   Directions  were  made
    requiring any report to be filed and served at least four weeks  before
    the next hearing date.  On 5th  August  2015,  the  Tribunal  gave  the
    parties notice that the appeal would be  heard  on  23rd  October  that
    year.

20.  On 14th October, there was another application to  adjourn,  the  focus
    largely being on the appellant's father's asylum  claim.   Attached  to
    the application was  a  copy  of  the  discharge  summary  prepared  by
    Lewisham & Greenwich NHS Trust, showing that the appellant was admitted
    to hospital between 27th June and 6th July 2015 as a result  of  "acute
    schizophrenia-like  psychotic  disorder".   The  application   for   an
    adjournment was refused on 16th October  2015,  the  judge  noting  the
    previous adjournment and indicating that an  explanation  was  required
    for the absence of a medical report.

21.  There was then  a  further  application  for  an  adjournment  on  21st
    October 2015, on the basis that time should be allowed for  a  decision
    to be made in the appellant's father's case and to  "allow  our  client
    sufficient opportunity to obtain a medical/psychiatric  report".   That
    application was also refused, on the same day.

22.  As is apparent from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    application for an adjournment was repeated  at  the  hearing  on  23rd
    October  2015.   In  paragraphs  20  to  22,  the  judge  recorded  the
    submissions made by Mr Lingajothy and the Presenting Officer  and  gave
    his reasons for not adjourning.  He noted that the appellant's father's
    protection claim was still outstanding and had been under consideration
    for some time and that two earlier applications  to  adjourn  had  been
    refused.  He noted the Presenting Officer's  submission  that  the  two
    claims were entirely separate and that there was no indication of  when
    the appellant's father would receive a decision.  There was also a lack
    of medical evidence, notwithstanding the adjournment to enable a report
    to be obtained.

23.  Against that background, I have no hesitation in  concluding  that  the
    judge did not err or act in a procedurally unfair way  in  refusing  to
    adjourn the case.  The appellant was not deprived of  a  fair  hearing.
    The judge's decision is thorough and has been carefully prepared and it
    is clear that he gave the appellant every opportunity  to  explain  his
    case.  The judge carefully recorded that the appellant  confirmed  that
    he understood the questions put to him.  He found the appellant  to  be
    lucid and coherent.  Having taken into  account  the  medical  evidence
    before the Tribunal, such as it was, the judge found  that  his  mental
    ill-health was not particularly serious.  So far as the cause  of  that
    ill-health is concerned, although the judge mentioned cannabis use as a
    factor, in paragraphs 56 and 70 of the decision, it is  clear  that  he
    did not expressly find that misuse of drugs was  responsible.   He  was
    careful to go no further than to mention it as a possible cause.  There
    is nothing in either of those paragraphs or elsewhere in  the  decision
    to undermine the judge's overall assessment of the medical evidence, or
    indeed any of the evidence.

24.  I conclude that the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  have  not
    been made out.  There was no unfairness  in  refusing  to  adjourn  the
    appeal and the judge did not err  in  his  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence.  His adverse credibility findings were open to him and he did
    not overlook or misunderstand  any  of  the  salient  features  of  the
    appellant's case.  The judge did not "effectively stop"  the  appellant
    from obtaining medical evidence.  Far from it.  The appellant  and  his
    advisors were given ample opportunity to obtain such evidence.

25.  Similarly, the assessments of risk on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  and  the
    appellant's private and family life  ties  are  cogently  reasoned  and
    sustainable.

26.  I conclude that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  no
    material errors of law and shall stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.






Signed                                  Date 15/08/2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell








ANONYMITY

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no  anonymity  direction  and  there  has
been no application before me.  I make no direction on this occasion.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell
