
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06302/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th December 2015                |On 1st February 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                     AA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ansari, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  23rd  April  1991.   On
    22nd September 2011 the Appellant was granted leave to enter the United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 Student.  Prior to the Appellant's  leave  expiring
    the Appellant claimed asylum on 27th February  2013.   The  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed by a Notice of Refusal dated 23rd March 2015.   It
    was noted that the Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon  a  fear
    that if returned to Pakistan he would  face  mistreatment  due  to  his
    sexual orientation.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Alty on  3rd  July  2015.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 15th July the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum
    and human rights grounds and the Appellant was found not to be entitled
    to humanitarian protection.  I note that before the First-tier Tribunal
    the Appellant was not legally represented.

 3. On 27th July 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    On 6th  August  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nightingale  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Nightingale noted that the grounds  argued
    that the judge did not consider the facts or approach  the  case  in  a
    proper manner for  an  unrepresented  Appellant.   In  particular,  the
    grounds argue that the judge failed to have regard to the fact that the
    witness, who was the Appellant's partner, had been granted asylum based
    on his sexuality and his relationship with the Appellant.  Further they
    argued that the judge had failed to  have  regard  to  the  documentary
    evidence produced.

 4. Judge Nightingale considered that it was arguable that  the  judge  had
    failed to have regard to the relevant fact that the witness, [K], was a
    recognised  refugee.   Although  that  fact  was  mentioned  in   [K]'s
    statement and it was accepted by Judge Nightingale that  whilst  it  is
    for the Appellant to establish his case, given that the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented it was also arguable that the judge had erred in  failing
    to make further enquiries about [K]'s asylum status and the reasons for
    his recognition by the Respondent.   Further  Judge  Nightingale  found
    that it was arguable that the judge had fallen into error, at paragraph
    33, by failing to have regard to relevant documentary evidence  showing
    that the Appellant and [K] had been living together.

 5. On 20th August 2015 the Secretary of State lodged  a  response  to  the
    Grounds of Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24  response  contends  that
    the Grounds of Appeal are a simple disagreement with  the  findings  of
    the judge and that it was not, as claimed, incumbent on him to  request
    the information regarding [K]'s claim from the Secretary of  State  and
    had he done  so  it  was  unlikely  to  have  shed  any  light  on  the
    Appellant's claim.  The Rule 24 response contended that the  fact  that
    [K] had succeeded in his claim did not mean that all the aspects of his
    claim were accepted and that [K] had attended and given evidence so the
    judge was well placed to make his own assessment of the credibility  of
    the witness.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  is  now  represented  and
    appears by his instructed solicitor Mr Ansari.  The Secretary of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Ansari submits firstly that the Appellant being unrepresented  meant
    that he did not understand the need to submit [K]'s screening interview
    and substantive interview in his reply and that the Appellant failed to
    have enquired further into this point.  He submits that the  judge  did
    not give proper consideration  to  what  are  known  as  the  Surendran
    guidelines and that when conducting the appeal it is the  duty  of  the
    Immigration Judge to "give every assistance, which he can give, to  the
    Appellant".  He submits that as a result of a  failure  to  follow  the
    Surendran guidelines the judge should have requested confirmation  from
    the Respondent about the reasons for the Secretary  of  State  granting
    [K]'s asylum and that the judge made a mistake as to  a  material  fact
    which could be established by  objective  and  uncontentious  evidence,
    where the Appellant was unrepresented an unfairness resulted  from  the
    fact that that mistake was made.

 8. Secondly he contends it was irrational of the judge not to  have  found
    the Appellant to have been a homosexual.  He points out that there were
    22 questions in  the  asylum  interview  relating  to  the  Appellant's
    homosexuality  and  that  the  Appellant  had  advised  he  was  in   a
    relationship with [K] and that [K] had been granted asylum on the  same
    factual basis as the Appellant.  He submits it was  only  possible  for
    [K] to have  been  granted  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  homosexual
    relationship.  He submits the Appellant included [K]'s  refugee  status
    document in his bundle and had given evidence to the  effect  that  [K]
    had been granted asylum on the basis  of  his  homosexual  relationship
    with the Appellant.  Therefore he contends it was wholly irrational for
    the Immigration Judge to have concluded  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible.

 9. He asked me to find that there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to set it  aside  and  to
    remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing.   Mr
    Harrison makes merely one submission namely that the Immigration  Judge
    did not know the basis  upon  which  [K]'s  appeal  had  been  granted.
    However he states that he cannot defend the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, that it does disclose in the view of the  Secretary  of
    State material errors of law and he would not oppose the decision being
    set aside and being remitted for rehearing.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. I am considerably  assisted  in  this  matter  by  the  very  sensible,
    constructive and pragmatic approach adopted by Mr Harrison on behalf of
    the Secretary of State.  Given the fact that  the  Appellant's  partner
    had been granted asylum at an earlier hearing and  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant has contended that the claims are identical, it was incumbent
    upon the judge to consider the documentary evidence.  The  judge  erred
    in failing to make further enquiries with regard to [K]'s asylum status
    and the reason for his recognition by the Secretary of State.  In  such
    circumstances I am satisfied that all these errors are material and  in
    addition that the failure to have regard to  the  relevant  documentary
    evidence showing that the Appellant and [K] were living  together,  was
    also a material error of law.  The correct approach is consequently, it
    is agreed by the parties'  legal  representatives,  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to remit it to the First-
    tier Tribunal for rehearing with additional directions.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge disclosed a material error  of
law.  The decision is set aside and is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
for rehearing.  The following directions are to apply:
 1) That the matter be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  at
    Manchester on the first available date, 42 days' hence with an  ELH  of
    three hours before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Immigration
    Judge Alty.
 2) That the Home Office do advise the Appellant's legal representatives by
    8th February 2016 as to whether they concede the claim that  the  grant
    of asylum to [K] (the Appellant's purported partner) was  based  solely
    on his  relationship  with  the  Appellant  and  whether,  if  that  is
    acknowledged, the Secretary of State wishes to withdraw her  Notice  of
    Refusal and whether it is the intention of the Secretary  of  State  to
    allow the appeal.
 3) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of evidence at least seven days prehearing, in  the  event  that
    the Secretary of State does  not  make  the  concession  considered  in
    direction (2) above and that the appeal therefore is to proceed.
 4) Urdu interpreter required.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

