
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06731/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2013                               |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                   MS T G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Knorr
For the Respondent:    Ms Martin


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  in  1988.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent made on 5 July 2012 to  remove  by
    way of directions. She was refused asylum.

 2. The basis of her claim is contained in the  following  lines  from  the
    refusal letter:

         '9.  You were in your first year at secondary school when you  were
             taken to Lagos by a man who  picked  you  up  from  school  in
             Ibadan where you lived with your grandmother.  You were  taken
             to your mother's house for a couple of days.  Your mother told
             you that you would be going abroad on a plane.  (Paragraphs 11-
             13, WS).

         10.  Your mother took you to N. O.'s family house in  Lagos,  where
             you met N.O. for the first time.  Your mother  told  you  that
             you would be going with her.  A few days later, you  travelled
             with N.O. and her baby to the UK from Lagos (Paragraphs 14-18,
             WS).

         11.  N.O. told you that if you were asked anything at the  airport,
             you were to say that your  name  was  T.O.  and  gave  you  an
             address to say you lived at.  You were not asked  anything  at
             the airport (Paragraph 19, WS).  You later realised  that  you
             were brought  to  the  UK  using  N.O.'s  daughter's  passport
             (Paragraph 20, WS).

         12.  You arrived in the UK on 5th May 2000.

         13.  On arrival in the UK with N.O. and her baby, you were taken to
             her house, where you started living with her, her husband  and
             her children.  You shared a bedroom with her  daughters  (Q37-
             Q40, AIR).

         14.  You did not know prior to coming to the UK what you  would  be
             doing here (Q33-Q36 AIR).

         15.  Each day, you had to take the children to school, cook  clean,
             do the laundry and look after the baby (Paragraph 30, WS & Q44-
             Q47 AIR).  You were not allowed to leave the house, other than
             taking the children to school and  picking  them  up  (Q48-Q49
             AIR).  You were not given any money (Q53 AIR).

         16.  If you did not do your chores on time, you would  be  punished
             by N.O.  She would punch and  slap  you  (Q53  AIR).   As  you
             became older, you would be sent on errands e.g. to  the  shops
             (Q57 AIR).

         17.  When you were 18 years old, you were allowed to go to  college
             (Q58 AIR).   N.O.  registered  you  at  Newham  College.   You
             studied literacy and numeracy at  college  (Paragraphs  62-64,
             WS).  You would go to college twice a week, and  N'.s  husband
             would give you �10 a week to pay your bus fare (Paragraph  67,
             WS).

         18.  In September 2008, after you finished at Newham  College,  you
             went to register at Barking College, where you studied  Health
             and Social Care.  You had  to  drop  out  of  this  course  in
             February 2009, as you had no documents with which to obtain  a
             CRB check, which was required (Paragraphs 68-69, WS).

         19.  You asked N.O. at this time if you could get a job,  to  which
             she agreed.  You began working at a  hair  salon  in  Brixton.
             You later got a job in Upton Park, N.O gave you  a  curfew  of
             10pm at this time (Paragraph 79-72, WS).

         20.  Around that time, in June 2009, N.O. went to Nigeria with  one
             of her daughters.  Her other daughter and husband were already
             living in Nigeria by this time.  You were left  in  London  to
             look after the two younger  girls  whilst  you  were  working.
             They stayed with a childminder during the week, but  you  took
             them to work with you at the  weekend.   You  called  N.O.  in
             Nigeria to tell her that this was not convenient for you,  but
             she told  you  that  there  was  nothing  that  she  could  do
             (Paragraphs 73-75, WS).

         21.  N.O. was away from June 2009 until September 2009.   When  she
             returned from Nigeria, she  told  you  that  the  family  were
             thinking of relocating there.  She told  you  that  there  was
             little point in  you  living  in  the  house  anymore  as  the
             children were getting older and  you  were  not  cleaning  the
             house.  On 5th September 2009, she told you  that  she  wanted
             you to leave her house by 5th October 2009.  Later, after  you
             called N's sister-in-law to help you, and she came to talk  to
             N., you were allowed to stay (Paragraph 78, WS).

         22.  One day whilst you were at work in September or October  2009,
             immigration officials came to your  place  of  work  and  took
             everyone's personal details, you gave them the alias  you  had
             been using in the UK, T.O., 7th August 1986.  You then  walked
             out and called N. to tell her what had happened.  She told you
             that as you had given her address, you  would  have  to  leave
             now.  You went to live with a friend in Croydon following this
             in October 2009.

         23.  You had been living with N.O. from the age  of  11  until  you
             were 21 (Q20 & Q42 AIR).

         24.  At this point, you started using your own  name  and  date  of
             birth.  You lived in Croydon  temporarily,  after  which,  you
             moved to Aveley with a friend.  Whilst living there, you  went
             to a solicitor in February 2010, and made an  application  for
             leave to the Home Office.   This application  was  refused  in
             September 2010.

         25.  You moved from Aveley in  September  2011,  and  you  are  now
             living with another  friend  (Paragraph  85,  WS).   You  were
             informed that your mother  passed  away  in  Nigeria  in  2005
             (Paragraph 86, WS).

         26.  You fear that on return to Nigeria, you will be targeted as  a
             single woman, and you may be killed (Q73, AIR).'

 3. The Respondent refused the claim.  In summary, her claim that  she  was
    trafficked was not believed because of its timing and circumstances and
    because of claimed inconsistencies in her account.  Little  weight  was
    attached to expert reports submitted because  it  was  considered  that
    these were based on the Appellant's account of  events  which  was  not
    considered credible.  Even if true it was noted that  she  left  N.O.'s
    house in 2009 and has become self-sufficient.  It was  considered  that
    she could integrate into Nigerian society and support herself.  She was
    not at real risk of being re-trafficked and  the  Nigerian  authorities
    are able to offer protection against this.  It was considered that  her
    medical conditions did not reach the threshold to breach Article  3  of
    ECHR.  She could obtain medical treatment in Nigeria.  Any interference
    with her private life was proportionate.

 4. She appealed.  Following a hearing on 26 September 2012 at Taylor House
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Roopnarine-Davies dismissed the appeal
    on asylum, and humanitarian protection grounds. She allowed the  appeal
    on human rights grounds (Article 8).  Her  findings  are  at  paragraph
    [16]ff.  The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant came to the  UK
    in 2000 but was brought at a later date.  Nonetheless at [para.21]  she
    was satisfied that the 'core of the Appellant's claim  is  as  claimed,
    that she has worked as a childminder for the N.O.  family  for  several
    years and has been badly treated, exploited and abused'.  Her  evidence
    of  this,  the  judge  found,  was  detailed  and  largely   internally
    consistent and consistent with the evidence of the medical and  country
    experts.

 5. Turning to the medical evidence, she noted that it was 'agreed that the
    Appellant is suffering from PTSD and a severe depressive episode'.

 6. The judge concluded (at [para.29]) 'The Appellant's claim  is  coherent
    and credible when looked at in the  round.   It  was  accepted  at  the
    hearing  that  it  engages  the  1951  Convention  on  the  grounds  of
    membership of a particular social group'.  She was satisfied  that  the
    Appellant was 'trafficked in Nigeria as a person under 18 years old for
    domestic servitude' and  that  she  'suffered  inhumane  and  degrading
    treatment in the UK'.

 7. However, the judge was not satisfied that the  Appellant  would  be  at
    risk of such treatment if she was returned  to  Nigeria.   The  finding
    that the Nigerian  authorities  provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection
    against trafficking and re-trafficking (PO (Trafficked Women) (Nigeria)
    CG [2009] UKAIT 00046) was preserved by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  PO
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2011] Civ 132.

 8. The judge continued by finding that the Appellant was not trafficked by
    gangs but through family networks and that she saw no  reason  why  she
    should fear the N.O. family in  Nigeria  or  the  UK.   There  were  no
    grounds for believing that the N.O. family  have  returned  to  Nigeria
    from the UK and by her own evidence they no longer had need for her.

 9. Having concluded that the Appellant was not at real risk of persecution
    and that there is a sufficiency of protection against  trafficking  and
    re-trafficking, the judge went on to decide that she was  also  not  at
    risk of ill-treatment amounting to a breach  of  Article  3.   In  that
    regard she was not at real risk of committing suicide not least because
    one of the doctors had said she was not suicidal.

10. As for Article 8, it was clear that she had established a private  life
    here.  Advancing to proportionality, noting that she was only 24  years
    old and was in the  middle  of  receiving  treatment  from  the  Bamber
    Foundation and support to recover from  her  ordeal  so  that  she  can
    adjust to a life of independence and  is  making  progress,  the  judge
    concluded that removal would be disproportionate to the legitimate aim.
    She allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

11. She sought permission to appeal against the refusal of asylum  and  the
    dismissal under Article 3 which was granted on 19 October 2012.

12. Following the error of law hearing I issued the following decision (the
    earlier paragraphs are omitted to avoid repetition):

         '6.  Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that  it  was
             arguable that the judge had given  no  reasons  for  rejecting
             expert evidence with regard to risk on return.   It  was  also
             arguable that the judge  failed  to  deal  properly  with  the
             medical evidence in  assessing  her  Article  3  human  rights
             claim.

         7.   At the error of law hearing before, Ms Knorr made  essentially
             two points.  Firstly, that the judge failed to have regard  to
             expert evidence given in a (second) report by  Victoria  Nwogu
             in which it was indicated, inter alia, that the Appellant  was
             likely if returned to Nigeria to be at risk of reprisals  from
             those who had trafficked her and that the authorities would be
             unlikely to  help.   Also  she  would  be  at  risk  of  being
             retrafficked.

         8.   Secondly, the judge,  who  accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
             suffering  from  PTSD  and  depression  as  a  result  of  her
             experiences, had not dealt adequately with the  evidence  that
             indicated that  if  returned  the  Appellant  would  be  at  a
             heightened risk of suicide.

         9.   In reply Mr Jarvis agreed that the judge had erred in  failing
             to have regard to the second report by Ms Nwogu and that as  a
             result she had not given adequate consideration to the risk of
             retrafficking and whether there  would  be  a  sufficiency  of
             protection.

         10.  Ms Jarvis, however, disagreed that the  judge  had  not  given
             proper consideration to the medical evidence.  She  had  dealt
             with the material in the round and reached conclusions she was
             entitled to reach.  Even if there were deficiencies they  were
             not material because of the very high threshold that needed to
             be met to satisfy Article 3 on mental health grounds.

         11.  As indicated, in this case the judge accepted the  Appellant's
             historical account namely, that she had been  trafficked  into
             years of domestic servitude in the UK.   She  found,  however,
             that the Appellant would not face a risk of harm if  returned.
             She relied on the interim guidance from  PO  (Nigeria)  (2011)
             EWCA Civ 132  in  finding  that  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
             protection against trafficking and retrafficking.

         12.  The judge, however, failed to give consideration  to  evidence
             in a second report (14 September  2012)  by  Ms  Nwogu,  whose
             expertise  she  accepted,  that  looking  at  the  Appellant's
             particular  circumstances  there   was   no   sufficiency   of
             protection  and  that  there  was  a  risk  of  reprisal   and
             retrafficking.  Indeed the judge failed to make  any  findings
             at all on the second report.  I agreed with both parties  that
             it was a material error of law not to have regard to  relevant
             evidence.

         13.  As for her consideration of the  medical  evidence  the  judge
             accepted that as a result of her experiences the Appellant  is
             suffering from PTSD and depression.  She is also self harming.
              The judge considered nonetheless,  noting  a  comment  by  Dr
             Majid that she is not currently suicidal, that there would  be
             no such risk were she to be returned to  Nigeria.   The  judge
             failed to comment on observations by  several  of  the  health
             professionals, including Dr Majid  and  Dr  Murray,  that  the
             Appellant's mental health would significantly decline  if  she
             was returned and indeed that she presented a  heightened  risk
             of suicide and self harm.

         14.  It is clear that the threshold needed to satisfy Article 3  on
             mental health grounds is very high.  Nonetheless, I find merit
             in Ms Knorr's submission that in failing  to  have  regard  to
             material evidence the  judge's  findings  on  the  Appellant's
             mental state were flawed such that she  did  not  give  proper
             consideration to the possible consequences were the  Appellant
             to be returned.

         15.  The judge  having  materially  erred  in  the  making  of  the
             decision, that  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  on  asylum,
             humanitarian protection and Article 3 grounds  is  set  aside.
             The case will need to be reheard to decide the general risk on
             return in respect of reprisals, retrafficking and  sufficiency
             of protection.  Also any risk in light of  her  mental  health
             state.  It was agreed that the historical findings of fact  be
             preserved.'

13. At the resumed hearing on 10 May 2013 the  Respondent's  representative
    sought to challenge the First-tier Judge's finding that  the  Appellant
    had  been  trafficked.   It  was  asserted  that  the  judge   had   no
    jurisdiction to consider trafficking on the basis  that  the  Competent
    Authority was the only body that could find  that  a  person  has  been
    trafficked and here there was a negative 'reasonable grounds' decision.
     On behalf of the Appellant it was argued that it was too late for  the
    Respondent to challenge the finding that the Appellant  was  trafficked
    and secondly that the argument was wrong in  law  in  any  event.   The
    hearing was adjourned to allow both parties  the  opportunity  to  make
    written submissions on these issues.

14. The full rehearing took place on 22 August 2013.  I  heard  submissions
    on whether the Respondent was entitled to raise a point of law  at  the
    resumed hearing stage such not having been raised in grounds or at  the
    error of law  hearing.   I  can  deal  with  that  matter  shortly.   I
    concluded that the issue of a material error of  law  could  be  raised
    even at a late stage on the basis that it cannot  be  correct  that  an
    Appellant could succeed in a case when a material error  of  law  which
    could affect that result had not been raised at an early stage.

15. Whether I am right or wrong in that conclusion is not of consequence as
    I find no merit in the submission raised that the judge,  not  being  a
    Competent Authority had no jurisdiction.  I indicated at the time  that
    under Section 86(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    the Tribunal 'must determine any matter raised as a ground of  appeal'.
    Were the Respondent correct the Tribunal's role as judicial fact finder
    would be irrelevant. I note, in addition, that the judge found  that  a
    point taken against the Appellant's credibility in the  refusal  letter
    (and also taken in the 'reasonable grounds' letter), namely,  that  she
    delayed raising trafficking as an issue until December 2011 was  simply
    wrong. It had been raised in a solicitor's letter in February 2010. The
    Competent Authority also did not have before it  the  large  volume  of
    medical and expert evidence which was before the Tribunal. I  concluded
    that while there was no appeal against the decision  of  the  Competent
    Authority as set out in the 'reasonable grounds' letter, that procedure
    and the consideration of the asylum claim were separate paths.

16. Such a view appears to be confirmed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1469 where it was  explained  that
    'The question in this appeal is the extent to which (if at all)  judges
    of the  Immigration  &  Asylum  Chamber  should  regard  as  conclusive
    decisions of the "Competent Authority" determining  that  an  Appellant
    before them has or has not been a victim of trafficking' [1].

17. The Court of Appeal held that the Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  decide
    whether an Appellant is a victim of trafficking and may depart from the
    findings of the Competent Authority when appropriate.   In  so  finding
    Longmore LJ said:

         '... The mere fact that the Competent Authority has made a decision
         which  on  analysis  is  perverse  cannot  prevent  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge from  considering  the  evidence  about  trafficking
         which is placed before him; nor can it in my judgment  be  relevant
         that  no  judicial  review  proceedings  have  been  taken  by  the
         Appellant in respect of  the  Competent  Authority  decision.   The
         First-tier Tribunal Judge should consider the  matter  for  himself
         [para.14]'.

18. In submissions on the merits Ms Martin  accepted  that  trafficking  is
    rife in Nigeria but maintained that the Appellant was not a  victim  of
    trafficking.  Further, she is not a lone  woman.   She  has  family  in
    Nigeria.  She could live with her grandmother.  She  did  not  need  to
    return to Lagos or Ibadan.  She would not  be  at  risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked.  Her problems had come from a family not from gangs.  There
    was no reason why the N.O. family would know  she  had  returned.   She
    could also get help from the Assisted Voluntary  Return  for  Irregular
    Migrants  Scheme  (AVRIM).   Such  could  help  her   financially   and
    educationally.

19. As for any mental health issues,  she  could  get  help  for  these  in
    Nigeria.  Dr Majid had noted that she has insight.  She would be  aware
    and alert to getting help.   There  was  no  evidence  that  her  anti-
    depressant medication is not available in Nigeria.   Her  problems  did
    not reach the threshold of severity necessary to satisfy Article 3.

20. In her submissions Ms Knorr referred to  her  skeleton  argument.   She
    said it was clear that the Appellant has significant medical issues for
    which she receives specialist treatment.  The loss of  her  UK  support
    network would greatly increase her  risk  on  return  of  deterioration
    including depression and suicide.  As would her  being  returned  as  a
    lone woman with mental health issues  and  her  history  of  long  term
    abuse.  She would be vulnerable and at risk of reprisals.  It would  be
    likely that the N.O. family  would  know  that  she  had  gone  to  the
    authorities.  Such would be known because of the community  and  family
    ties to the Appellant's family.  It was her mother, who  it  was  found
    was still alive, who had sold her into trafficking.  She would also  be
    at risk of re-trafficking as a young, single, vulnerable woman with  no
    support.

21. In considering this matter, as indicated,  the  Appellant's  historical
    account of being taken at a young age from Nigeria to the UK where  she
    was forced into a life of domestic servitude from which  she  was  only
    effectively released when a young woman and that as  a  consequence  of
    her experience over those many years she has significant mental  health
    issues, was believed by the First tier judge.

22. The Respondent's submission is, in essence, that even if the  Appellant
    was a victim of trafficking she has moved on with her life having  left
    her trafficking situation several years  ago  and  thereafter  attended
    college and work which suggests she is self-sufficient and  resourceful
    and could therefore support herself; that there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection in that she can access support for victims of trafficking in
    Nigeria; that she is not at risk of re-trafficking because she was  not
    trafficked by a gang and not for prostitution and there is  no  general
    risk of trafficking to women and girls.

23. The UNHCR Guidelines on the application of Article 1A(2)  of  the  1951
    Convention and/or 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of  Refugees  to
    victims of trafficking and persons at risk of being  trafficked  (April
    2006) made clear that victims of trafficking may  qualify  as  refugees
    where it can be demonstrated that they fear persecution for reasons  of
    their membership of a particular social group.  The Courts  in  the  UK
    have adopted the same approach (see AM & BM (Trafficked women)  Albania
    CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC)). The guidance states as follows:

         '38. Women are an example of a social subset of individuals who are
             defined  by  innate  and  immutable  characteristics  and  are
             frequently treated differently to  men.   As  such,  they  may
             constitute a  particular  social  group.   Factors  which  may
             distinguish women as targets  for  traffickers  are  generally
             connected to their vulnerability in certain  social  settings;
             therefore certain social subsets of women may also  constitute
             particular social groups.  Men or children or  certain  social
             subsets of these groups may also be considered  as  particular
             social  groups.   Examples  of  social  subsets  of  women  or
             children could, depending on the  context,  be  single  women,
             widows,  divorced  women,  illiterate  women,   separated   or
             unaccompanied children, orphans or street children.  The  fact
             of belonging to such a particular social group may be  one  of
             the factors contributing to  an  individual's  fear  of  being
             subjected to persecution, for example, to sexual exploitation,
             as a result of being, or feared being, trafficked.

        39.  Former  victims  of  trafficking  may  also  be  considered  as
            constituting a social group based on  the  unchangeable,  common
            and  historic  characteristic  of  having  been  trafficked.   A
            society may also, depending on the  context,  view  persons  who
            have been trafficked as a cognizable group within that  society.
            Particular  social  groups  can  nevertheless  not  be   defined
            exclusively by the persecution that members of the group  suffer
            or by a common fear of  persecution.   It  should  therefore  be
            noted that it is the  past  trafficking  experience  that  would
            constitute one of the elements defining the group in such cases,
            rather than the future persecution now feared  in  the  form  of
            ostracism, punishment, reprisals  or  re-trafficking.   In  such
            situations, the group would therefore not be defined  solely  by
            its fear of future persecution.'




24. In this case it was accepted at  the  hearing  before  the  First  tier
    Tribunal that the Convention was engaged on the grounds  of  membership
    of a particular social group [para.3 of determination].

25. Looking first at the Appellant's medical situation, I note, again, AM &
    BM  in which  the  Tribunal  considered  the  position  of  victims  of
    trafficking with mental health problems and said:

         'Particular weight must therefore be given to the mental state of a
         victim of trafficking not only when considering whether  or  not  a
         victim of trafficking might face persecution in her home  area  but
         also when considering issues such as  internal  relocation  or  her
         Article 8 rights'  [para.150].

    The Tribunal also confirmed that victims of trafficking who  have  been
    subjected to physical and sexual violence are likely to have a profound
    psychological  impact  and  there  is  a  significant  risk  that   the
    individual will suffer from PTSD [para.218].

26. The conclusions of the medical witnesses were accepted  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and I see no reason to take a different  view.   She  has
    been diagnosed with PTSD, severe depression and eating disorders  which
    are linked to her  status  as  a  victim  of  trafficking.   Dr  Majid,
    Consultant Psychiatrist,  states  (13/8/12)  regarding  the  impact  of
    return:

         '106.    I am concerned that Ms G. would be unable  to  cope,  self
                care and support herself in Nigeria due to her  symptoms  of
                depression and PTSD, in particular  her  helplessness,  poor
                energy and motivation, difficulty conceptualising a  future,
                and intrusive thoughts and experience that  cause  distress,
                reduce her capacity for attention and concentration and lead
                to dissociative laspes [sic] and forgetfulness.  I  observed
                some of these in the room,  particularly  in  the  cognitive
                state examination.  Ms G. currently manages in the  UK  with
                the support and encouragement of  therapeutic  services  and
                friends.  I note that when she is not at college or visiting
                church friends she spends  most  of  the  day  in  her  room
                feeling low and upset, demonstrating  little  motivation  or
                initiative when left to herself.  I am  concerned  that  she
                will become increasingly isolated  and  unable  to  cope  in
                Nigeria, and be unable to find accommodation  or  employment
                for herself.

         107. I also note that Ms G. required prompting to  seek  help  with
                her psychological difficulties and with her asylum status in
                the UK.  And that even after a discussion  about  medication
                for depression with her GP she did not follow through due in
                part to her tendency to avoidance, stigma and  shame.   This
                indicates that without prompting and encouragement Ms G.  is
                unlikely to seek and secure the help she will need socially,
                practically and in relation to her mental health.  This will
                lead to an escalating deterioration  of  her  mental  state,
                fears, helplessness, low self worth, guilt and shame.   This
                will exacerbate her depression and increase her risk of self
                harm and suicide.  I am concerned that even if she does  not
                kill herself actively she may withdraw  into  a  dissociated
                state in which she would be at high risk of neglect and stop
                eating altogether, with eventual death through this.'

27. Dr Murray (22/6/12) explains that the Appellant's psychological profile
    leaves her particularly vulnerable to further exploitation.   She  says
    as follows:

         '10.03   In my opinion, Ms G. may be psychologically vulnerable  to
                further exploitation.  As her  time  in  domestic  servitude
                began at an early age and was extensive, she has had  little
                opportunity to acquire age-appropriate  skills  which  would
                protect her from further harm, such as knowing how  or  when
                to contact authorities such as the Police.  She has had very
                little education and very little interaction with  peers  or
                opportunities to live independently.  She has few protective
                factors such  as  social  support.   Living  in  an  abusive
                situation over a long period can lead  to  a  distortion  in
                "normal" psychological skills such as the ability  to  judge
                risk in a situation or threats or potential  harm.   Victims
                of  repeated  traumatic  experiences  are  more  likely   to
                experience further traumatic experiences than other  people,
                as their ability to effectively  judge  and  make  decisions
                regarding their safety is impaired.'

28. Dr Murray makes clear that in  her  opinion  the  Appellant's  expected
    decline in mental health  upon  return  to  Nigeria  'will  reduce  her
    ability to engage in tasks of living, such  as  finding  and   securing
    housing,  employment  or  education  and  keeping   herself   safe'   [
    para.10.07].

29. I note also the comment that even in the UK the  Appellant  experiences
    distressing and intrusive thoughts relating to past abuse when she sees
    Nigerian people and she is highly anxious about meeting  Mrs  N.O.  [Dr
    Majid's report para. 68].

30. The Appellant has very limited education having lost the opportunity to
    attend school during the years during which she was exploited  and  has
    only worked for a short period.  The Respondent  accepts  that  she  is
    presently destitute having been given her NASS  accommodation  (witness
    statement 9 August 2012 para. 25).  She would therefore be returning to
    Nigeria with no resources,  few  skills  and  little,  if  any,  family
    support.  On that last matter I note that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    concluded that the Appellant's mother was still alive.  However, it was
    she who had connived in the trafficking of her daughter.

31. The Appellant's submission is that were she to return  to  Nigeria  she
    faces risks as a young woman and a former victim of trafficking.  These
    risks include a risk  of  re-trafficking,  stigmatisation  and  further
    abuse.

32. Ms Nwogu's opinion is that as a victim  of  trafficking  the  Appellant
    faces a risk of  reprisals  and  re-trafficking  from  the  people  who
    organised her trafficking to the UK (report 2 - para. 67-72  and  135).
    She would also be at risk from the traffickers as a result  of  putting
    Mrs N.O. at risk from the police in the UK (report  2  -   para.  139).
    The fact that she had reported the matter to the authorities in the  UK
    is likely to be known by Mrs N.O. due to the links between her and A H.
    and Y.  In Ms Nwogu's view the Appellant will not be protected  by  the
    police (report 2 - para. 137-139).

33. In PO (Trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2009]  UKAIT  00046  the  Tribunal
    found that the government in Nigeria is able and willing  to  discharge
    its duties to  protect  people  against  trafficking.   That  case  was
    removed from the Country Guidance list in  February  2011  although  PO
    (Nigeria) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 132  states  that  paragraphs  191-192
    remain as interim guidance pending further country  guidance  from  the
    Tribunal.

34. Such includes the comment  (para.  191)  that  whilst  Nigeria  is  not
    complying with minimum standards, it is 'making significant efforts' to
    do  so  and  has  'demonstrated  a  solid  commitment  to   eradicating
    trafficking'.  However, at the time PO was heard Nigeria was graded  as
    Tier 1 meaning  that  it  was  compliant  with  minimum  standards  for
    elimination  of  trafficking  according  to  a  US   State   Department
    assessment to which paragraph 191 refers.  A subsequent USSD report  in
    2012 has downgraded Nigeria to Tier 2.  The report found that there has
    been a 50%  decrease  in  the  capacity  of  shelters  for  victims  of
    trafficking since 2010 and there are difficulties staffing the shelters
    and caring for victims.  This is consistent with Ms Nwogu's  view  that
    the availability of shelters is severely limited (report 2 - para.  72-
    78).

35. I find the comments made by Ms Nwogu in her careful  and  detailed  and
    sourced report to be persuasive.

36. ATLeP carried out a fact-finding mission to Nigeria  in  February  2011
    which concurs with the US report (2012).   Their  view  is  that  while
    there are laws in place to  prevent  trafficking  these  laws  are  not
    effectively implemented.  They found evidence of a  real  risk  of  re-
    trafficking which is exacerbated when there are  economic,  social,  or
    psychological difficulties.

37. In this case, in my judgment, in light of the particular  vulnerability
    of the Appellant she would be vulnerable to re-trafficking.  PO did not
    rule out a risk of re-trafficking in an individual case and  I  do  not
    read paragraph 192 as indicating that a  real  risk  of  re-trafficking
    arises only when there is a debt.  Whilst this may be the highest  risk
    category it is not the only risk category.

38. Considering, further, Ms Nwogu's second report, I note her comment that
    it is highly unlikely  that  the  Appellant's  traffickers  would  face
    prosecution in Nigeria and that without this occurring she would remain
    in fear of them (para. 70-71).

39. As well as the lack of protection for victims of trafficking  there  is
    also a serious risk of discrimination as a result of being a victim  of
    trafficking because the assumption  is  that  the  person  has  been  a
    prostitute  (  para.  55-56,  VF  v  France,  AIRE  Centre  and   ATLep
    Intervention).

40. Even if the Appellant was able to access a NAPTIP  shelter,  they  only
    provide shelter for up to  six  weeks,  there  is  no  trauma  focussed
    counselling available and very limited training opportunities (report 2
    - para. 79).  There are unlikely to be any longer  term  care  options,
    particularly given that she is now an adult.  Also if she does access a
    shelter they are likely to try and convince her to return to  her  home
    area which would put her at risk of re-trafficking (report 2 - para. 79-
    82).

41. I conclude that in the particular circumstances of this case  were  the
    Appellant to be returned to Lagos  or  Ibadan  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood of re-trafficking, discrimination as a result of her  status
    as a lone woman who has been trafficked, violence and destitution.

42. In considering the issue of internal relocation I note  the  following.
    Ms Nwogu's  opinion  is  that  the  Appellant  could  not  successfully
    relocate (report 2 - para 140-146). She  is  unlikely  to  be  able  to
    access effective support services even if she can access a shelter  for
    a limited time (report 2 - para. 83-97).  She would be at high risk  of
    exploitation and violence in other areas of Nigeria (report 2  -  para.
    116-121).  In light of her poor mental health, vulnerability,  lack  of
    family support, discrimination she is likely to suffer  on  return  and
    inability to  access  treatment,  I  conclude  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the Appellant to relocate.

43. The appeal succeeds on Refugee Convention grounds.

44. As indicated the appeal was allowed  by  the  First  tier  Tribunal  on
    Article 8 grounds (ECHR) and such was not challenged by the Respondent.
    It seems to me that it is not necessary to  specifically  consider  the
    medical evidence in this case and to reach a view on whether it on  its
    own is sufficient to satisfy Article 3. It follows from my findings and
    conclusions on the evidence more widely, referred to above, in  respect
    of the Refugee Convention analysis,  that  removal  would  subject  the
    Appellant to real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment of  sufficient
    severity to engage Article 3.

Decision

45. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds (Article 3).

Anonymity Direction

Under rule 45(4)(i) of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
Rules 2005, unless and until a Tribunal  or  Court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her. This  direction  applies  both  to  the
Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

