

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: AA/06327/2011
                                                               AA/06332/2011

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Determination Sent           |
|on    15  October 2013                        |                             |


Before:                                             Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson
                          Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

Between:
                                    X Q X
                                    J Y X
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Ms Cronin, instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the respondent: Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                                  Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules  2005.  Having  regard  to
the accepted history and  vulnerability  of  the  first  appellant  and  the
minority of the second appellant, we continue that order under  rule  14  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


                 NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL OF DECISION TO REMOVE

 1. The appellants are citizens of China and are mother and daughter.  They
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  respondent's  decision
    dated 17 May 2011 to remove them to China, following her refusal of the
    principal appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
    claims.

First-tier Tribunal determination

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Youngerwood found the principal appellant  to
    be a  credible  witness  who  had  given  a  reliable  account  of  her
    circumstances, and concluded that she  was  a  victim  of  trafficking.
    Clear findings of fact and credibility were made at paragraphs 27-28 of
    the determination, concluding that:

       "I am ultimately persuaded that the [principal]  appellant's  account
       has been essentially  consistent  and  plausible  and  I,  therefore,
       accept it as an essentially true and accurate account."

 3. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellants' appeals on the  limited
    basis that  the  respondent's  decision  to  remove  them  was  not  in
    accordance with the law by reason of her failure to carry out her  duty
    to refer the principal appellant's trafficking claim  to  the  National
    Referral Mechanism (NRM) pursuant to the Council of  Europe  Convention
    on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, Warsaw, 16 May 2005 (the
    Trafficking Convention) and her own  policy  guidance  thereon[1].  The
    First-tier Tribunal did not proceed to determine the remaining  grounds
    of appeal before the Tribunal, under the  Refugee  Convention  and  the
    ECHR.

 4. The respondent neither appealed the findings of  fact  and  credibility
    nor challenged them in a rule 24 Reply.  They therefore stand.

 5. The appellants appealed, arguing that it was an error  of  law  not  to
    determine all the heads in the grounds of appeal, and that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should have made findings on human  rights,  humanitarian
    protection  and  asylum,  as  well  as  dealing  with   the   principal
    appellant's claim to be a victim of trafficking.

Upper Tribunal hearing

 6. For the appellants, Ms Cronin submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law in failing to determine the refugee and  human  rights
    elements  of  the  appeal,  notwithstanding  the  unlawfulness  of  the
    respondent's decision as regards the Trafficking Convention.

 7. For the respondent, and in response  to  Ms  Cronin's  submissions,  Mr
    Avery withdrew orally the respondent's May 2011 decision to remove  the
    appellants. He confirmed that withdrawal in writing on 15 October 2013.



 8. Ms Cronin expressed concern at  the  late  withdrawal  of  the  refusal
    decision and invited the Upper Tribunal to refuse to accept it,  having
    regard to the provisions of paragraphs 17 of the Asylum and Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (as amended) and The Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended).  We indicated, provisionally,
     that we did not consider that either of the Rules 17 in the  Procedure
    Rules had the effect of impeding  or  preventing  the  respondent  from
    withdrawing her decision  to  remove,  and  thus  bringing  the  appeal
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal to an end.

 9. However, we acceded to Ms Cronin's request for a short period (4  days)
    in which to provide written submissions concerning the  extent  of  the
    Upper Tribunal's power to accept, or refuse to accept, the respondent's
    withdrawal of her removal decision.  By an email dated 18 October 2013,
    Ms Cronin accepted that the respondent's withdrawal of  the  underlying
    removal decision, from which arose the appeal right under s.82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, did not equate to a  s.17
    withdrawal of her 'case' before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  for  which  the
    permission of the Tribunal was required.  The respondent had  power  at
    any time to withdraw the underlying decision.  Indeed,  the  respondent
    has the implied power, subject to general principles of public law,  to
    withdraw any  decision  taken  under  statute,  unless  such  power  is
    expressly excluded.

10. The respondent remains under a duty to refer the principal  appellant's
    trafficking claim to the NRM. Subject always to  the  outcome  of  that
    referral, it is open to her to  make  a  further  decision  to  remove,
    should she consider that to be appropriate.  In any such  decision,  it
    will be necessary for her to take into account:

        a) the positive findings of fact and credibility made by the First-
           tier Tribunal in  these  proceedings  (see  Danaei,  R  (on  the
           application of) v Secretary Of State For Home Department  [1997]
           EWHC Admin 301, [1998] Imm AR 84 CA); and

        b) the best interests of the second appellant and a further  child,
           a son, as required by  s.55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
           Immigration Act 2009 (ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the
           Home Department [2011] UKSC 4).

11. The respondent has withdrawn the removal decision which was the subject
    of this appeal.  That being the case, there is no  longer  any  adverse
    decision against which a valid appeal lies.



Signed:                                 Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt




                               -----------------------
[1] "Victims of Trafficking: Guidance for competent authorities" and
"Victims of trafficking: Guidance for
frontline UK Border Agency Staff" available here:
http://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/policyandlaw/asylump
rocessguidance/spe
cialcases/

