
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06891/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10th August 2016                           |On 12 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                             Mr Zhen Quen Huang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Appellant not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with permission, in  relation
      to a Decision and Reasons of Judge Herwald  promulgated  on  the  11th
      February 2015 by which he dismissed the appeal.  Permission to  appeal
      having been granted my first task is to decide  whether  the  First  -
      tier Tribunal made an error of law and  if  so  whether  and  to  what
      extent the Decision should be set aside.

   2. There was no attendance by the Appellant or  by  his  Representatives.
      Having checked the file I was satisfied that notices  of  hearing  had
      been sent to both the Appellant and his Representatives.  The Tribunal
      clerk attempted on several occasions to telephone the  Representatives
      but the telephone was unanswered.

   3. There had been no application to adjourn.

   4. I was given no explanation or reason not to proceed and so  I  decided
      to proceed.

   5. Although this was an appeal against the refusal of  an  asylum  claim,
      Counsel who represented the Appellant before the First - tier Tribunal
      made clear that the Appellant  did  not  wish  to  pursue  any  asylum
      aspects of his claim.  He was  no  longer  asserting  that  he  needed
      protection for any refugee reason and his Counsel made clear that  the
      case would proceed only on the grounds of the Human Rights claim.   So
      much is made clear in paragraph 5 of Judge Herwald's decision.

   6. The Appellant was thus relying upon Article 8 and  in  particular  his
      relationship with his British Citizen spouse and her two children, the
      youngest of whom was under 18.

   7. The Judge found that the Appellant was not a credible witness  and  he
      found that the  relationship  with  hi  spouse  was  not  genuine  and
      subsisting and dismissed the appeal.  Permission to appeal was granted
      on the basis that the Judge, while recording  the  number  of  witness
      statements he had before him,  did  not  appear  to  engage  with  the
      evidence in those witness statements and furthermore the treatment  of
      the Appellant's relationship with the child under family life did  not
      properly address the best interests of the child or whether there  was
      any dependency in the relationship.

   8. It is quite clear from the Decision  that  the  Judge  was  singularly
      unimpressed by the Appellant.  He noted in paragraph 20 that China  is
      the country of the Appellant's birth and the country of he speaks  the
      language and where he spent the majority of his life.  He also  had  a
      wife and two children there.

   9. The Judge heard from only two witnesses, the Appellant and  his  wife,
      and the Judge did not accept that the Appellant had  broken  all  ties
      with China.

  10. The Judge found at paragraph 20  (b)  that  the  Appellant  was  being
      untruthful when he said that he did not realise  he  was  supposed  to
      keep in touch with the Home Office.  The  Judge  found  that  he  knew
      perfectly well he was supposed to report, but instead, absconded.

  11. The Judge found at paragraph 20 (c) that absconding was  a  deliberate
      attempt  to  delay  or  frustrate  the  decision  making  process  and
      frustrate removal.

  12. At paragraph 20 (d) the judge found his answers, when asked how he had
      supported himself in the UK for so many years, evasive  and  dishonest
      constantly refusing to answer questions put to him.

  13. At paragraph  20  (e)  the  Judge  found  that  throughout  his  cross
      examination, the  Appellant  had  to  be  reminded  that  he  was  not
      answering the question and questions were constantly repeated,  to  no
      avail.  In that paragraph the Judge  accepted  the  assertion  by  the
      Secretary of State that it is more likely than not that the  Appellant
      had been working illegally to support himself in the UK.

  14.  At paragraph 20 (f) the Judge noted that the Appellant had  indicated
      that when he left China he had a  wife  and  two  children  there  but
      throughout the asylum and appeal process in the UK he made no  mention
      of them whatsoever.  The Judge found at paragraph 20 (g) that  it  was
      impossible to avoid the impression that this  man's  evidence  changed
      with the wind and that he was attempting to tailor his evidence to the
      questions put.  Later, the Judge found that the  evidence  as  to  the
      contact he had with people in China  was  also  inconsistent  and  the
      Judge was particularly unimpressed by the suggestion that he could not
      remember whether his  mother  was  alive  or  dead  and  he  found  at
      paragraph 20 (p) that clearly this is not a  man  to  be  trusted  or,
      sadly, believed.  He was telling a pack of lies about his  history  of
      lack of contact or otherwise.

  15. The Judge went on to consider the nature of the relationship and found
      on the evidence of Council Tax  bills,  all  of  which  contained  the
      single person discount, that that was an indication  that  the  "wife"
      was living on her own and evidence of cohabitation was scant.   Whilst
      witnesses had indicated in statements that they were living  together,
      the parties own evidence, the Judge found, gave a lie to that.

  16. The "marriage" relied upon by the Appellant  was  a  Chinese  form  of
      traditional marriage.  The Judge, correctly, found that this was not a
      genuine marriage.  He was not persuaded that they had  lived  together
      for the time they claimed or at all given the inconsistencies in their
      evidence.

  17. On the basis that the  Judge  found  that  the  marriage  was  neither
      genuine nor subsisting it can be no error not to have  considered  the
      situation of the "wife's" children.  If his  relationship  with  their
      mother was not genuine or subsisting  then  clearly  his  relationship
      with them must not have been either.

  18. For all of the above reasons I find that the Decision of the  First  -
      tier Tribunal did not contain any material error of law and it stands.

  19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction and I  see
      no reason to make one.



       Decision

    The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed


Signed                              Date 11th August 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


