

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    APPEAL NO: AA/06577/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Determination sent
On 11 December 2014    On 3 February 2015


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SUKHJIT KAUR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent:    Mr Dhanji


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent, a citizen of India, appealed against a decision by  the
appellant to remove her after an asylum claim had been rejected. The  appeal
was dismissed on Refugee Convention grounds but  allowed  on  the  basis  of
humanitarian protection and under article 3 of the ECHR.  The  first  ground
of appeal argues that the judge wrongly conflated  article  3  of  the  ECHR
with article 15 of the qualification directive.  Whilst the judge  "did  not
close the door" on this point he clearly saw no merit in it.  There  may  be
cases where there is a  meaningful  difference  between  the  two  bases  of
protection but there is none here. I conclude that there is no error in  law
here.

2.   The judge was more favourably impressed  by  grounds  2  and  3.  These
read:

         4.   However, the second  and  third  grounds  are  arguable.   The
         Secretary of State argues that the judge failed to have  regard  to
         the impact assisted voluntary returns package might  have.   It  is
         clear that the availability of the package  was  mentioned  in  the
         reasons for refusal letter of 22 August 2014.  The principle reason
         given by Judge Nicholls for allowing  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
         grounds and under article 3 ECHR was that  the  appellant  and  her
         children faced  destitution  on  return.   The  availability  of  a
         support package should have been considered  since  the  presenting
         officer relied on the reasons for refusal letter and the failure to
         engage with that evidence or to give reasons for not  doing  so  is
         arguably an error on a point of law.


         5.   The third ground is in similar terms and argues that the judge
         failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting the possible  support
         from charities in India.   The  judge  does  not  indicate  why  he
         rejected the background country evidence about the availability  of
         charities in India.  It was a relevant issue and  evidence  of  the
         availability of such support was set out in the reasons for refusal
         letter.


3.   It  was  argued  that  the  trial  judge  was  entitled  to  reach  the
conclusions that he did. There is, however, no doubt that the judge did  not
deal with the matters set out in the paragraphs of the grant  of  permission
set out above  and  they  are  clearly  relevant  to  the  decision.  It  is
impossible  to  conclude  that  the  judge  would  have  reached  the   same
conclusion had he considered  those  matters.  The  determination  therefore
contains an error of law.

4.   As a crucial part of the case has not been dealt with it is right  that
this case should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  case  is
remitted to Taylor House for a fresh decision to be made by any judge  other
than Judge Nicholls.


The appeal is accordingly allowed


Designated Judge Digney
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal  15 February 2015

