
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06574/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 5th October 2016                 |On 11th November 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, Broudie Jackson and Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a national of the Islamic Republic of  Iran  born  in
      1986.




      Anonymity Order

   2. This case concerns a claim for international  protection.  Having  had
      regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders
      I therefore consider it appropriate to make an order in the  following
      terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  both  the
           Appellant and the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




      Case History

   3. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 8th June 2013 having  entered  the
      United Kingdom illegally. He advanced a  claim  based  on  his  stated
      opposition to the Iranian regime. He claimed to have  participated  in
      pro-democracy demonstrations, to have come to the adverse attention of
      the authorities and as  a  result  to  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
      persecution for reasons of his political opinion.

   4. The Respondent did not accept  the  account  to  be  true,  and  in  a
      determination dated 21st August 2013 Judge  Malik  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal largely concurred with that conclusion. Although she accepted
      that the Appellant had taken part  in  a  single  pro-Mousavi  protest
      Judge Malik found the account of arrest, escape and pursuit thereafter
      to be implausible and inconsistent and dismissed the appeal.

   5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, which
      was granted. The matter came before Designated Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal McClure.  The matters in issue were whether Judge  Malik  had
      erred in her approach to the Appellant's credibility, and whether  she
      had erred in declining to assess whether or not the Appellant would be
      at risk on return to Iran because he had left the  country  unlawfully
      and would be returning without documentation.

   6. In respect of  the  credibility  findings  Judge  McClure  upheld  the
      reasoning of Judge Malik, finding it to  be  cogent  and  valid.    He
      further agreed with her that the matter  of  risk  for  failed  asylum
      seekers had been dealt  with  by  the  Country  Guidance  case  of  BA
      (demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran  CG  [2011]  UKUT  36
      (IAC) and there was no need to consider the matter any further.

   7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  on
      the 'risk on return' point.  It was argued that  new  evidence  showed
      that there was  a  risk  of  ill-treatment  in  detention,  and  since
      detention would inevitably follow from apprehension of illegal exit, a
      refugee claim would be  made  out.  Permission  was  granted  by  Lord
      Justice Beatson on the 27th March 2015. On the 1st December  2015  the
      matter was remitted by consent. Lord Justice Laws signed the order  in
      the following terms:

           1. The appeal be allowed.

           2. The decision of the Upper Tribunal  dated  18  December  2013
              finding no error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
              Tribunal be set aside and the appeal be remitted to the Upper
              Tribunal for rehearing.

   8. In the hiatus between that decision and the matter coming  before  me,
      the Upper Tribunal issued Country Guidance on the issue identified  by
      the Court of Appeal, in  SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
      seeker) [2016] UKUT 308 (IAC).  The findings  are  summarised  in  the
      headnote as follows:

           (a)   An Iranian male whom it is sought to return to  Iran,  who
           does not possess a passport, will be  returnable  on  a  laissez
           passer, which he can obtain from the Iranian Embassy on proof of
           identity and nationality.

           (b)   An Iranian male in respect of whom no adverse interest has
           previously been manifested by the Iranian State does not face  a
           real risk of persecution/breach  of  his  Article  3  rights  on
           return to Iran on account of having left Iran  illegally  and/or
           being a failed asylum seeker. No such risk exists at the time of
           questioning on return to Iran  nor  after  the  facts  (i.e.  of
           illegal exit  and  being  a  failed  asylum  seeker)  have  been
           established.  In  particular,  there  is  not  a  real  risk  of
           prosecution leading to imprisonment.

      The Tribunal thereby rejected the proposition in  the  onward  appeal,
      that questioning on arrival would necessarily entail detention and ill-
      treatment.

   9. At a mention hearing on the 22nd August 2016 the  Appellant  indicated
      that notwithstanding these findings,  generally  unfavourable  to  his
      case, he would be pursuing his appeal.




      The Appellant's Case

  10. Mr Greer highlighted the following  pertinent  information  about  the
      Appellant:

            . He is a young man who has been out of Iran for at least three
              years

            . He left illegally with no identity documents

            . He is currently undocumented

            .  In  2009  he  took  part  in  at   least   one   pro-Mousavi
              demonstration

            . He has claimed asylum in the UK

  11. Mr Greer took me to  the  relevant  passages  of  SSH  and  HR.   That
      decision indicates that in order to affect the Appellant's  return  to
      Iran the Secretary of State will  have  to  obtain  on  his  behalf  a
      laissez-passer style document from the Iranian embassy in London.  The
      Tribunal held that arrival with such a document may  indicate  to  the
      authorities that the holder left  Iran  illegally  and  a  fine  would
      result. He would likely be subject to some questioning.   Of  this  Mr
      Greer makes the following submission:

           "he is likely [at that point] to be questioned  in  relation  to
           the  details  of  his  asylum  case  on  return  to  Iran.  Such
           questioning is likely to  illicit  details  of  the  Appellant's
           attendance at anti-government demonstrations in 2009"

  12. He submitted that if those matters were  revealed  by  the  Appellant,
      there would likely follow  ill  treatment  amounting  to  persecution.
      Although the political landscape in Iran is  somewhat  different  from
      that in 2009, Mr Greer points out  that  SB  (risk  on  return-illegal
      exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053 and BA (Demonstrators  in  Britain  -
      risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT  36  (IAC)  are  still  applicable
      country guidance.




      The Respondent's Case

  13. Mr McVeety asked me to  focus  on  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  is
      entirely unknown to the Iranian state. He  has  no  political  profile
      whatsoever.  Whilst  he  may  have  posed  for  a  photograph   on   a
      demonstration seven years ago there is no evidence to suggest that the
      authorities are aware of that. There is no  reason  why  he  would  be
      asked any  questions  about  it.   Those  protests  were  against  the
      election victory of  Ahmedinejad  who  is  now  out  of  the  picture.
      Millions of people attended those protests; deplorable  as  the  human
      rights record in Iran is, it is not the case the millions continue  to
      be arrested.  There is no evidence that the Appellant would  be  asked
      about his asylum claim. If he is he can tell them the truth - that  he
      made a fraudulent claim which was rejected.




      My Findings

  14. The Appellant's case turns on two points, very well made by Mr  Greer.
      First, it must be accepted following the findings in both BA and  SSH,
      that he will be subject to questioning upon return  to  Iran.  Second,
      applying the principles in HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon) v Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2010] UKSC 31, he cannot be expected to
      lie about his claim for  asylum,  or  the  fact  that  he  attended  a
      demonstration in support of  Mousavi  seven  years  ago.   From  these
      propositions Mr Greer deduces that the Appellant faces a real risk  of
      persecution for reasons of his political opinion.

  15. I deal first with the nature of questioning. It has long been accepted
      that returnees to Iran - at least those without regular  documentation
      - face interview by officials on arrival.  That  is  unsurprising.  No
      doubt a British national returning  to  Heathrow  without  a  passport
      would also have to answer some questions. The difference is  that  the
      'wrong' answer, in the Iranian context, could lead to persecution.  Mr
      Greer emphasises that it is for this reason that this 'pinch point' is
      so significant.  I must therefore  assess  whether  the  Appellant  is
      reasonably likely to be asked questions the  answers  to  which  might
      expose him to risk.

  16. In SSH the Tribunal heard evidence that  the  questioning  could  take
      anything from 10 minutes [at 21], to 2-3 hours [13], to 3-5 hours [14]
      to several days [22]. It was prepared to accept Dr  Kakhki's  evidence
      that there is a special  court  near  the  airport  which  deals  with
      penalties  for  illegal  exit  and  other  immigration  offences.  The
      Tribunal was not at all satisfied that there was, in general,  a  real
      risk of persecution at this stage.  The  panel  endorsed  Dr  Kakhki's
      evidence that a returnee simpliciter would not face  a  real  risk  of
      harm:

           "If they co-operated and accepted that they left  illegally  and
           claimed asylum abroad then there would be  no  reason  for  ill-
           treatment, and questioning would be for a fairly  brief  period.
           That seems to  us  to  sum  up  the  position  well,  and  as  a
           consequence we conclude that a person with no history other than
           that of being a failed asylum seeker who  had  exited  illegally
           and who could be expected to  tell  the  truth  when  questioned
           would not face a real risk of ill-treatment during the period of
           questioning at the airport".

  17. It is implicit in this that the questioning would cover whether or not
      the individual and claimed asylum. This was indeed the evidence of  Dr
      Kakhki,  recorded  at  paragraph  35  of  Appendix  1.   The  Tribunal
      specifically considered, and rejected, the proposition that the act of
      claiming asylum would in itself expose the individual to prosecution -
      with the attendant risk of harm - for propaganda  against  the  state.
      At 30:

           "We can understand the sensitivity that the Iranian  authorities
           may have towards perceived slights against their  own  state  in
           the form of untruthful allegations  about  the  conduct  of  the
           state, but equally one can expect a degree of reality  on  their
           part in relation to people who in  the  interests  of  advancing
           their economic circumstances would make up a story in  order  to
           secure economic betterment in a wealthier country".

  18. Mr Greer submits that the key is not then to  whether  the  individual
      might have made up a story in  order  to  found  a  false  claim,  but
      whether there was any underlying truth in his assertion  that  he  has
      demonstrated political opposition to the Iranian government. He relies
      on the clear distinction to that effect found by the panel in SSH:

           "31.  Elsewhere in Dr Kakhki's report  there  are  a  number  of
           examples given of people who were prosecuted for other  offences
           and also for illegal departure. It seems to us that these  cases
           establish no more than that people may be prosecuted and  indeed
           imprisoned, as some  of  these  cases  show,  for  the  separate
           offence  of  illegal  exit,  but  they   are   clearly   to   be
           distinguished from cases where there is no history and where the
           person is no more than a failed asylum seeker  who  exited  Iran
           illegally.  Cases  such  as  Mr  Jazari  who   was   a   corrupt
           businessman, Ms Bayazidi who was  convicted  of  an  offence  of
           disinformation and other examples of  people  who  were  clearly
           political dissidents or at least perceived  as  being  political
           dissidents, are different again. We do not consider it  to  have
           been shown that somebody who has  made  a  failed  asylum  claim
           would simply as a consequence of that be regarded as a political
           dissident. These cases where people were  imprisoned  show  much
           more by way of specific activity than a simple  imputation.  The
           description of the case of Mr Hadi Keikhosravi, referred  to  at
           page 13 of the report, which  refers  to  a  conviction  of  six
           months' imprisonment for illegal departure, says  nothing  about
           the surrounding circumstances and as such cannot be  an  example
           of any materiality. The examples given show  that  people  found
           guilty of another offence  may  in  addition  receive  a  prison
           sentence for illegal exit, but they do not show that people  are
           sentenced to imprisonment for illegal exit per se.  Indeed,  the
           evidence suggests that there is no  appetite  to  prosecute  for
           illegal exit alone, but if there  is  another  offence,  illegal
           exit will be added on".

           [emphasis added]

  19. In the instant case the undisturbed findings of Judge  Malik  are,  on
      the lower standard of proof, that  the  Appellant  attended  a  single
      protest in 2009, wearing a  green  shirt  and  holding  a  picture  of
      Mousavi. Judge Malik makes no explicit findings as to whether  or  not
      the Appellant did so out of genuine political conviction, but  appears
      to accept his written evidence  that  he  does  not  claim  to  be  an
      activist, just someone with "a view like every man and woman  in  Iran
      on political issues".   The statement cited by Judge Malik (dated 25th
      July 2013) states that the Appellant voted for Mousavi and  took  part
      in the protest that he did because of anger at the election result and
      dissatisfaction with the  state  of  the  economy.   He  professes  to
      continue to hold those views. I see no reason to reject that evidence:
      although the Appellant's credibility has been severely damaged by  his
      fabrication of elements of his claim, I fail to see why he would  have
      attended a protest holding a picture of  Mousavi  on  the  streets  of
      Tehran had he not been a genuine supporter. I also note  however  that
      the Appellant's convictions were not such that he has  been  moved  to
      participate in any kind of political activity or expression in the UK.



  20. The findings of the Tribunal in SSH are clear: there is  a  difference
      between people who were activists or protestors on the  one  hand  and
      people on the other hand who have no history at all [see for  instance
      at 26].  The Appellant's  claim  cannot  simply  be  rejected  on  SSH
      grounds. He is not simply a failed asylum seeker. He is someone with a
      history, albeit a very modest one, of protest.

  21. What then is the likelihood of the Appellant facing any  serious  harm
      upon return to Iran?  The demonstrations  in  2009  were  the  largest
      protests seen on the streets of Iran since the days of the revolution.
       Many millions took part and the state responded to this challenge  to
      its authority by cracking down with customary brutality.   The country
      guidance most contemporaneous to those events was  SB.  The  pertinent
      paragraph of the headnote reads:

           Events in Iran following the 12 June 2009 presidential elections
           have led to a government crackdown on persons seen to be opposed
           to the present government and the Iranian judiciary  has  become
           even less independent. Persons who are likely to be perceived by
           the authorities  in  Iran  as  being  actively  associated  with
           protests against the June 12 election results may  face  a  real
           risk of persecution or ill treatment, although much will  depend
           on the particular circumstances.

  22. SB continues to be operative country guidance.    I find on that basis
      that person who had an active association with protests back  in  2009
      may face a risk, although much will depend on the  circumstances.  The
      circumstances here are that seven years ago the Appellant  joined  one
      demonstration in support of the Reformist candidate.  He  has  had  no
      involvement with Iranian politics since then.   I can find no evidence
      to suggest that it would be reasonably likely that the Appellant would
      be subjected to further questioning, or harm, in these  circumstances.
      Ahmedinejad is no longer in power and so there is  no  motivation  for
      those who supported him to subdue the opposition. Whilst  it  is  true
      that personnel in the Iranian security  services  are  generally  more
      hardline than the reformist President that they now serve,  I find  it
      difficult to see why there would be any adverse  interest  in  someone
      with the Appellant's profile today. Applying the guidance in SB I find
      that he cannot be said to have had an "active  association"  with  the
      2009 protests, and that his marginal involvement would not expose  him
      to any risk today.




            Decisions

  23. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

  24. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           3rd November 2016
