
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06508/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 April 2016                     |On 15 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                    [S W]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Warren of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Libya  born  on  [  ]  1994.  The
         respondent notified him on 25 March 2015 of her decision to  refuse
         to grant asylum  or  ancillary  protection,  and  of  her  decision
         requiring him to leave the United Kingdom. His appeal against  that
         decision was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Buchanan  ("the
         Judge") following a hearing on 22  May  2015.  This  is  an  appeal
         against that decision.

The Judge's findings

      2. The Judge stated [7.4] that the appellant;

             "... was in a low profile post of manning security gates along
             with many others."

      3. The Judge stated [7.9] that;

             "I am not persuaded by the appellant that he was  incarcerated
             on a return to Libya in 2013. Neither am I persuaded that  his
             family have gone to ground following  a  raid  to  secure  the
             appellant. I am not persuaded that the account of events on an
             alleged return to Libya from the UK is founded in fact.  I  do
             not accept that someone having acted as the  appellant  claims
             to have acted as a guard manning security checkpoints would be
             of interest to the militia in Libya to  such  an  extent  that
             they would monitor calls made to or from the appellant's  more
             (sic) distance family members in Libya."

      4. The Judge stated [10.1] that;

             "I am  not  persuaded  by  the  appellant  that  the  material
             contained in  the  (sic)  appellants  bundle  is  such  as  to
             disclose  a  materially  different  level  of   indiscriminate
             violence so as to form a real risk to threaten the appellant's
             life or person."

      5. It is of note that in the Respondents initial  refusal  letter  (25
         March 2015) it was accepted that he  had  played  a  low  level  in
         Gadaffi's forces for 4 months during 2011 [22], he was arrested and
         released in 2012 as a result of that [27], and he  had  resided  in
         Tripoli for the majority of his life [33]. It was not  accepted  he
         was from the Bani Wallid Tribe [54].

Permission to Appeal

      6. First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted permission to appeal on  6
         August 2015 on the grounds that;

             "2.  It  is  arguable  ...  that  the  judge  did  not  engage
             adequately with the  material  placed  in  front  of  him  and
             therefore did not provide adequate reasons for his decision at
             [10.1]. Given the evidence referred to in  the  grounds  which
             could, on the face of it,  indicate  that  the  situation  had
             materially changed so that there was good reason not to follow
             country guidance it is arguable that  the  judge  should  have
             explained why, despite that evidence,  he  did  not  find  the
             situation to have materially changed.

             3.  It is also arguable that the judge erred in not addressing
             the argument put forward by the appellant that  there  was  no
             safe route of return ..."

The hearing before me on 20 October 2015

      7. Mrs Petterson did not challenge the  assertion  that  there  was  a
         material  error  of  law  as  the  Judge  had  not  given  adequate
         consideration to the changed situation as set out in  the  evidence
         below [12 to 15]. I was satisfied that the making of  the  decision
         by the Judge did involve the making of a material error on a  point
         of law given the failure to adequately assess the then up  to  date
         background evidence subsequent to the relevant Country Guidance.  I
         set aside the decision.

The Scope of the Disposal hearing

      8. I was satisfied that, given the passage of time since  the  hearing
         on 22 May  2015,  and  given  the  duty  to  consider  the  current
         evidence, the parties should have the opportunity to  file  further
         evidence regarding the current situation in Libya  and  whether  or
         how he could be safely  returned,  and  whether  the  circumstances
         meant  he  could  or  should  be  granted  asylum  or  humanitarian
         protection or protection under Article 3 of the ECHR or not.

      9. I therefore directed the filing of further evidence  and  relisting
         of the matter. The Respondent ignored the direction  to  state  the
         route of return. The Appellant filed the directed evidence late.

The Country Guidance

     10. AT & Others (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT was
         heard between 18 November 2013 and 22 November 2013.  That guidance
         noted;

          1) the role of the militias in providing some security,

          2) their conflicting interests which  often  also  conflict  with
             that of the central government,

          3) the lack of real risk of being subjected to the internal armed
             conflict solely on account of being in Libya,

          4) the lack of real risk of harm just because  of  having  worked
             for or having had a family member associated with the  Gaddafi
             regime,

          5) the lack of real risk of harm just because of  having  been  a
             failed asylum seeker,

          6) the  general  availability  of  safe  return  to  Tripoli  and
             Benghazi airports, and

          7) the general availability of internal  relocation  despite  the
             presence of checkpoints,

          8) the possibility of internal relocation if it was required  due
             a real risk in their  home  area  particularly  if  they  have
             tribal affiliation or family links to that home area, and

          9) the fact specific nature of each case.

Background evidence since AT

     11. Within the background evidence produced are many documents that say
         similar things in different ways.

     12. The poor prison conditions and ill treatment  were  highlighted  by
         Human Rights Watch (3 December 2015).

     13. The United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office stated  (14  May
         2015) that they;

             "... advise against all travel to Libya  due  to  the  ongoing
             fighting, threat  of  terrorist  attacks  and  kidnap  against
             foreigners from ISIL extremists,  and  deteriorating  security
             situation throughout the country."

     14. The International Committee of the Red Cross through  their  report
         "Libya: as violence continues, humanitarian needs increase"  on  13
         April 2015 stated;

             "The violence shows  no  sign  of  abating.  Libya  remains  a
             patchwork of conflict, fuelled by a plethora of  armed  groups
             with varying allegiances and diverse agendas.  Thousands  have
             been killed; hundreds of thousands more have  been  displaced.
             The humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate."

     15. The evidence was summarised in the document headed "United  Nations
         News Centre 'New UN rights report depicts 'turmoil, lawlessness' in
         Libya' 10 February 2015" which states;

             "The report, which will be presented to the  UN  Human  Rights
             Council in March, depicts a country suffering from  increasing
             turmoil and lawlessness, inflamed by a multitude of competing,
             heavily  armed  groups  and  a  broadening  political  crisis.
             Against  such  a  backdrop,  it  calls  for  bolstering  State
             institutions, urges accountability for rights  violations  and
             support for the ongoing political dialogue ...

             Indiscriminate artillery and air attacks are commonplace,  the
             report says, while infrastructure, such as hospitals,  schools
             and airports, has  been  attacked  and  damaged  or  used  for
             military purposes ...

             Targeted violence, unlawful killings and assassinations,  were
             found to be common, with footage  emerging  in  November  that
             appeared to show several beheadings in Benghazi and Derna.

             Cases of harassment, intimidation,  torture,  abductions,  and
             summary executions of human rights  defenders,  civil  society
             activists, journalists and other media professionals, as  well
             as members of the judiciary, politicians and  law  enforcement
             officers were common and minority groups,  including  Egyptian
             Coptic Christians, have also been increasingly targeted ...

             Fighting  and  intentional  destruction  of  residential   and
             commercial property has caused  ballooning  displacement  with
             the number of internally displaced persons soaring from 60,000
             at the beginning of 2014 to around 400,000 by mid-November.

             UN human rights staff report thousands of people in detention,
             held mostly by armed groups in situations  where  torture  and
             ill-treatment is rife, with  no  means  of  challenging  their
             situation  because  prosecutors  and  judges  are  unable   or
             unwilling to confront the armed groups.

             The intimidation  and  attacks  suffered  by  members  of  the
             judiciary, which include court  bombings,  physical  assaults,
             abduction  of  individuals  or  family  members  and  unlawful
             killings, help explain the hesitancy and the breakdown of  the
             justice system, which does not function in some parts  of  the
             country."

Dr Emile Joffe

     16. The Appellant filed a report from Dr Joffe (3 January 2016). He did
         not give oral evidence. He noted  the  Appellant's  claimed  tribal
         affiliation of Bani Waleed (although I note that the Judge did  not
         find he was a member of that tribe and the Respondent had  rejected
         that part of his claim), and [14] their marginalisation  and  being
         disadvantaged in post-revolutionary Libya following  the  death  of
         Mu'ammar Gaddafi while in  their  custody  and  that  their  tribal
         members can anticipate hostility from the major tribal militias  on
         Triploitania.

     17. He noted [118]  the  open  borders  with  Tunisia  and  Egypt,  its
         accessibility by sea from Malta, the virtual destruction of Tripoli
         airport (which is closed [135]), the availability of  Misurata  and
         Labraq airports, the  dispute  over  control  of  Benghazi  airport
         (which is closed  [135]),  the  unpredictable  security  at  border
         points as they are still generally controlled by militia units, and
         the unpredictable internal checkpoints. There is no safe  route  of
         return  [134]  as  the  land  routes  are  subject  to  sudden  and
         unpredictable disruption, and he is  not  aware  of  ongoing  ferry
         services from Malta or Tunisia.  British airlines do not use  Bayda
         airport [135].

     18. He noted [119] the lack of the Libyan  states  ability  to  provide
         adequate  protection  to  its  own   nationals,   and   [121]   its
         administrative chaos making duplicates of the family book  required
         to ensure residence and registration unobtainable. He  states  that
         [124] relocation is simply not a viable option currently and travel
         and relocation outside the 2 urban conurbations  in  the  East  and
         West is forbidden and profoundly insecure.

     19. He noted [127] the worsening security since November 2013. There is
         a catastrophe in Benghazi where large parts of the city  have  been
         destroyed in fighting over the  control  of  the  airport  and  its
         environs and air assaults by the UAE and Egypt. In Tripoli tensions
         have polarised around the Somoud Front and Zintani  Militias  which
         periodically erupt into violent clashes, and [128] the coastal road
         to Tunisia is insecure and often unstable, Central Libya has become
         the domain of IS, and there is complete  chaos  in  Fezzan  to  the
         south of Tripoli. There are now 2 competing governments.  A  United
         Nations inspired mediation collapsed in November 2015 and had  been
         imposed with no  certainty  it  will  be  accepted.   The  economic
         situation is dire [129/130].

     20. He opined that [131] the situation has changed  so  radically  that
         the Country  Guidance  is  no  longer  an  appropriate  guide.  The
         Appellant's past activities for the Gaddafi regime in  Tripoli  and
         his tribal affiliation mean he would be unable to  safely  relocate
         within Libya, and the threat he faces in Tripoli would be amplified
         by the chaotic situation and personal hostility. It  has  become  a
         battleground between the forces of Libyan Dignity and Libyan  Dawn,
         with the threat of IS in the background, and [132] the  surrounding
         region is contested by the Misturatan and Zinani militia.

     21. Libyan nationals being returned face the danger of arbitrary arrest
         and detention given the chaotic border controls which  are  in  the
         hands of the militia groups [133]. Returned asylum seekers who  are
         known supporters  of  the  Gadaffi  regime  or  from  a  tribe  who
         supported it may face potential interrogation and imprisonment with
         the possibility of torture and imprisonment that falls far short of
         international standards [136].

Submissions

     22. Mrs Petterson submitted that he can return voluntarily on a transit
         flight. The facts as found do not indicate he is at real risk  from
         the Libyan Government.

     23. Mrs Warren noted that there was still no identified route of return
         and no response to Dr Joffe's report. Returns had been stopped  due
         to the dangers. The political and state framework had broken  down.
         The situation had changed since AT such as to mean he was  entitled
         to be recognised as a refugee or to humanitarian protection.

Discussion

     24. The Appellant was found by the Judge to have had a low profile post
         of manning security gates along with many others. He  was  accepted
         by the Respondent as having lived  the  majority  of  his  life  in
         Libya, of having been in the Gadaffi army for 4 months in 2011, and
         of having been detained and released in 2012 due to  that.  He  was
         not found to have been from the Bani Waleed tribe, or to have  lost
         contact with family, or to have been detained or ill treated  on  a
         previous return to Libya. Dr Joffe has made  assumptions  of  facts
         specific to the Appellant that were not  established  even  to  the
         lower standard.

     25. I am not satisfied that given the current background evidence, that
         the facts as conceded by the Respondent and as found by  the  Judge
         bring the Appellant anywhere near the risk categories identified in
         AT as indicating the Appellant is now entitled to be recognised  as
         a refugee. He was not a former high  ranking  official  within  the
         intelligence service, or associated at  a  senior  level  with  the
         regime, or a Black Libyan, or a woman. Given the chaos  it  is  not
         reasonably likely anyone will have any idea who he is or  what  his
         background is, or any real interest in due to his  background  even
         if they found out.

     26. I therefore dismiss the asylum appeal.

     27. The situation in Libya, from both the background evidence  and  the
         evidence of Dr Joffe appears to have got worse since AT.  There  is
         plainly  an  internal  armed  conflict  between  various   factions
         including government forces. The question for me is whether  it  is
         so bad that the mere fact of returning him would  place  him  at  a
         real risk of being a victim of indiscriminate violence (QH  and  AH
         (Iraq) v SSHD, UNHCR intervening [2009] EWCA Civ 620). The level of
         indiscriminate violence has to be very high  (HH,  AM,  J,  and  MA
         (Somalia) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 426).

     28. The Respondent has not indicated  the  route  of  return  to  Libya
         despite being directed by me to do so  by  11  November  2015.  She
         simply ignored the direction.

     29. The Appellant is from Tripoli. He had failed to  establish  he  had
         any problem after his release from detention in 2012. He has failed
         to establish any ongoing interest due to his personal circumstances
         given the embellishment by Dr Joffe of the "facts" as found.  There
         is no evidence the Appellant would be unable to obtain a  duplicate
         of the family book required for residence  and  registration  given
         his failure to establish a loss of contact with his family. I  note
         that in his asylum interview (29 July 2014) he identified having  4
         uncles and 6 aunts in Libya. He would  therefore  be  able,  if  he
         could get safely  to  Tripoli,  reside  and  register  as  a  local
         citizen. I am not satisfied that the description Dr Joffe gives  of
         the position in Tripoli of the periodic eruption of violent clashes
         between the Soumoud Front and Zintani militias indicates  that  the
         level of indiscriminate violence is very high or that by  his  mere
         presence there the Appellant is at a real risk of being a victim of
         indiscriminate violence.

     30. I accept the evidence of Dr Joffe that the Appellant cannot however
         reach Tripoli by sea or air given the lack of ferries  and  closure
         of the airport as I have no reason to doubt it given the background
         evidence. I also accept his evidence that the land route  would  be
         unsafe and has unpredictable security at border points as they  are
         still  generally  controlled  by  militia  units,  and  there   are
         unpredictable internal checkpoints even  if  he  was  able  to  get
         safely to Musrata or Badya airport. That is because the  Respondent
         chose not to file anything to rebut  Dr  Joffe's  evidence  and  it
         accords with the background evidence. I accept the evidence  of  Dr
         Joffe that the Appellant cannot reach Benghazi by  sea  or  air  or
         land for the same reasons.

     31. I accept the evidence of Dr Joffe that Central Libya is  under  the
         control of IS and therefore even if he could get  there  safely,  a
         requirement to internally relocate there would be wholly improper.

     32. I am therefore satisfied that it has been established that no route
         of return is sufficiently safe to mean that there would be  a  real
         risk to the Appellant of him being subjected to harm if he  was  to
         be returned currently. I am not satisfied  that  it  is  reasonably
         likely the Appellant would be able to reach the relative safety  of
         his family in Tripoli. I  am  satisfied  that  internal  relocation
         would be unduly harsh due to the  lack  of  safety  and  protection
         available.

     33. I am not therefore satisfied that  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
         humanitarian protection given the findings above [29],  but  he  is
         entitled to protection pursuant to Article 3 of the  1950  European
         Convention on Human Rights as he cannot reach the  relative  safety
         of Tripoli without there being a real risk of harm in  him  getting
         there.

Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remake the decision and dismiss the asylum appeal.

    I dismiss the humanitarian protection appeal.

    I allow the human rights appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
14 April 2016
