

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06220/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  8 January 2015                            |On 13 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               AMIREH SALMANI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Fadiga and Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, HOPO.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal came before Judge Oakley on 30 September 2014 at Hatton
         Cross. He dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum  grounds,  not
         accepting that  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  persecution  for
         political reasons in Iran as claimed.


      2. In doing so he said that he placed little weight to the evidence of
         the previous Secretary General of the ADPF, who  gave  evidence  on
         the  appellant's  behalf,  on  the  grounds  that  there   was   no
         authorisation from the organisation and he found the evidence given
         to be evasive.


      3. The grounds of application state that the witness provided a letter
         on ADPF letter headed paper. Moreover the judge gave no reasons for
         concluding that the evidence was unreliable.


      4. Mr Mills accepted that the judge had given no proper  justification
         for discounting  the  evidence,  and  that  the  determination  was
         flawed.  The  proper  course  was  a  remittal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.


      5. The decision of Judge Oakley is set aside on the grounds  that  the
         judge has not taken into account relevant  evidence,  and  has  not
         given  adequate  reasons  for  his  conclusions.  The  case  should
         therefore be set down before a judge other  than  Judge  Oakley  at
         Hatton Cross, so that the decision can be remade.






    Signed        Date 8 January 2015


     Judge of the Upper Tribunal
