

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  AA/06130/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 1 July 2013                                |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     HS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley instructed by Gloucester Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule 14  of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran who was born on  29  January  1980.
      He left Iran in August 2009 and travelled to Turkey. He then  went  to
      Greece where he stayed for six months before travelling to Italy where
      he stayed for two years.  In May 2012, he  came  to  the  UK  entering
      illegally in a lorry.  He was arrested on 16  May  2012.   He  claimed
      asylum on arrest.

   3. The appellant claimed to be a Ghashgaei Turk.   He  claimed  that  his
      father had been arrested in 1983 and executed in 1995.  The appellant,
      however, did not claim to have participated in any activities for  the
      Ghasgayee himself.  He was a member of the Green Movement.  He claimed
      that shortly before the presidential election in 2009 he  had  put  up
      posters for the presidential  candidate,  Moussavi  and  he  had  been
      arrested and kept in police custody for two nights during  which  time
      he was tortured and beaten up.  He was then released  without  charge.
      He claimed that on 13 June 2009 he was involved in a demonstration  in
      Kovar.  He was not arrested but the police were taking photographs and
      the Etellaat raided his home at 3.00 am the next morning  looking  for
      him.  The appellant fears  the  Iranian  authorities  because  of  his
      involvement in the demonstration on 13 June 2009.

   4. On 13 June 2012,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
      application for asylum and made a decision to remove him as an illegal
      entrant by way of directions under Schedule 2 to the  Immigration  Act
      1971.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a
      hearing, in a determination dated 4 August  2012  Judge  C  J  Woolley
      dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The  Judge  made   an   adverse
      credibility finding and did not accept that appellant's account.   The
      Judge did not accept that the appellant would be at risk as  a  failed
      asylum seeker or that his removal would breach Articles 2, 3 and 8  of
      the ECHR.

   5. Although the appellant's grounds did not engage with  Judge  Woolley's
      reasoning, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Gibb) granted the  appellant
      permission to appeal on two bases (1) that the  Judge  had  failed  to
      have regard to the fact that the appellant was unrepresented  and  had
      mental health problems when  assessing  his  evidence  and  making  an
      adverse credibility finding, in particular  in  counting  against  the
      appellant his failure to mention before the hearing that he  had  been
      detained and tortured before the demonstration in June 2009;  and  (2)
      that it was arguably contrary to the background evidence that  it  was
      implausible that the Iranian authorities  would  release  him  without
      charge and that he would have been photographed and identified by  the
      police at the demonstration.

   6. The appeal had previously been listed before me but adjourned  because
      it was understood that the appellant had, in fact, been granted asylum
      in Italy.  That matter having been explored, I  was  informed  at  the
      hearing that the appellant had indeed been granted  asylum  in  Italy.
      Mr Manley informed me that, nevertheless, he had  no  instructions  to
      withdraw the appeal (as had been anticipated) and  he  invited  me  to
      determine the error of law issue.  Thereafter, he indicated  that  the
      appellant's representative would take further instructions  about  the
      continuance of this appeal.  Mr Hibbs also invited me to determine the
      error of law issue.

   7. On behalf of the appellant,  Mr  Manley  submitted  that  the  Judge's
      adverse credibility finding was flawed and could not stand  for  three
      reasons.

   8. First, Mr Manley submitted that the Judge had erred in law in applying
      s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc)  Act
      2004  in  taking  into  account,  as  damaging  of   the   appellant's
      credibility, his failure to claim asylum  in  a  safe  third  country,
      namely Italy and that he had lied in his screening interview  when  he
      said that he had been granted asylum in Italy (and also Turkey).    Mr
      Manley submitted that it was now clear that in fact the appellant  was
      telling the truth.  Mr Manley acknowledged  that  this  was  his  main
      point upon which he now relied.

   9. Secondly, however, Mr Manley  continued  to  rely  upon  his  skeleton
      argument at para 4(a)-(g) that the  Judge  had  failed  to  take  into
      account the appellant's mental health.  There it is  argued  that  the
      hearing should have been adjourned in order that the  appellant  could
      be represented and further medical evidence obtained and also that the
      appellant's mental health  was  wrongly  not  taken  into  account  in
      assessing the appellant's  evidence,  in  particular  his  failure  to
      mention that he was detained and  tortured  before  the  demonstration
      prior to the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

  10. Thirdly, in his reply, Mr Manley also submitted  that  the  Judge  had
      been wrong to conclude that aspects of the appellant's  evidence  were
      implausible in the absence of background evidence.

  11. Turning to each of these submissions in turn, I deal first  with  what
      maybe termed the "mistake of fact" submission.

  12. At para 42 of his determination, Judge Woolley noted  the  appellant's
      evidence in relation to whether he had previously  claimed  (and  been
      granted) asylum in Turkey and Italy as follows:

           "42.  ....The appellant in his screening interview  states  that
                 he had been granted asylum in both Turkey  and  Italy,  and
                 that in fact he had been given a 5 year residence  visa  in
                 Italy.  This claim was  not  repeated  in  his  substantive
                 interview and at the hearing he said that he had  not  been
                 granted asylum in either country, and that  his  motive  in
                 saying so was that he would not be sent back to  Iran.   It
                 is stated in  the  decision  letter  that  the  absence  of
                 fingerprints suggests that  he  did  not  claim  asylum  in
                 either country, but I am satisfied after hearing from  Miss
                 Goodfellow that this conclusion cannot be reached for  this
                 reason, since fingerprints are deleted from the  system  in
                 any event after a period of time.  Having  heard  from  the
                 appellant at the hearing I am satisfied  that  he  was  not
                 granted asylum in either country.  The fact remains however
                 that  he  made  a  false  statement  to   the   immigration
                 authorities in his screening  interview  with  the  aim  of
                 manipulating the process to his own  advantage,  and  I  do
                 find that this is behaviour which comes under Section 8  of
                 the 2004 Act as behaviour which was designed to mislead."

  13. Then at para 43 the Judge dealt with that issue in the context of  the
      appellant's failure to claim asylum in a safe third country which,  if
      established, is also conduct falling within s.8 of the 2004 Act.   The
      Judge said this:

           "43.  The appellant by his own account did not claim  asylum  in
                 any country through which he passed on his journey  to  the
                 United Kingdom. No criticism can be levied against him  for
                 not claiming asylum in Greece which, it has been  accepted,
                 does  not  apply  international  standards  properly.    In
                 respect of  Italy,  France  and  Belgium  however  all  are
                 accepted as safe countries  which  do  apply  international
                 law.  In Italy it is noteworthy that the appellant had come
                 to the attention of the proper  authorities  (the  "Network
                 Italiano Richiedenti Asilo Sopravvissuti a Torture"  -  the
                 Italian network for those requesting asylum  and  survivors
                 of torture) as he had been given  medication  following  an
                 examination by a psychiatrist at Bari on 7th  August  2010.
                 Given the assistance which had been given to him  by  Italy
                 it is hard to see any reason why the  appellant  would  not
                 have claimed asylum other than personal choice.  Indeed  he
                 did say that in Italy even  those  who  have  been  granted
                 asylum still have to live on the streets.   In  France  and
                 Belgium similar conclusions follow and I find he could have
                 claimed asylum in either of these countries.  Both are safe
                 countries where the appellant would have been free to claim
                 asylum. I do not accept his account that  he  had  no  idea
                 where he was going and would have preferred to go to Norway
                 and Sweden.  If this was the case his route would have been
                 northwards across Europe rather than  northwest  and  there
                 would have been no need for him to ever be in  Belgium.   I
                 find that his destination was the United Kingdom  and  that
                 his failure to claim asylum while in a safe  country  is  a
                 further reason to apply Section 8 of the 2004  Act  and  to
                 conclude that by reason of the engagement of that  Act  his
                 credibility is undermined."

  14. It was not suggested before me that if the appellant had, in fact, not
      claimed asylum or been granted asylum in Turkey  and  Italy  that  the
      Judge's reasoning in relation to s.8 of the 2004 Act was  in  any  way
      flawed.  Clearly, the appellant's failure to claim asylum in Italy and
      to lie to the UK authorities that he had been granted asylum in  Italy
      (and Turkey) would fall within s.8 and would be behaviour  potentially
      "damaging" of his credibility.  Further, there is no  doubt  that  the
      Judge was entitled to find, on the evidence before him, including  the
      appellant's own conflicting evidence but his unambiguous oral evidence
      at the hearing, that he had not claimed asylum prior to coming to  the
      UK.  Consequently, Mr Manley's submission  relies  entirely  upon  the
      proposition that the "mistake of fact" by the  Judge  amounted  to  an
      error of law.  The leading authority is E v SSHD: R v SSHD [2004] EWCA
      Civ 49 which I drew to the representatives' attention at the  hearing.
       In that case, the Court of Appeal accepted that  a  mistake  of  fact
      giving rise to unfairness could amount to an error of law.  Having set
      out at some length the previous authorities, Carnwath  LJ  (delivering
      the judgment of the Court) stated at [66] that:

           "66.  In our view, the time  has  now  come  to  accept  that  a
                 mistake of fact giving rise to  unfairness  is  a  separate
                 head of challenge in an appeal on a point of law, at  least
                 in those statutory contexts  where  the  parties  share  an
                 interest in cooperating  to  achieve  the  correct  result.
                 Asylum law is undoubtedly such an area."

  15. Thus far, E &  R  provides  some  support  to  Mr  Manley's  principal
      submission.  At [66], Carnwath LJ went on to set out the  requirements
      to establish this new head of challenge as follows:

           "66.  ....First, there  must  have  been  a  mistake  as  to  an
                 existing fact, including a mistake as to  the  availability
                 of evidence on a particular matter.  Secondly, the fact  or
                 evidence must have been 'established', in the sense that it
                 was un-contentious and  objectively  verifiable.   Thirdly,
                 the  appellant  (or  his  advisors)  must  not  have   been
                 responsible for the mistake.  Fourthly,  the  mistake  must
                 have played a material (not necessarily decisive)  part  in
                 the Tribunal's reasoning".

  16. The first two requirements are met.  There is not doubt that  in  this
      appeal there has been a "mistake as to an existing fact" and that that
      fact is  "uncontentious  and  objectively  verifiable".   The  crucial
      issue, in my judgement,  relates  to  the  third  requirement,  namely
      whether it can be said that the appellant (or his  advisers)  was  not
      responsible for that mistake.   In my judgement, that  requirement  is
      not made out in this appeal.  Although the appellant initially (at his
      screening interview) said that he had claimed (and had  been  granted)
      asylum in Italy and Turkey, he expressly recanted that evidence at the
      hearing in his oral evidence. The mistake (if  that  is  what  it  can
      properly be called in the light of the variance in the  evidence  from
      the  appellant)  was,  therefore,  of  the  appellant's  own   making.
      Subject  to  Mr  Manley's  submission  in  relation  to  the   Judge's
      assessment of the evidence which I deal  with  below,  the  Judge  was
      entitled to take the appellant's oral evidence on this matter as being
      the truth rather  than  what  he  said  in  his  screening  interview.
      Although the appellant was not represented  at  the  hearing,  he  was
      previously  represented.  At  no  time  did  the  appellant   or   his
      representatives provide any supporting evidence concerning what we now
      know to be the case, namely that he had been granted asylum  in  Italy
      and Turkey.  As I have said, the Judge was entitled  to  rely  on  the
      appellant's unequivocal oral evidence at the  hearing  and  reach  the
      finding that he did.  In my judgement, this  was  not  a  case  where,
      applying the requirements set out in [66] E & R,  that  a  mistake  of
      fact was made  by  the  Judge  which  amounts  to  an  error  of  law.
      Consequently, the Judge was correct to apply s.8 of the 2004 Act.

  17. Secondly, Mr Manley (in his skeleton argument  and  oral  submissions)
      argued that the Judge had erred in law by not  adjourning  the  appeal
      given the appellant's mental health issues and also, having  continued
      the hearing, in assessing the appellant's evidence.   The point arises
      out of the Judge's reasoning in para 38 of his determination.   There,
      the Judge said this:

           "38.  The appellant's account of  being  detained  and  tortured
                 before the demonstration was made for the first time at the
                 hearing.  It is noteworthy that he did have the  assistance
                 of a solicitor in reviewing the interview (Messrs Crowley &
                 Co) who did write in with a series  of  amendments  to  the
                 interview.  If this detention did take place I do not  find
                 it credible that the appellant would only  mention  it  for
                 the first time at the hearing, especially when a  competent
                 immigration solicitor would have  ensured  that  the  whole
                 picture would have been presented before the decision.  The
                 appellant in his screening interview  stated  that  he  had
                 never been in detention and I do not accept his explanation
                 at the hearing  for  this  discrepancy  -  namely  that  he
                 thought this question just related to his time  in  Europe.
                 The question is not so defined.... "

  18. Mr Manley pointed  out  that  the  appellant  was  on  medication  for
      depression and his own evidence, set out by the Judge at  para  19  of
      the determination, was  that  he  was  "under  the  supervision  of  a
      psychiatrist and forgetful of dates".

  19. In my judgement this ground is  not  made  out.   Self-evidently,  the
      Judge had in mind that the appellant was on medication for depression.
       Although the appellant stated that he was under the supervision of  a
      psychiatrist and forgetful, there was no supporting  medical  evidence
      to that effect.  The documents at pages D8-D20 appear to be  documents
      concerned with the appellant's treatment whilst in  Italy.   They  are
      not translated into English.  There is reference to a number of  drugs
      which seem, and it was not suggested to the  contrary  before  me,  to
      relate to treatment for depression.  There was,  however,  apart  from
      the appellant's own evidence nothing to indicate  that  the  appellant
      first, could not properly represent himself; and secondly, to  explain
      why at his screening interview he omitted to mention  altogether  that
      he had been detained and tortured by the police for two days prior  to
      the demonstration in June.  As the Judge made clear in  para  38,  the
      appellant was at that time represented by a  firm  of  solicitors  who
      wrote  to  UKBA  on  7  June  2012  making  a  number  of  points   of
      clarification arising out of the appellant's substantive interview  on
      30 May 2012.  No mention is made of the omission of the  appellant  to
      refer to his detention and torture which he subsequently  referred  to
      for the first time at the hearing before the Judge.   The  appellant's
      own evidence, at its highest, was that his mental condition meant that
      he "forgets dates".  That was not the inconsistency or omission  which
      the Judge relied on in para 38.  The appellant's evidence provides  no
      explanation for the complete omission to mention a two day  period  of
      detention (the only one that he claims to have happened) during  which
      time he was tortured.

  20. Nothing in the evidence before the Judge warranted his adjourning  the
      appeal because of the appellant's mental health  issues  in  order  to
      obtain legal representation or further medical evidence in relation to
      the appellant's mental health.  Nothing in the determination  suggests
      that the appellant was not able to represent himself or suggests  that
      the Judge failed to conduct the hearing fairly and give the  appellant
      a proper opportunity to present his case.   Likewise,  the  Judge  was
      entitled to rely on the appellant's omission to mention his  detention
      and torture during his interview and to raise it for the first time at
      the hearing in reaching his finding that he did not  accept  that  the
      appellant had been detained and tortured as he now claimed.

  21. For these reasons, I reject Mr Manley's second submission.

  22. Thirdly, in his reply Mr Manley relied upon  the  point  made  in  the
      grant of permission to appeal that the Judge's view  that  aspects  of
      the appellant's account were implausible appears to be contrary to the
      background  evidence  on  the  persecutory  response  of  the  Iranian
      authorities to low level demonstrators/Moussavi supporters.  That is a
      reference to a passage in Judge Woolley's determination  at  paragraph
      38 where the Judge said this:

           "38.  ...The appellant says that he was detained for putting  up
           posters but from the country evidence Moussavi had  hundreds  of
           thousands of supporters and election posters  of  Moussavi  must
           have been commonplace throughout  Iran.   The  Country  evidence
           suggests that there were nightly TV debates  between  candidates
           and  that  there  was  a  "mass  distribution  of   computerised
           propaganda" and also that  there  were  some  110  million  text
           messages sent out from the political parties every day.  Against
           this background it is not credible that the appellant would have
           been singled out by the authorities just for putting up posters.
            The appellant had not come to the attention of the  authorities
           before and has not suggested that there  was  any  link  in  the
           authorities' minds between him  and  his  father  who  had  been
           executed by the regime when the appellant was a child.  Even  if
           he was detained for two days as he claims it is  not  consistent
           with the  country  evidence  that  the  authorities  would  have
           released him without charge or without any conditions to  ensure
           his behaviour, especially in such a sensitive  time  before  the
           elections.  And yet the appellant  said  clearly  in  answer  to
           questions at the  hearing  that  he  was  released  without  any
           conditions.  He describes that he was kicked  to  the  face  and
           body with boots  but  has  not  produced  any  evidence  of  any
           injuries he was caused.  He was under the medical  care  of  the
           Italian authorities and has produced  a  certificate  issued  at
           Bari on 7th August 2010.  There is however no  mention  in  this
           certificate of any detention by the authorities, just  as  there
           was no mention in either of his interviews.  I do not find  that
           the appellant's account is credible and do not  accept  that  he
           was ever in detention in Iran.   I  find  that  it  is  a  later
           invention designed to strengthen his claim."

  23. There are  two  difficulties  with  Mr  Manley's  submission.   First,
      neither the Judge in granting  permission  to  appeal  nor  Mr  Manley
      identified the specific background information concerning Iran  which,
      it is postulated, contradicts the Judge's conclusion that it was  "not
      credible that the appellant would be singled out  by  the  authorities
      just for putting up posters".  To the extent that it is also said that
      the Judge's view that it is not consistent with the  country  evidence
      that the authorities would release the appellant without charge, again
      the contradictory country evidence is not identified in the  grant  of
      permission  or  by  Mr  Manley  in  his  skeleton  argument  or   oral
      submissions.  Secondly, this reason formed only one of many  given  by
      the Judge for doubting the appellant's credibility. Most particularly,
      in para 38 this passage (now challenged) follows the passage I set out
      earlier in which the Judge stated that he did not "find  it  credible"
      that the appellant was detained given that he had not mentioned it  at
      his two interviews and only for the first time referred to it  at  the
      hearing.

  24. The other issue raised under the  rubric  of  "plausibility"  concerns
      paragraph 39 of the Judge's  determination.   There,  the  Judge  said
      this:

           "39.   The  appellant  in  interview  suggested  that   he   was
                 identified at the demonstration and singled  out  later  by
                 the Etellaat.  I have noted the country information to  the
                 effect that Kovar itself is not mentioned  as  one  of  the
                 cities in which a demonstration took place.  I have however
                 to accept that the absence of Kovar's name from the list is
                 not a convincing reason to deny that any demonstration took
                 place there at all.  There  was  an  upsurge  in  political
                 activity at this time in Iran  and  a  demonstration  could
                 have taken place in Kovar  without  being  recorded.   Even
                 accepting  that  a  demonstration  did  take  place  there,
                 however, I do not accept that the appellant's mere presence
                 at that demonstration is a credible explanation of why  the
                 Etellaat were interested in him.   There  wee  on  his  own
                 account a thousand demonstrators and the numbers of  police
                 were small.  They would have been preoccupied certainly  in
                 the first few hours with controlling the  demonstration  to
                 actively  engage  in  intelligence  gathering   about   the
                 participants.   The  appellant   says   that   there   were
                 photographs being taken  but  does  not  say  that  he  did
                 anything out of the ordinary at the demonstration  or  that
                 he was singled out by the police in any way.  Even  if  his
                 photograph had been taken it would have been one face in  a
                 thousand and I do not find  it  credible  that  the  police
                 would have been able to  identify  him  so  quickly  as  to
                 attempt a raid on his house at 3.00 am  the  next  morning.
                 He says that in Kovar everyone knows everyone else  but  in
                 the case of a man who had not come to the attention of  the
                 authorities  before  (I  have  not  found  his  account  of
                 detention to be credible) it is not credible that a man  of
                 good character would have been singled out at such an early
                 stage as opposed to the organisers of the demonstration  or
                 of any student activities who may have been present.  I  do
                 not find that the appellant is credible in his  account  of
                 the demonstration and its aftermath.  He  was  not  singled
                 out in the demonstration and was not arrested at it.  I  do
                 not find that he was identified at the demonstration by the
                 authorities or that Etellaat raided his house."

  25. In his skeleton argument, Mr Manley submitted that  the  Judge's  view
      was  not  supported  by  reference  to  specific  objective  evidence.
      Further, it is said that it is inconsistent with the respondent's view
      expressed at para 44 of the refusal letter that the Iranian government
      had a "long standing suspicion" for the  Ghashghaye  of  which  ethnic
      group the appellant is a member.  In my judgment, this is no more than
      a disagreement with the Judge's assessment of the  evidence.   It  was
      open to the Judge to find that it was not likely  that  the  appellant
      was identified by photographs or otherwise (as one out of  a  thousand
      people) by the Etellaat so that his house was raided at  3.00  am  the
      next morning.  Having rejected the appellant's  account  that  he  had
      previously been involved in a demonstration, it was  not  perverse  or
      irrational of the Judge to conclude that the  appellant's  account  of
      being tracked down at his home, simply because he was involved in such
      a large demonstration, was not credible.

  26. For these reasons, the Judge did note  err  in  law  in  reaching  his
      adverse credibility finding and rejecting the appellant's account  and
      consequently to find that he had failed to establish that he would  be
      at risk on return to Iran.

Decision

  27.  Thus  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss   the
      appellant's appeal on asylum grounds did not involve the making of  an
      error of law and its decision stands.

  28.  The  First-tier  Tribunal's  decisions  to  dismiss  the  appeal   on
      humanitarian protection grounds and under Articles 2, 3 and 8 were not
      challenged and stand.

  29. The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
