

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06022/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Birmingham Employment      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Tribunal                                     |                               |
|On 8th September 2015                        |On 30th September 2015         |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     A M
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Nwaiwu of Jernek solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify the original Appellant. This  direction  applies
       to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply  with  this
       direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.





   2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal a decision of  the  FtT
      dismissing his appeal  against  removal  on  international  protection
      grounds. The appellant relied upon four grounds:


   a) That the FtT judge had failed to set out clearly and apply the correct
      burden and standard of proof
   b) The FtT judge had failed to take into account arguments set out in the
      skeleton argument before him and the background material;
   c) The FtT judge had failed to take into account material evidence;
   d) The FtT judge had erred in the credibility findings.


      Background


   3. The appellant, an Iranian citizen date of birth  22nd  November  1991,
      arrived in the UK clandestinely on  28th  December  2013  and  claimed
      asylum. The respondent did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  an
      Iranian citizen and considered  him  to  be  Iraqi.  Nevertheless  she
      considered his asylum claim as if he were Iranian and  concluded  that
      his account lacked credibility and his  removal  (either  to  Iraq  or
      Iran) would not breach the refugee convention.


   4. The FtT judge concluded on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
      appellant was an Iranian citizen.  There  was  no  challenge  to  that
      finding by the respondent either in the Rule 24 response or before me.




      Error of law


   5. The FtT judge found the appellant's account of how he  left  Iran  not
      credible. He  found  that  the  appellant  had  'attended  possibly  2
      demonstrations of indeterminate size' ([69]; that the  'only  evidence
      produced shows that he may have attended 2 demonstrations and there is
      no evidence he was prominent either in participation or  organisation'
      ([71]); that 'Since [the  FtT  judge]  do  not  find  the  appellant's
      evidence to be credible, [the FtT judge]  also  consider  the  alleged
      taking away of 2 CD's [sic]  from  his  parents'  home  to  have  been
      recounted with a view to enhancing his alleged  fear  of  persecution'
      ([74]); that 'It was not argued before  [the  FtT  judge]  that  these
      activities (photographic evidence of  alleged  sur  place  activities)
      increased his fear of persecution' ([69]).


   6. The evidence before  the  FtT  judge  included  more  than  photos  of
      attendance at two demonstrations. Also before the  FtT  judge  in  the
      appellant's witness statements was the appellant's  evidence  of  five
      separate activities whereas it was submitted the judge  only  referred
      to the two demonstrations. The  skeleton  argument  before  the  judge
      submitted that the appellant's activities in the UK increased the risk
      of persecution if returned to Iran. The judge  has  erred  in  stating
      that was not a submission made.


   7. Mr Richards submitted that although there were some errors made by the
      judge in terms of the number of the appellant's activities in  the  UK
      and the submission as regards sur place activities, overall the  judge
      had considered the evidence and reached sustainable conclusions.


   8. A significant difficulty with that submission is the  judge's  finding
      in [74] as referred to above. The judge has  failed  to  consider  the
      evidence in the round and has made significant findings predicated  on
      earlier  findings  as  to  the  credibility  of  the  appellant.   The
      determination  cannot  be  read  as  the  judge  making  findings   on
      consideration of the evidence as a whole but rather he  made  findings
      and then specifically because of those  findings  he  reached  further
      adverse findings which are significant to the decision overall.


   9. I am therefore satisfied that the  FtT  judge  erred  in  law  in  his
      approach to the evidence  before  him  and  reached  findings  without
      considering the evidence in its totality.


  10. I set aside the decision to be remade.

   Remaking of the decision

  11. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act  2007  does  not
      assign the function of primary fact finding  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
      Where a decision is set aside s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me  to
      remit the case to the First-tier with directions or remake it  myself.
      Where the facts are disputed or unclear I conclude that  the  decision
      should be remitted to the First tier judge to determine the appeal.


  12. It was agreed by the parties that none of the findings  of  FtT  Judge
      Butler are preserved.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     The appeal is remitted to the FtT to be remade; no findings  preserved.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

                                    Date 29th September 2015
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
