
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th April 2015                            |On 22nd May 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                           khatereh alipour naeimi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Tetty of Counsel instructed by Switalski's
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hillis
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 14th October 2014.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 30th May 1977.  She and  her
    children left Iran around 11th September 2013 and travelled by lorry to
    the UK arriving on 10th October 2013 when she claimed asylum.   She  is
    of Arab ethnicity and a Shia but her husband  converted  to  the  Sunni
    faith.  He was a bank manager and, she said, worked with supporters  of
    Arabs in Ahvaz, helping them financially.   As  a  consequence  he  was
    transferred to another bank and closely monitored.  In February 2013 he
    was arrested and in June the authorities came to arrest her.   She  was
    detained for 10 days.  Her youngest son was born on  30th  August  2013
    and when he was 8 days old the authorities came to her home and she was
    told by a friend of her husband's that  she  should  prepare  to  leave
    Iran.

 3. The Secretary  of  State  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  of  Arab
    ethnicity but by her own evidence she had not actually faced any direct
    discrimination.  It was not accepted that her husband had converted  to
    the Sunni faith or that he was a bank manager or that he  was  arrested
    or that either of them came to the  attention  of  the  authorities  in
    Iran.

 4. The  judge  set  out  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  and  the
    submissions of both parties.  He rejected the  respondent's  submission
    that inconsistencies between the screening interview  and  her  present
    account adversely affected her credibility because  she  had  not  been
    provided with  an  interpreter  in  her  main  language,  and  she  was
    interviewed shortly after being removed from a lorry with her children.
     Moreover, she was also informed that she would not be asked to go into
    detail about her asylum claim.

 5. The judge was provided with a number of documents.  First, there was  a
    letter from the Ahwazi Democratic Front which confirmed  that  she  had
    been persecuted in Iran due to the activities of her  husband  and  his
    conversion to the Sunni faith.   However  it  gave  no  detail  of  his
    activities and nor did it mention her husband's imprisonment.

 6. There was also a letter  from  the  Lincoln  Green  Mosque  dated  19th
    September 2014 which confirmed  that  she  and  her  children  attended
    there, and had declared themselves to be members of the Sunni  sect  to
    the best of their knowledge.  However it did not  say  that  they  were
    members of the mosque and gave no indication that  she  had  ever  been
    regarded as a member of the Shia faith or that she had  converted  from
    it to the Sunni faith.  Moreover the letter gave no indication that the
    author was aware of the use to which the letter was being put.

 7. Documents were produced in relation  to  the  appellant's  husband,  in
    particular from the bank where he was employed, but the letter gave  no
    detail of his job description or salary and the judge concluded that it
    did not support the contention that he occupied a  senior  position  or
    that he did not conform to the bank's policies.  He inferred from  them
    that he worked as a  level  5  bank  manager  in  Ahvaz  and  was  then
    transferred to the Khuzestan branch but there was no evidence  to  show
    that the transfer  was  either  a  promotion,  a  sideways  move  or  a
    demotion.  There was a document showing a judicial order  was  obtained
    in the Khuzestan province,  and  that  the  prisoner,  the  appellant's
    husband was to be escorted to the "coroner"  at  Ahvaz  for  a  medical
    examination and that a report of the outcome was to be sent back to the
    court.  It did not state whether he was in police custody or in  prison
    following a conviction or awaiting trial for any  offence.   The  judge
    concluded that it provided no evidential support for the claim that her
    husband was being persecuted as opposed to  being  prosecuted  lawfully
    for an alleged criminal offence in accordance with Iranian law.

 8. He concluded as follows:

         "I  therefore  conclude  that  the  documentation  shows  that  the
         appellant's husband joined the  Refah  Bank  at  Ahvaz  branch  and
         appears to have progressed in his career to attain  the  status  of
         level 5  bank  manager  by  9th  February  2012  and  that  he  was
         transferred to the Khuzestan branch.  I also  find  they  offer  no
         support to the claim that he was discriminated against at the  bank
         and  targeted  for  observation  by  the  Iranian  authorities  for
         anything other than a valid criminal offence and that he  is  being
         persecuted in Iran as opposed  to  prosecuted  in  a  proper  legal
         fashion.   Additionally  there  is  no  mention  of   his   alleged
         conversion from the Shia to the Sunni faith of Islam."

 9. So far  as  the  conversion  was  concerned,  the  appellant's  witness
    statement said that the authorities in Iran  would  have  targeted  her
    husband if his secret conversion to the Sunni  faith  had  been  known.
    This was in direct contradiction to her oral testimony  when  she  said
    that the government were initially unaware of his conversion  but  once
    they found out they arrested him and took him away before she left Iran
    for the UK.  She would not have made a mistake as to whether or not her
    husband's claimed secret conversion had been discovered  if  the  claim
    was genuine, and he rejected it.

10. In relation  to  the  targeting  of  her  husband,  he  said  that  the
    appellant's  account  of  the  assistance  her  husband  gave  to  Arab
    customers was vague and not from her own personal  knowledge.   He  did
    not find it credible that her husband as an Arab would continue  to  be
    employed if he was discriminated against as claimed and was  acting  in
    breach of the bank's lending policy to Arabs.

11. The appellant  claims  to  have  been  arrested  and  detained  on  two
    occasions, the first when she was three months' pregnant and the second
    when seven months' pregnant.  There was no medical evidence.

12. There was a discrepancy in relation to the lodging of the  house  deeds
    as surety.  In her witness statement the appellant said that her father
    placed his house deeds as surety whereas in oral evidence she said that
    it was not the house her father lived in but another  house  he  owned.
    There was a further contradiction in relation to the period of time she
    spent at her father's home after her release.

13. Moreover, the appellant had no passport and claimed to have taken her 3
    children, one of whom was only 9 days old across the border into Turkey
    without any difficulty.  The judge did not accept that she  could  have
    survived a 15 day journey from Turkey to the UK with a 9 day old  child
    without any apparent need for medical attention on arrival in the UK.

14. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

15. The appellant sought permission to appeal  in  very  detailed  grounds,
    challenging the judge's conclusions.

16. First in respect of her route to the UK,  there  was  an  inconsistency
    between the judge's acceptance of her state of mind  at  the  screening
    interview and his conclusions about her journey,  which  had  not  been
    challenged by the respondent.  Reaching   adverse  conclusions  without
    giving an opportunity to address his concerns amounted to a  procedural
    irregularity.

17. Second, the judge had acknowledged that Iranian authorities  would  not
    issue a document stating that they hold him in  custody  for  being  an
    Arab bank manager who failed to discriminate against other  Arabs,  and
    he had therefore erred  in  expecting  the  documents  to  support  the
    appellant's case so far as her husband's occupation was concerned.  The
    judge was required to  consider  her  written  and  oral  evidence  and
    contrast it with the country evidence to consider whether  the  account
    was reasonably likely to be true which he had failed to do.  He had not
    properly explained why he believed her husband  was  in  detention  for
    prosecution rather than persecution.

18. Any medical evidence could not categorically prove that  the  appellant
    had received injuries as a result of her ill-treatment.

19. The judge had failed to properly consider  the  answers  given  in  her
    asylum interview when the appellant said that she did not call  herself
    a Shia because of the wrongs that they do, and  that  the  majority  of
    Arabs of Ahvaz have converted to Sunni.

20. Finally he had not properly considered the country guidance case of  SA
    (Iranian Arabs) [2011] UKUT 41 which held  that  the  authorities  were
    suspicious of Iranian Arabs and such people might be interrogated  more
    vigorously or which enhances the risk on return. The appellant would be
    going back to Iran as a failed asylum seeker  from  London,  an  Ahwazi
    Arab who had exited illegally and would be  interrogated  and  detained
    upon arrival.  If that is the case her detention would breach Article 3
    of  the  ECHR  according  to  the  Respondent's  own  evidence  in  its
    Operational Guidance Note.

21. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Macdonald  on  1st
    December 2014.

22. On 4th December 2014  the  Respondent  served  a  reply  defending  the
    determination.



Submissions

23. Mr Tetty relied on the grounds.  Turkey's border with Iran  was  porous
    and the judge had failed to give clear reasons for his  findings.   The
    appellant had given brief details  of  her  journey  in  her  screening
    interview when she said that she had come by lorry  and  it  had  taken
    about 15 days, and in her substantive interview when she said that  she
    did not  know  all  the  countries  but  she  made  the  journey  in  a
    lorry/trailer.

24. The documents which had been produced substantiated the account; it was
    perfectly plausible  that  the  appellant's  husband  would  have  been
    persecuted for assisting Arab customers as  he  claimed.   The  country
    material was supportive in relation to the detention.

25. Finally the judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  the  submission  that
    according  to  the  Respondent's  OGN  it  was  accepted  that   prison
    conditions in Iran breached Article 3 of the ECHR and  accordingly,  if
    detained at the airport, the appellant would be at risk  of  Article  3
    ill-treatment.

26. Mrs Pettersen defended the determination and made the following points.
    She submitted that the judge was entitled to rely on the contradictions
    between the witness statement and the  oral  evidence  in  relation  to
    whether the appellant's husband kept his  conversion  secret.   He  was
    entitled not to accept the evidence of the journey from Turkey  to  the
    UK particularly as she had had a caesarean operation only 9 days before
    she left and the baby was still very young.  He had looked  at  all  of
    the documentary evidence in the round and  entitled  to  conclude  that
    they did not say what the appellant claimed.  The detention was tied to
    the issue of whether the authorities knew of the  conversion.   Finally
    the OGN did not support the submission that questioning at the  airport
    would breach Article 3.

Findings and conclusions

27. There is no error in this determination and the overly lengthy  grounds
    amount to a mere disagreement with the decision.

28. The grounds fail to address the key issue before the  judge  which  was
    the discrepancy in the evidence in  relation  to  whether  the  Iranian
    authorities were aware of the claimed conversion or not, and which goes
    to the heart of this claim.

29. First, with respect to the journey, this is not a core element  of  the
    appellant's case but in any  event  the  judge  was  entitled  to  have
    reasonable doubts that a woman who had just undergone major surgery and
    had a newborn baby would be able to undertake such an  arduous  journey
    in a lorry over 15 days without requiring medical attention, which cast
    clear doubt upon her claim to have exited illegally.

30. Second, there is no error in his consideration of the documents. It was
    open to him to place little weight upon them for the reasons  which  he
    gave.

31. So far as the letter from the Ahwazi Democratic Front is concerned, the
    judge was perfectly entitled to regard it as vague, giving no detail of
    the activities of her husband  and  failing  to  mention  that  he  was
    imprisoned.  The letter from Lincoln Green Mosque does not confirm  the
    claim that the appellant is a convert from the Shia  faith.   The  bank
    documents confirm his employment but  nothing  else,  and  whilst  they
    could not be expected to confirm the details of the appellant's  claim,
    the fact that they do not is not evidence  in  her  favour.   They  are
    neutral.  There is evidence that the appellant's husband was imprisoned
    but no detail whatsoever is given for the reason for his incarceration.



32. So far as risk on return as an Iranian Arab is  concerned  the  country
    guidance states in terms that there is no risk of persecution or  other
    ill-treatment solely by reason of  ethnicity.   It  was  accepted  that
    being an Arab returned from the UK enhances other risk factors but,  on
    the sustainable findings of  the  judge,  no  other  risk  factors  are
    present in this case.

33. The submission that the OGN supports the claim that questioning at  the
    airport risks Article 3 ill-treatment is misplaced.  It does not.   The
    fact that prison conditions may breach Article 3 is not  evidence  that
    such a risk arises from detention at an airport.

34. Overall this is a  wholly  sustainable  determination  and  the  overly
    lengthy grounds disclose no arguable error of law.

Notice of Decision

35. The original  decision  shall  stand  and  the  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.

36. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

