

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06666/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 November 2013                           |On 5 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                     CONCOLATA TINGIRIZINYANI ZVIRIKUZHE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Fountains Solicitors, Walsall
For the Respondent:    Ms M Morgan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. On 20 September 2013, the appellant was granted  permission  to  appeal
    against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler.   Judge
    Pooler had dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's immigration decision of 9 July 2013 to remove the appellant  as
    a person subject to administrative removal  whose  asylum/human  rights
    claim has been refused.

 2. The grounds of application which stand as the grounds  of  appeal  fall
    under six headings.  I deal with them in turn, taking into  account  Mr
    Howard's amplification of the grounds during his submissions.

 3. Firstly, the judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  finding  that,
    despite accepting that the appellant was heavily involved in the United
    Kingdom  with  organisations  working  for  peace  and  justice  which,
    according to the appellant's evidence, required her  to  criticise  the
    Zimbabwean regime, she did not have a well-founded fear of  persecution
    in Zimbabwe.

 4. Secondly, the judge failed to  identify  all  the  risks  factors  that
    applied to the appellant and thereby did not follow binding  case  law.
    The judge accepted that  the  appellant's  brother  and  son  may  have
    experienced difficulties in Zimbabwe. Similarly, the  judge  failed  to
    take adequately assess whether the appellant would  be  disbelieved  in
    Zimbabwe by the authorities as to whether she supported the regime.  By
    not giving appropriate weight to these two factors the judge failed  to
    follow the Supreme Court's approach in RT (Zimbabwe) and KM  (Zimbabwe)
    v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38 which found that these  issues  would  enhance  a
    person's the risks on return.

 5. Thirdly, the judge made contradictory findings in that at paragraph  31
    he recorded that the appellant had said,  "She  has  never  engaged  in
    political activity", whilst in her witness statement  she  had  clearly
    indicated her political activity.

 6. Fourthly, the judge applied the wrong test when assessing  whether  the
    immigration decision was proportionate in relation to article  8  ECHR.
    The judge had found that the appellant enjoyed private and family  life
    in the United Kingdom and that her private and  family  life  would  be
    disrupted should she be required to leave.  The  judge  had  failed  to
    give proper weight to the fact that the appellant had provided  support
    to her daughter who had mental health difficulties and support for  her
    grandchildren who were otherwise at risk of being taken into care.

 7. Fifthly, the judge had failed to have due regard to the best  interests
    of the children.  The children are British citizens and  they  rely  on
    the appellant for support.  The judge failed to identify countervailing
    features to show that removal would be proportionate.  Mr  Howard  took
    me to paragraph 60 of the determination where Judge Pooler had assessed
    proportionality in relation to the potential for the children suffering
    significant harm.  Mr Howard argued this was the wrong legal test.

 8. Sixthly, and on the same point, the judge failed to have due regard  to
    section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009.
    Although the judge found that the best interests of the  children  were
    that the appellant should remain in the United Kingdom, the  judge  did
    not rank  this  factor  higher  than  other  factors  when  determining
    proportionality.

 9. Ms Morgan relied on the rule 24 response of 5 October 2013, which was a
    detailed reply  to  each  of  the  grounds.   She  submitted  that  the
    determination was well reasoned and omitted nothing.  The appeal failed
    because of the lack  of  relevant  reliable  evidence  to  support  the
    appellant's claims.

10. The appellant had been a high ranking nurse in Zimbabwe and  would  not
    be at risk on return, and in any event would be able to relocate.   The
    judge found that the appellant's activities in the United  Kingdom  did
    not amount to political activity that would attract the interest of the
    Zimbabwean authorities.  He was entitled to come to that finding as  it
    amounted to a finding that the appellant did  not  have  a  significant
    political profile.

11. Although the appellant had travelled to the United Kingdom in  2003  to
    support her daughter and grandchildren, she had overstayed.  There  was
    no clear evidence that the current situation required the appellant  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  It was for the appellant  to  show  that
    her absence would have negative consequences  for  her  grandchildren's
    well-being.  The evidence of such consequences  was  very  limited  and
    from friends, who although qualified to comment on such  matters,  gave
    personal rather than professional opinions.   It was open to the  judge
    to take account of the limited evidence and find against the appellant.

12. In reply, Mr Howard took me through the evidence that was available  to
    Judge Pooler regarding the children's best interests.

13. Having examined the determination, the evidence and after having regard
    to all the arguments presented, I am  satisfied  that  the  grounds  of
    application are merely an attempt to re-litigate the  appeal.   I  find
    there is no error whatsoever in the judge's findings.  My  reasons  are
    as follow.

14. There is no irrationality in the judge's finding that the appellant has
    been active in justice and peace organisations in  the  United  Kingdom
    but would not be of interest to the Zimbabwean  authorities.   This  is
    because the judge did not accept  that  the  activities  in  which  the
    appellant has  been  involved  would  be  regarded  by  the  Zimbabwean
    authorities as anti-regime.  The judge set out in detail  his  findings
    and reasons on this issue in paragraph 26, relying on the fact that her
    concern for peace and justice was far removed from a  focused  interest
    in Zimbabwean political issues.  The  appellant  provided  no  evidence
    from an independent source or any  background  country  information  to
    suggest that the judge could not reasonably come to this conclusion.

15. Similarly, Judge Pooler's findings regarding what risks  the  appellant
    might face because of the difficulties her brother and son  encountered
    in Zimbabwe are properly set out in paragraph 27.   The  Supreme  Court
    case law describes such factors as ones that might enhance an  existing
    risk of persecution and  does  not  go  so  far  a  to  say  that  such
    relationships might be a further risk factor.  Judge Pooler is  correct
    in identifying that there is no authority suggesting that the appellant
    would be targeted because of her relationship to her  brother  and  son
    and, having found she is not at risk  herself  for  political  reasons,
    would not encounter an enhanced risk.

16. With  regard  to  the  criticisms  relating  to  paragraph  31  of  the
    determination, it is clear they stem from a misreading  of  what  Judge
    Pooler wrote.  The grounds take the phrase out of context  since  Judge
    Pooler was,  at  this  point  of  his  determination,  looking  at  the
    appellant's activities in Zimbabwe.  The appellant has never claimed to
    have been politically active in Zimbabwe.

17. In light of these conclusions, I find there is no legal  error  in  the
    judge's findings relating to asylum.

18. The  remaining  three  grounds  all  challenge  the  judicial  findings
    relating to the assessment of proportionality.   The  grounds  seek  to
    misrepresent what Judge Pooler  found.   He  carefully  looked  at  the
    reasons that brought the  appellant  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    current situations of the appellant and her daughter and grandchildren.
     Judge Pooler identified a serious lack of up to  date  evidence  about
    the best interests of the children and how  their  wellbeing  might  be
    affected should the appellant be removed.

19. The Court of Appeal identified in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    550, [2013] WLR(D) 192 that the  adversarial  nature  of  the  Tribunal
    meant that it would not generally be able  or  required  to  embark  on
    investigations of its own even in situations where the  best  interests
    of children had to be considered.  I am aware that in this  appeal  the
    appellant was legally represented and no doubt  was  advised  that  the
    burden of proof lay on her to show  what  the  best  interests  of  the
    children were.  In such circumstances it was for the judge to  consider
    the evidence presented.  It is clear that this  is  what  Judge  Pooler
    did.  In paragraphs 45 to 47 he set out the historical support provided
    by the appellant and the reasons for that.  In paragraphs 48 to  52  he
    examines the very limited evidence relating to  the  current  situation
    and in paragraph 53 sets out the difficulties this posed.

20. In paragraphs 54 to 59, Judge Pooler weighed the evidence and concluded
    that the immigration decision was proportionate.  It is evident that he
    took into account all the factors that arose in this appeal and weighed
    them together.

21. The legal arguments raised are that he  did  not  prioritise  the  best
    interests of the children and that  he  applied  a  "significant  harm"
    test.  I do not agree.  The judge identified in paragraph  54  that  it
    was in the children's best interest for the appellant to remain in  the
    United Kingdom.  He then went on to consider whether that consideration
    was displaced and he found that it was.  He found  that  contact  would
    change but would not end if the appellant returned to Zimbabwe  and  he
    considered that there was no  evidence  that  the  appellant's  removal
    would result in the children suffering significant harm, which is  akin
    to saying that they would not encounter a level of hardship that  would
    be contrary to article 8 should  the  appellant  be  removed  from  the
    United Kingdom.  This is fully consistent with Strasbourg and  domestic
    principles and law.

22. The grounds seek to find difficulties in the determination where  there
    are none.  They are merely disagreement with  the  legitimate  findings
    made by the judge and do not disclose any legal error.

Decision

The determination of Judge Pooler does not contain any error on a  point  of
law and is upheld.




                               Signed                 Date: 12 November
                                   2013


                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
