
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06369/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 March 2016                              |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     T M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Rawat, Counsel instructed by the Government
                    Legal Department
For the Respondent:    Mr G Denholm, Counsel instructed by Immigration
Advice Service


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He is a citizen of Eritrea and his date of  birth
    is [ ] 1989.  He made an application for asylum and this was refused by
    the Secretary of State on 24 March 2015.  He appealed  and  his  appeal
    was allowed by Judge Thornton following a  hearing  on  22  June  2015.
    Permission was granted to the Secretary  of  State  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Jordan on 4 August 2015.  Thus the matter came before me.

2.   The appellant's evidence (in a nutshell) is that he is a  deserter  and
    illegally exited Eritrea.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  illegal
    exit, but did not accept that he was a deserter  because  of  perceived
    internal inconsistencies in his evidence.  The application was  refused
    by the Secretary of State because it was decided that there had been  a
    significant change in the country situation since MO  (illegal  exit  -
    risk on return) Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT 00190 and MA  (Draft  evaders  -
    illegal departures - risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059  and  reliance
    was placed on the Country Information and  Guidance  Reports  of  March
    2015 which were informed by the Danish  Immigration  Service's  (  "the
    DIS") Fact-Finding  Mission  Report  ("FFM  report")  in  justifying  a
    departure from the country guidance cases.

3.   The Upper Tribunal in MO concluded that the  general  position  adopted
    in MA, namely that a person of or approaching draft age, i.e.  aged  18
    or over and not above the upper age limits for military service,  being
    under 54 for men and under 47 for women, and not  medically  unfit  and
    who is accepted to have left Eritrea illegally is reasonably likely  to
    be regarded with  serious  hostility  on  return,  subject  to  limited
    exceptions.  The Upper Tribunal decided  that  the  great  majority  of
    failed asylum seekers  are  likely  to  be  perceived  as  having  left
    illegally and this would mean, save for very limited  exceptions,  that
    they face a real risk of persecution or serious  harm.   Thus  applying
    the guidance in MO  (in  the  light  of  the  concession  made  by  the
    Secretary of State that the appellant has illegally exited Eritrea) the
    appellant's appeal fell to be allowed on asylum grounds.

4.   The FFM report published in  November  2014  recorded  observations  on
    penalties for illegal exit and likely treatment on return.  The sources
    in the report were not identified by name, save Professor Kibreab,  but
    referred to as international organisation or western embassy A, B and C
    etc.  There was also  an  unnamed  source  described  as  a  well-known
    intellectual.  Reliance was placed by the Secretary  of  State  on  the
    conclusion in the report that an illegal  exiter/draft  evader/deserter
    who had paid 2% income tax and signed an apology letter would not  face
    problems  and  that  the  authorities  had  become  more  relaxed   and
    understanding towards the young people who have left Eritrea.  Thus the
    conclusions indicated that a significant change had taken  place  since
    MO.

5.   The Secretary of State's position is that the  country  guidance  cases
    are inconsistent with the more up-to-date evidence,  namely  the  March
    2015 reports and FFM report, and should no longer be followed. Applying
    the March 2015 reports and the conclusions in the  FFM,  the  appellant
    would not be at risk.

6.   Professor Kibreab  has  distanced  himself  from  the  FFM  report  and
    following this the DIS has removed reference to him and his evidence in
    the report and reissued  the  report  (in  December  2014).   Professor
    Kibreab and others (including  UNHCR,  UN  and  HRW)  have  extensively
    criticised the findings of the FFM.

7.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Thornton
    in a decision promulgated on 6 July 2015.   The  judge  heard  evidence
    from the appellant and considered whether there should be  a  departure
    from the country guidance cases.

8.   The judge made the following findings at [14] and [15]:

         "14. It is therefore paragraph 12 of the Upper Tribunal Immigration
             and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No 2  that  is  relevant
             here.  In stating in the Reasons for Refusal Letter that I was
             allowed to depart from the country guidance cases of MO and MA
             in light of new evidence, the Respondent was  relying  on  the
             Danish  Immigration  Service's  Fact-Finding   Mission   (FFM)
             Report, published in November 2014  and  updated  in  December
             2014 (quoted in the Country Information and Guidance, Eritrea,
             National (including military) Service, 2.8.1  -  2.8.2,  March
             2015).  However, in a press release on Tuesday 9 December 2014
             the Danish Immigration Service said that it  had  changed  its
             mind about the conclusions in  its  report,  issuing  a  press
             release saying that this was due to reactions  to  its  report
             raising doubts about  the  report;  and  that  Eritreans  were
             likely to be granted asylum in Denmark even  if  they  weren't
             personally persecuted.  Moreover,  the  findings  in  the  DIS
             Report are not supported by recent  background  evidence  from
             other sources, for example from Human Rights Watch and the  UN
             Human Rights Report on Eritrea.  (Appellant's bundle pages 6 -
             32).


         15.  I therefore find that I do not have before  me  such  credible
             fresh evidence as to allow  me  to  depart  from  the  country
             guidance caselaw of MO and MA."


9.   It is asserted by the Secretary of  State  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly consider the  FFM  report  and  failed  to  give  reasons  for
    rejecting it. It is asserted that the  evidence  that  was  before  the
    judge was not properly examined and analysed.    It  is  asserted  that
    the judge inaccurately stated that the DIS changed its mind  about  the
    conclusions of the report.  The report  was  amended  after  the  press
    release, but it has not been retracted.   The  reference  to  Professor
    Kibreab and his evidence has been removed from the  report.   Mr  Rawat
    submitted that the grounds essentially amounted to a reasons challenge.

10.  The appellant did not provide a  bundle  for  the  hearing  before  me.
    However, the Secretary of State provided a bundle  which  included  the
    appellant's bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal (and index).
     The following documents were before the judge;

    1.   A document entitled "Statement on EU  Asylum  and  Aid  Policy  to
         Eritrea of 31 March 2015".  This  document  is  signed  by  various
         academics including Professor Kibreab and the authors indicate that
         the FFM report has been the source of much controversy  in  Denmark
         after Professor Kibreab declared that he  had  been  misquoted  and
         that although the report has  not  been  officially  withdrawn  its
         conclusions are no  longer  used  as  a  reference  for  policy  in
         Denmark.

    2.   A document from Human Rights Concern  Eritrea  expressing  concern
         about the findings of the FFM.

    3.   A report from  HRW  dated  17  December  2014  entitled  "Denmark:
         Eritrea Immigration Report Deeply  Flawed  -  European  Governments
         Should Rely on UN Reports, Support UN  Inquiry".   It  is  asserted
         that the FFM report is largely based on interviews  with  anonymous
         diplomatic and other sources in Eritrea and contains  contradictory
         and speculative statements about Eritrea's human rights  situation.
         It is asserted that the  sources  often  qualify  their  statements
         about Eritrea's human rights noting that there  is  no  independent
         access to detention centres and that the fate of people returned to
         Eritrea is unclear, but this is not reflected in the conclusions of
         the FFM.  It is asserted that  there  is  no  indication  that  the
         authors of the report interviewed victims  or  witnesses  of  human
         rights violations in Eritrea  and  a  prominent  Eritrean  academic
         consulted for the report has publicly criticised it.

    4.   A press release from  the  DIS  of  9  December  2014  documenting
         communication between them and Professor  Kibreab.   It  is  stated
         that the DIS received an email from Professor Kibreab in  which  he
         expressed objections to the report.  Corrections and additions were
         made following this.  On Tuesday 25 November 2014  the  report  was
         published and a copy sent to Professor Kibreab who sent the DIS  an
         email in which he expressed his gratitude for  a  well-written  and
         informative report.  On Friday 28 November 2014 the DIS received an
         email from Professor Kibreab in which he  expressed  objections  to
         the FFM report.  On the same day the DIS  received  a  copy  of  an
         email from Professor Kibreab addressed to a number of professionals
         in which he claimed that the  DIS  attributed  information  to  him
         which was taken out  of  context.   The  same  day  the  DIS  asked
         Professor Kibreab to forward to them his objections, but he did not
         respond to this.

    5.   A newspaper article of 10 December 2014 entitled  "Denmark  admits
         'doubts' about Eritrea report" and in this document. It is reported
         that the DIS has been under heavy fire since the  report's  release
         and the  DIS  now  says  that  the  feedback  "raises  doubts"  and
         Eritreans can expect to be granted asylum in  many  cases.   It  is
         also stated that the DIS has changed its mind about the conclusions
         of the much criticised report after the report was  criticised,  by
         its only named  source,  Professor  Kibreab.   It  is  stated  that
         according to the DIS  sending  deserters  of  Eritrea's  compulsory
         military service back home does present a danger after all and  the
         article states that in a press release  the  DIS  stated  that  the
         reaction to its report "raises doubts about whether there are risks
         to people returning to Eritrea after illegally leaving the  country
         and avoiding national service".

    6.   A document from UNHCR in which examples are given of where the FFM
         report ascribes statements to interlocutors that cannot  be  traced
         to their statements.  The report gives four examples of  this,  one
         of which relates to Professor Kibreab.  It refers to the  following
         conclusion in the FFM report,

             "It is now possible for evaders and deserters  who  have  left
             Eritrea illegally to return if they pay the 2%  tax  and  sign
             the apology letter at an Eritrean embassy.  Kibreab was  aware
             of a few deserters from the national service who have  visited
             Eritrea and safely left the country again."

         The report states that according  to  the  documented  conversation
         that the authors of the FFM had with Professor Kibreab, he followed
         this  sentence  with  the  following  qualification:   "These   are
         invariably people who have been naturalised in their  countries  of
         asylum."  This qualification is not, according to  UNHCR,  included
         in the main text of the report on any of the three  occasions  that
         the statement is quoted.  There are three other examples of similar
         problems with the report which do not relate to Professor Kibreab.

    7.   A printout from EIN summarising the  UN  human  rights  report  on
         Eritrea which was published on 8 June 2015.  It  is  summarised  as
         follows, "UN finds Eritrea responsible for  systematic,  widespread
         and  gross  human  rights  violations,  calls   for   international
         protection for those fleeing".  The summary by EIN states,  amongst
         other things, that the FFM report followed a  Fact-Finding  Mission
         undertaken due to a large increase in Eritrean  asylum  seekers  in
         Denmark and that two DIS employees who were critical of the  report
         resigned in protest.

11.  The judge, in my view, properly directed herself  in  relation  to  the
    circumstances when a judge can depart from a country guidance decision.
    By any account the judge properly concluded that the  findings  of  the
    FFM were not supported by the evidence from HRW and the  UNHCR  report.
    The judge did not summarise the conclusions of  the  reports  from  the
    various organisations, but there was no need  for  her  to  do  so.   I
    accept the judge has conflated the press release of 9 December 2014 and
    the document from a Danish newspaper of 10 December 2014.   However,  I
    do not find that it is material.  Whilst I accept that the  quote  from
    the newspaper report is not a direct quote from the DIS in the  context
    of a press release, it is capable of undermining the  findings  of  the
    FFM. It was a matter for the judge what weight to  attach  to  it.  The
    judge was entitled on the evidence before her to conclude that the  DIS
    had changed its position in relation to the conclusions made by the FFM
    (whether or not the report had actually been withdrawn).

12.  Whilst the judge may have  confused  the  report  from  UNHCR  and  the
    summary of the UN report (EIN), I  am  satisfied  that  she  took  into
    account the evidence produced by the appellant and properly  considered
    this in the context of the FFM.  Both pieces of evidence are capable of
    undermining the FFM report. The judge was entitled to attach weight  to
    the summary of the UN report. The Secretary of  State's  case  was  not
    advanced on the basis that the summary was inaccurate.

13.  There is no reason to believe that Judge  Thornton  did  not  have  the
    full press release of 9 December 2014 which documents the communication
    between Professor Kibreab and the DIS.  Whilst the report has not  been
    withdrawn by DIS there are significant criticisms of it which go beyond
    the issue relating to Professor Kibreab.  The judge  was  entitled,  on
    the evidence before her, to conclude that the background  evidence  did
    not support the FFM report.  Albeit they are brief, the  reasons  given
    by the judge are adequate and grounded in the  evidence.   It  was  not
    necessary for her to engage with each and every piece  of  evidence  in
    her written decision.  There was a  significant  quantity  of  material
    that was capable of undermining the findings of the  FFM  report.   The
    grounds amount to a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

14.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of
    Judge Thornton to allow the appeal on asylum grounds is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal to allow the appeal is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 24 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

