
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06207/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     i c
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Paur, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a Gambian national, born on 18  February  1979.    She
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on 15 June 2012.  On  appeal,  her
    application was remitted to the Respondent as the decision was found to
    be not in accordance with the  law  and  the  Respondent  withdrew  the
    decision. The Respondent then refused her application in a letter dated
    24 March 2015. She appealed against that decision and  the  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Real  in  a  decision  dated  6
    September 2015. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Landes on 1 October 2015. She  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal did not give adequate reasons for
    her findings that there would not be very significant obstacles to  the
    Appellant's integration  into  Gambia  taking  account  of  the  expert
    evidence of Dr Kea. She considered that there was  less  force  in  the
    arguments so far as the protection claim was  concerned.  She  did  not
    limit the grounds of appeal which could be argued.

The Grounds

2.   It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  rejecting  the
    evidence of Dr Kea. The grounds argue that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    approach to the assessment of the Appellant's credibility is flawed  as
    it did not take account of Dr Kea's conclusions in relation to the fact
    that the Appellant would be a source of shame to her  family  and  that
    they would pursue her on return. The Appellant  argues  that  Dr  Kea's
    report shows that her claim that her family have animosity towards  her
    and wish to pursue her is plausible and objectively  justified  in  the
    context of the Gambian culture. It is also argued that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in assessing whether the Appellant could relocate within
    Gambia. The Judge had cited the fact that the Appellant had  previously
    relocated elsewhere in the Gambia but  had  failed  to  appreciate  the
    Appellant's circumstances. The Judge had failed to have regard  to  the
    fact that the Appellant would  be  socially  excluded  and  may  suffer
    verbal and physical abuse.

3.   The Appellant now had three children out of  wedlock  and  the  country
    evidence included in the Appellant's bundle made it clear that children
    born out of wedlock were discriminated against. The  Appellant  asserts
    in the grounds that this had not been considered when  looking  at  the
    viability of relocation. In finding that the Appellant had  connections
    in Gambia the Judge had not born in mind the evidence from Dr Kea  that
    she would be socially excluded and seen as a woman of ill-repute.

4.   It is also submitted that the Judge had given inadequate  consideration
    to the effect of removal on the Appellant's children. The Judge  stated
    that the circumstances facing her on return were now similar  to  those
    when she lived away from her family previously. It  is  submitted  that
    those circumstances were now very different as the Appellant  would  be
    returning with three UK born children who were born out of wedlock.  It
    is submitted that in the current circumstances the Appellant could  not
    reasonably survive and support her  children  in  Gambia.  It  is  also
    submitted  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to   fully   appreciate   the
    circumstances of the Appellant on return as a single woman  with  three
    children born out of wedlock of an age where they could not look  after
    themselves.  Whether  the  Appellant  could  support  herself  and  her
    children on return is said to be central to the assessment of  what  is
    in the children's best interests.

5.   It is further submitted that the Judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  the
    evidence of Dr Kea that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  find
    accommodation was speculation. There was  evidence  to  corroborate  Dr
    Kea's conclusion that there was unlikely to be an  assistance  afforded
    to the Appellant. Further, in assessing the Appellant's children's best
    interests the Judge had failed  to  take  into  account  the  objective
    evidence in the Appellant's bundle which showed that children born  out
    of wedlock were  stigmatised,  discriminated  against  and  there  were
    obstacles  to  registering  such  children.  There   were   significant
    obstacles to the Appellant returning to Gambia.

The Rule 24 Response

6.   The Respondent  submits  that  the  evidence  of  the  expert  received
    analysis at [34] and [36] noting that a number of the conclusions  were
    from a  premise  rejected  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  reasoned
    throughout the determination ([26] - [34]). Any error as to  the  issue
    of internal relocation (if any) could  only  be  immaterial  given  the
    penultimate sentence at [34]. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  therefore
    directed himself appropriately.

The Hearing

7.   Mr Puar referred to the  Judge's  findings  at  paragraph  28.  A  text
    message was sent by the Appellant's brother which  was  single  message
    three years ago. The First-tier Tribunal found that a  forewarning  was
    inconsistent with an intention to kill her. The bundle before the First-
    tier contained a text message from the family. Paragraph 4 showed  that
    the contact was the Appellant's brother and the threat was  not  issued
    by the father per se. It was clear that this  was  the  brother  saying
    "please come back" and this was inconsistent with her finding that this
    was a forewarning. This was not how the message read.

8.   The other points emanated from the expert's report of Dr  Kea  and  the
    appropriate starting point was page 19  of  the  bundle.  There  was  a
    declaration at page 21 and it was clear that it was her expert opinion.
    It was  an  independent  expert  report  and  she  was  given  specific
    questions to answer. Page 5 of the report and page  25  of  the  bundle
    confirmed that in her considered opinion it was likely that her  family
    would pursue her. There was  shame  because  the  Appellant  had  three
    children out of wedlock. The expert then continued and identified  that
    she may be labelled as a prostitute. Importantly she also  stated  that
    Gambians lived in family compounds. There were strong cultural ties and
    it was a small country. From page 27 it was clear that it was difficult
    to afford the high cost of housing. The Judge dealt with Article  8  at
    page 45. There was no rejection per se of Dr Kea's report save for what
    she said about housing. What Dr  Kea  said  was  that  she  could  find
    employment but the practicalities were that she could not find housing.
    It was culturally unacceptable to live  without  a  husband.  The  risk
    factor was having children  out  of  wedlock  and  the  potential  ill-
    treatment for having done so. Her case was that her parents  wanted  to
    cause  her  harm  but  her  research  showed  that  not  one  of  those
    conclusions were adopted on the evidence. The First-tier  Tribunal  was
    prepared to accept that her family her disappointed in her. Looking  at
    Article 8 that being the Judge's finding of fact, the Judge found  that
    the  reason  there  would  not  be  very  significant   obstacles   was
    accommodation.  She  said   the   expert's   conclusion   amounted   to
    speculation. It was not speculation.  It was unacceptable for  a  young
    woman to be living without a husband and those who  rented  rooms  were
    male migrants. Moreover the difficulty was that the facts had  changed.
    The main risk was having the children out of wedlock. That  factor  was
    not present before. Even  if  the  Judge  was  to  reject  the  contact
    argument the husband would not allow her to live with  him.  It  was  a
    temporary measure before and she was settled before. The current  facts
    were totally different. In short, of course a judge could reject expert
    evidence but  there  must  be  sufficient  reasons.  The  reasons  were
    illogical and not in keeping with the evidence and not  taking  account
    of the new facts. It was incumbent to give reasons which had  not  been
    done. It was a confusing determination. The Judge did  not  reject  the
    report of Dr Kea. There was also the ground that the determination  did
    not adequately deal with the best interests of the children. The First-
    tier Tribunal in granting permission was not  as  impressed  with  that
    ground. Evidence was attached to  the  grounds.  Illegitimate  children
    were at risk of becoming stateless.

9.   Mr Richards submitted that there was no  material  error  of  law.  The
    Judge gave cogent  reasons  for  her  conclusions  and  the  attack  on
    paragraph 28 was misplaced. The comment made by the Judge was  rational
    and did not  affect  the  adverse  findings  already  reached  in  that
    paragraph. The Judge did not reject the evidence of Dr Kea and the most
    significant sentence was in paragraph 34. Her  self-direction  in  that
    paragraph was a perfectly proper direction. The expert gave  advice  as
    to the generality of the situation. The Judge was the arbiter  of  fact
    and gave full and cogent reasons for finding that  this  Appellant  was
    not at risk from her family on return to the Gambia. She concluded that
    taken at its highest the family had expressed a wish that she  did  not
    return but there was no evidence that they persisted in that view.  But
    in any event the Judge found that she was not at risk of persecution or
    ill-treatment at their hands. That was a perfectly proper conclusion at
    which to arrive. The Judge formed the view that the true  catalyst  for
    her claim was the loss of her employment in the UK. There were adequate
    reasons on the protection issue and having reached that  conclusion  it
    was open to her to make findings in relation to Article 8  and  to  the
    best interests of the children which she concluded were to remain  with
    their mother and go back with her to the Gambia  and  make  friends  in
    their country. The grounds were in effect no more than a  disagreement.
    The decision ought to stand.

10.  In reply, Mr Puar said that at paragraph 36  of  the  determination  in
    relation to the  difficulty  obtaining  accommodation  that  the  Judge
    concluded that the expert's conclusions  were  based  on  her  family's
    intention to harm her and they would be alerted. That was  just  wrong.
    Her conclusions in respect  of  accommodation  were  founded  upon  the
    assumption that her family would not accept her which was  the  finding
    in any event which the  Judge  made.  The  risk  factor  which  Dr  Kea
    identified was having children out of wedlock and she  only  considered
    the potential for ill-treatment.

11.  I reserved my decision. Both representatives agreed  that  remittal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal would be appropriate if I  were  to  find  that
    there were a material error of law.



Discussion and Findings

12.   The  grounds  of  appeal  all  relate  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    treatment of the expert evidence. It is not in dispute that Dr  Kea  is
    appropriately qualified to offer an expert opinion on  the  matters  in
    issue. The First-tier Tribunal's findings of fact and  in  relation  to
    the credibility of the Appellant's account that she would be at risk on
    return to Gambia are at paragraphs 26 to 34 of the decision. Whilst the
    findings for rejecting the Appellant's account to be  at  risk  are  to
    very well-reasoned I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  her
    approach to the expert evidence. She made her findings of fact  and  in
    relation to credibility at paragraphs 26 to 33 without reference to the
    expert  evidence.  This   approach   runs   contrary   to   established
    jurisprudence. In M (DRC) v SSHD [2003] UKIAT 00054 the  Tribunal  held
    that it was wrong to make adverse findings  of  credibility  first  and
    then dismiss the report. In HE v SSHD (2004) UKIAT 00321  the  Tribunal
    held that where the report  is  specifically  relied  on  as  a  factor
    relevant to credibility,  the  Tribunal  should  deal  with  it  as  an
    integral part of the findings on credibility, rather than  just  as  an
    add on, which does not undermine the  conclusions  to  which  he  would
    otherwise come.  The Tribunal also, importantly, said  that  where  the
    report simply recounts a history which the Judge is  minded  to  reject
    and contains nothing which does not depend on the truthfulness  of  the
    appellant, the part which it can play in the assessment of  credibility
    is negligible.

13.  Dr Kea was asked, in relation to the protection claim, on  her  opinion
    on the question of whether the Appellant, or her sons born in  the  UK,
    would be at risk as a result of having children out of wedlock  in  the
    UK. She was further asked whether this  risk  would  emanate  from  the
    Appellant's family in Gambia and/or the general public in  Gambia.  She
    concluded that the Appellant would be at risk in Gambia as a result  of
    having children out of wedlock in the  UK  and  that  this  risk  would
    emanate primarily from her parents. She further concluded that  it  was
    very likely that the Appellant's family would pursue  her  upon  return
    for bringing shame on the family. A daughter who brought shame  on  her
    family in this way may be socially excluded, disowned and/or physically
    abused (page 25 A's bundle).

14.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant's  evidence  that  she
    would be at risk was not believable for a number of reasons. The First-
    tier Tribunal found that  the  text  messages  relied  on  demonstrated
    disappointment with her rather than  an  intention  to  kill  her;  the
    messages coincided with her asylum claim  at  a  time  when  all  other
    attempts to remain in the UK had failed;  her  evidence  about  contact
    with her family had been inconsistent; the true catalyst for her asylum
    claim was the loss of her employment in the UK and  her  evidence  that
    she had lost contact with her friends and could not support herself was
    not consistent. The Judge further found that the Appellant had been  in
    contact with her friends and family in Gambia and that her family  were
    disappointed in her.

15.  Whilst, as stated above, these findings were well-reasoned, the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not deal with the expert's report as an integral part
    of the findings on credibility. The Judge stated at paragraph 34:

         "I have considered, and in general  terms,  accept,  as  consistent
         with the Respondent's country evidence,  the  evidence  of  Dr  Kea
         regarding the view that her family are likely  to  take  about  her
         behaviour,  but  I  disagree  as  to  her  conclusions  about   the
         consequences of this situation on the  facts  as  I  find  them  in
         relation to this particular Appellant."

16.  It is clear from this passage that the  Judge  made  findings  of  fact
    first and as a  consequence  disagreed  with  the  conclusions  of  the
    expert.   It is also clear that the expert's opinion, cited above,  was
    not predicated on matters relating to the Appellant's  credibility.  It
    was predicated on established facts,  namely  that  the  Appellant  had
    children out of wedlock in the UK.   It  was  therefore  evidence  that
    should have been taken into account as an integral part of the findings
    on credibility. In the light of this,  the  error  of  law  has  to  be
    material, as it cannot be said that the outcome  would  have  been  the
    same in the absence of the error.

17.  I have also considered whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in
    relation to the findings on Article 8 under the Rules.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal found that there would not be very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration under paragraph 276 ADE because the Appellant would be able
    to find employment. The First-tier  Tribunal  further  found  that  the
    expert's conclusion that  the  Appellant  would  be  unable  to  obtain
    accommodation was both founded on a premise that her family would  harm
    her and was speculation in relation to the refusal of accommodation  by
    compound heads. The Tribunal also found that financial  assistance  was
    available to the Appellant from the Assisted  Voluntary  Return  scheme
    and she had friends she could rely on.

18.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes in granting permission  considered  it
    arguable that the Judge did not give adequate reasons for her  findings
    that there would not be very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's
    integration bearing in mind  what  Dr  Kea  said  about  the  Appellant
    suffering discrimination, being socially  excluded  and  that  she  may
    suffer verbal and physical abuse (paragraph  5  of  the  grounds).  She
    found that the Judge did  not  give  reasons  for  rejecting  Dr  Kea's
    conclusions in that respect or explaining why  she  would  be  able  to
    integrate into Gambia despite those problems.

19.  Dr Kea's opinion was that the  Appellant  would  suffer  discrimination
    upon her return to Gambia because she would be seen as someone who  had
    not conformed to cultural expectations. She states that  she  would  be
    socially excluded and potentially suffer from various forms  of  verbal
    and physical abuse. As an unmarried woman she would be seen as a  woman
    of ill-repute and may possibly be labelled  a  prostitute.  I  consider
    that those factors were relevant to the  question  of  integration  and
    were not considered  by  the  First-tier  tribunal  in  the  assessment
    conducted under paragraph 276ADE.  Therefore  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to give adequate reasons for her finding  that  there  were  not
    very significant obstacles in the absence of a consideration  of  those
    factors.  This also amounted to a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

In those circumstances I conclude that there was a material error of law  in
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. All findings are vitiated  by  that
error and the extent of judicial fact  finding  is  such  that  this  matter
should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  complete  rehearing  both
in respect of the protection claim and under Article 8 ECHR.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

