
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06380/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 February 2015                           |On 26 February 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Seehra of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity Direction

1.   I continue the anonymity direction made by the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    2 December  2014.   Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
    otherwise, the direction of anonymity that has  already  been  made  in
    favour of the appellant shall continue.



The Appellant and the Decision Appealed Against

2.   The appellant is a 24 year old citizen of Sri Lanka who,  according  to
    his own account, arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 November  2013  and
    claimed asylum three days later.  On 14 August 2014  his  asylum  claim
    was refused.  He appealed against that decision.

3.   His appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Prior  who,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 2 December 2014, dismissed the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

4.   The basis of the appellant's claim is that  his  older  brother  was  a
    member of the LTTE who was killed in fighting in 1997 and was  regarded
    as an LTTE hero.  The appellant's other brother and  sister  were  also
    LTTE members.  The appellant claims that he was arrested in 2006  while
    still at school and required to report regularly.  At the  end  of  the
    war he was detained  for  3  years  until  October  2012.   During  his
    detention he was tortured and admitted his  family's  involvement  with
    the LTTE.  After returning home both the Appellant and his sister  were
    arrested on  28  October  2012.   He  was  tortured  in  detention  and
    photographed.  Following his release he fled Sri  Lanka  with  a  false
    passport and came to the UK.  Since he came to the  UK  he  has  learnt
    that both his brother and sister are missing and he has been told  that
    the authorities have been to his house looking for him.

Grounds of appeal

5.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal set out clearly and  concisely
    the issues which are  now  before  me  and  I  therefore  repeat  below
    relevant extracts from the grounds:

         2.   It seems that First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior accepted most of
             the appellant's account.  In paragraph 25 he stated  he  found
             the account of the personal history from 2005 to his detention
             beginning  in  2009  to  be  "predominantly   consistent   and
             credible".  In the following paragraph he  accepted  that  the
             appellant's siblings were LTTE members until the  end  of  the
             war in 2009.  In paragraph 27 the judge also seems  to  accept
             that the detention which began  in  2009  lasted  until  2012.
             What happened after his  release  in  October  2012  was  then
             considered by the judge in paragraph 28 onwards.

         3.   It is submitted that on the basis on  what  was  accepted  the
             judge should have allowed  the  appeal.   In  addition  it  is
             submitted that he has erred in law  in  his  approach  to  the
             appellant's  evidence  of  what  happened  from  October  2012
             onwards.

         4.   In respect of the first point it is pertinent to note, as  the
             judge has recorded at paragraph 15 of the determination,  that
             in paragraph 91 of  the  refusal  letter  the  respondent  had
             stated, "If it were accepted that your siblings were  involved
             with  the  LTTE  then  external  information   supports   your
             assertion that you may be exposed to treatment giving rise  to
             the need for international protection."  The judge did  accept
             that the appellant's siblings were involved with the  LTTE  as
             claimed.  The respondent did not withdraw paragraph 91 of  the
             refusal letter and therefore it is submitted  this  concession
             should have been followed.  The judge  has  erred  in  law  by
             failing to do so or by giving any reason why he deviated  from
             it.  It is submitted that that is a material error of law.

6.   The grounds also submitted  that,  based  on  the  medical  and  mental
    reports in the evidence, the judge should  have  followed  the  medical
    evidence and taken that into account when considering  the  appellant's
    evidence which he found "muddled".

The hearing

7.   At the hearing  before  me  Ms  Seehra  relied  on  and  made  expanded
    submissions on the grounds of appeal particularly in relation to  those
    issues set out above.  In reply Ms Holmes argued  that  the  judge  had
    undertaken a careful examination and analysis of the evidence and  that
    he was entitled to have reached the conclusions that he did.

8.   Following  completion  of  the  submissions  I  indicated  that  I  was
    satisfied that there had been a material error of law  in  the  judge's
    determination such that the decision itself should  be  set  aside  but
    that there was no reason why his factual findings,  having  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant, should not be preserved.

9.   Neither representative made any submissions that the  judge's  findings
    of fact should not be preserved.  On the contrary, both representatives
    agreed that no further oral evidence was  required  and  that,  on  the
    facts as found by the judge, they were content for  me  to  remake  the
    decision without further evidence or submissions.

10.  I accordingly  indicated  that  it  was  my  intention  to  remake  the
    decision by allowing the appellant's asylum appeal  and  that  I  would
    give my reasons in a written decision.  I now do so.

11.  I deal first with the error of law in the First-tier Tribunal.  I  find
    myself in complete agreement with the grounds  of  appeal  as  set  out
    above and in particular paragraph 4 of the grounds.   Paragraph  91  of
    the reasons for refusal letter of 14 August 2014  states  clearly,  and
    without reservation, that

          "If it were to be accepted that your siblings were  involved  with
         the LTTE then external information supports your assertion that you
         may  be  exposed  to  treatment  giving  rise  to  the   need   for
         international protection".

    The  refusal  letter  gives  a  specific  reference  to  the  "external
    information" referred to.  The refusal letter had previously refused to
    accept that the appellant's siblings were involved with  the  LTTE  but
    Judge Prior, at  paragraph  26  of  his  decision,  after  finding  his
    evidence "to be predominantly consistent and credible"  [25],  accepted
    specifically that the appellant "had siblings who were LTTE members".

12.  That finding alone, in light of paragraph 91  of  the  refusal  letter,
    should have been sufficient for Judge Prior to have allowed the  appeal
    outright.  However at  paragraph  15  of  his  decision  he  said  that
    paragraph 91 could not be taken in  isolation  "without  proceeding  to
    consider the following paragraphs of qualification".  In  my  judgment,
    the paragraphs in the refusal letter  which  follow  paragraph  91  are
    entirely separate issues and do not in any way  limit  or  qualify,  or
    even purport to limit or qualify, the clear concession in paragraph 91.
     Paragraphs 92 and 93 do not even refer to the appellant's siblings.

13.  That was a clear error of law on the part of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the main, but not the only, reason why the decision cannot stand.

14.  As to my reasons for remaking the decision by allowing the  appellant's
    asylum appeal, I repeat, firstly, the issue mentioned above.  Paragraph
    91 of the refusal letter was a clear concession  by  the  Secretary  of
    State which was not at any time  withdrawn.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellant's siblings were members of the  LTTE  and,  in
    accordance with the concession, the appellant's appeal must be  allowed
    on that basis alone.

15.  Having regard also to the lower standard of proof that applies  in  all
    asylum cases, the fact that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  found  the
    appellant to be "predominantly consistent and  credible"  goes  a  very
    long way to supporting his asylum claim.  That claim must be reinforced
    by the medical evidence which was before the First-tier  Tribunal.   Dr
    Heller's psychological report based on her interview of  the  appellant
    on 26 September 2014 believed the appellant when he said  that  he  was
    adamant that he would commit suicide if returned  to  Sri  Lanka.   She
    found, in her report, that his "risk of suicide is high at the  current
    time" and that this would pose an extreme risk if removal to Sri  Lanka
    is enforced.  She found that he was suffering from PTSD in  a  moderate
    to severe range of severity.  She advised that he was unfit  to  attend
    the court to give evidence.

16.  Faced with such a report from Dr Heller I must take her  findings  into
    account when considering  what  the  First-tier  Tribunal  regarded  as
    "muddled" evidence in relation to his most recent years in  Sri  Lanka.
    Having found his earlier claims to be credible  I  must  give  him  the
    benefit of the doubt in relation to his later claims.  Again I bear  in
    mind the low standard of proof which the appellant is bound to cross.

17.  For all these reasons I am satisfied that the appellant is entitled  to
    international protection as a refugee under the Convention.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law such  that
the decision must be set aside whilst preserving its findings  of  fact.   I
remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal and finding  that  he
is a refugee under the Convention.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
26 February 2015

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Although the appeal has been allowed no fee was  paid  and  consequently  no
fee award is made.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
26 February 2015
