

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
  Number: AA/06177/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |           Decision and Reasons      |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 13 January 2016                    |           On 2 February 2016        |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant



                                     And




Ms A S

                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION RETAINED)



                                                                  Respondent


Representation:



For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Harding of Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones,
Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal has been brought by the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
  decision of Judge Talbot,  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  who
  following a hearing at Taylor House on  21  September  2015  allowed  the
  appeal of the above named now named as respondent in this  determination.
  The Secretary of State had refused  her  application  to  be  allowed  to
  remain in the United Kingdom as a refugee and on the basis of her  rights
  under human rights law.

2.    The Secretary of State, hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  appellant,
  contends in her grounds of appeal that the First Tier Judge erred in  law
  by failing to apply binding case law without  giving  good  reasons.  She
  asserts that in failing to explain why given the  appellant's  particular
  profile why she would be unable to access the arrangements and facilities
  available to enable her successful integration in Albania. The  appellant
  states in her grounds of appeal findings of fact made by the  First  Tier
  Judge and suggests that given those findings it was not open to the Judge
  to conclude as he did - that she, as  a  trafficked  woman  returning  to
  Albania would  be  unable  to  access  the  arrangements  and  facilities
  available to her for re-integration.

3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by  Judge  R  A
  Cox, a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal  who  in  his  decision  dated  5
  November 2015 stated, "On consideration, I think there is arguable  merit
  in the grounds and would grant permission."

4.   At the hearing before me Mr Duffy representing the appellant said  that
  he wished to rely on the written grounds of appeal,  which  he  explained
  were simply challenging the decision on the basis  of  lack  of  adequate
  reasoning and not on the basis that the decision was perverse.

5.   Mr Harding representing the respondent disagreed and  argued  that  the
  grounds indicated that the appellant  was  challenging  the  decision  as
  being perverse and reminded me that the threshold for succeeding in  that
  challenge was high. He submitted that the reasoning given by Judge Talbot
  for his decision to allow the appeal on grounds  of  asylum  as  well  as
  Article 3 of the ECHR  were  adequate  and  evidence  based.  Mr  Harding
  pointed out that the Judge had correctly noted in  paragraph  16  of  the
  determination that the respondent's account had been accepted in full  by
  the appellant and therefore credibility is not  an  issue.  According  to
  him, the Judge had gone on to extensively review the principles  set  out
  in AM & B (Albania) [2010] CG, UKUT 80 in paragraphs 17, 18, 19 and 20 of
  his determination. In paragraph 21 of his determination Judge Talbot  had
  given reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  despite  further  evidence  of
  improvement in the conditions of trafficked women on return as set out in
  the appellant's Guidance, the respondent would not  be  able  to  receive
  satisfactory protection from the state because such protection  would  be
  insufficient  and  the  respondent  could  not  be  expected,  given  her
  particular circumstances, to avail of any internal relocation option.  Mr
  Harding asked that the appeal be dismissed.

6.    Mr Duffy did not make any further submissions.

7.   Having given careful consideration to the grounds  of  appeal  advanced
      by the appellant and the written determination of Judge Talbot as well
      as the submissions advanced by representatives of the  parties  before
      me, I have concluded that the appellant has failed to  establish  that
      there is an error of law in the determination of Judge Talbot and that
      such error, if established is material to the outcome of the appeal. I
      found Mr Harding's arguments well founded and therefore I dismiss this
      appeal. The decision of Judge Talbot to allow the appeal on asylum  as
      well as Article 3 of the ECHR therefore stands.


      K Drabu CBE
      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
      23 January 2016
