
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06807/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2015                   |On 6 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                     Mr GULUVITAGE SASHIE PRABHA PEIRIS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah, Birnberg Peirce & Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal against a  decision  to  refuse  him  leave  to
    enter,  made on 27 August 2014, was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Plumptre ("the judge")  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  24
    November that year.

2.   The appellant arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  with  valid  leave  in
    September 2001.   He claimed to be at risk on return to Sri Lanka as  a
    person of adverse interest to the  authorities,  as  a  result  of  his
    support for the Tamil cause.  In addition to fearing  ill-treatment  at
    the hands of  the  authorities  and  non-state  agents,  the  appellant
    claimed that his removal would breach his rights under Articles 3 and 8
    of the Human Rights Convention, by reason of his mental ill health.  He
    also relied upon  Article  8  in  the  context  of  private  life  ties
    established here since his arrival.

3.   There  was  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  before  the  judge,
    including reports prepared by Dr Chris Smith, a country expert, and  Dr
    Saleh Dhumad, a medical expert.   Evidence  was  also  given  by  other
    witnesses, regarding the appellant's political activities in the United
    Kingdom.  A DVD was relied upon as showing attendance at  a  conference
    held in September 2013 and the appellant's participation by means of  a
    speech.  Sadly, the DVD could  not  be  played  fully  at  the  hearing
    although it appears that efforts were made by several of those  present
    to overcome a technical problem.  The judge  gave  weight  to  evidence
    given by a witness that the appellant was one of those who received  an
    award at the  conference  but  she  was  unable  to  find  whether  the
    appellant simply expressed his thanks or made a political statement.

4.   Overall, the judge found that the appellant's  political  profile  was
    not such as to show a reasonable degree of likelihood that he would  be
    on any "stop" or "watch" list.  She gave little weight  to  Dr  Smith's
    report.  She found that although the  appellant  was  not  particularly
    well, there was no risk of suicide.  She concluded that Articles  2,  3
    and 8 of the Human Rights Convention were not engaged in the appeal.

5.   So far as the appellant's claim  to  have  been  tortured  before  his
    arrival here was concerned, the judge found that  he  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka on three occasions, in 2004,  2005  and  2006,  to  visit  family
    members.  She concluded that he would not have done so had he been ill-
    treated in the manner claimed.

6.   In an application for permission to appeal, it was contended that  the
    judge erred in  several aspects.  There was no proper consideration  of
    the appellant's pro-Tamil activities in the diaspora, the principles in
    HJ (Iran) were  not  applied,  the  appellant  was  not  treated  as  a
    vulnerable witness as he should have been in the light of  Presidential
    Guidance and the judge made  no  reference  to  some  of  the  evidence
    supporting his  claim  to  be  at  risk  on  return.   So  far  as  the
    appellant's human rights are concerned, it was contended that the judge
    failed to properly determine the  Article  3  claim  and  confined  her
    analysis to suicide risk.  Her finding that  much  of  the  psychiatric
    evidence was unreliable and undermined by the  appellant's  returns  in
    2004, 2005 and 2006 was not sustainable.  In those years, there  was  a
    ceasefire between the authorities and the LTTE and the  fact  that  the
    appellant returned during that period did not indicate that he was  not
    tortured prior to his arrival in this country in 2001.

7.   In final grounds, it was contended that the judge failed  to  consider
    the appellant's case under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.
    This was raised as a ground of appeal in the light of his  presence  in
    the United Kingdom since 2001.  His private life included his right  to
    respect for physical and moral  integrity,  an  aspect  of  his  health
    claim.  The judge failed to engage with submissions made in relation to
    this aspect.

8.   Permission to appeal was granted in December 2014 on the basis that it
    was arguable that the judge had erred in law by failing to consider the
    appellant's Article 8 case, which was clearly raised  in  the  skeleton
    argument prepared by his Counsel in relation to mental  ill-health  and
    private life.

9.   In a Rule 24 response, the Secretary of State opposed  the  appeal  on
    the basis that the  judge  had  directed  herself  appropriately.   The
    determination was detailed and well reasoned and took into account  the
    various pieces of evidence and relevant factors.  The Article  3  claim
    had been thoroughly considered.  In dealing with Article 8,  the  judge
    noted submissions made by the Presenting Officer and by the appellant's
    Counsel.  Given the appellant's precarious immigration status,  it  was
    inconceivable that the judge could have concluded  that  the  appellant
    might succeed under Article 8 and so there was  no material error.

Submissions on Error of Law

10.  In a skeleton argument filed with  the  Tribunal  shortly  before  the
    hearing, it was contended that  there  was  nothing  in  the  grant  of
    permission indicating that grounds of appeal other than those  relating
    to Article 8 were not arguable and so the appellant sought to rely upon
    them.  In the Rule 24 response, the respondent  had  not  confined  her
    submissions to Article 8 and so all the grounds remained arguable.

11.  Ms Everett said that the Secretary of  State,  having  considered  the
    matter, could see some merit in the first of the grounds, regarding the
    appellant's  profile  in  the  diaspora.   At  paragraph  113  of   the
    determination, the judge adopted guidance in  GJ  to  the  effect  that
    diaspora activists are not necessarily at risk and went on to find that
    there was no evidence that the appellant had been a fund raiser or that
    he had supplied arms.  However,  the  guidance  given  in  GJ  was  not
    confined to those matters.

12.  At paragraph 114, the judge found that the country expert had  made  a
    sensible point, that if the  DVD  showed  the  appellant  speaking  out
    against the Sri Lankan government at  the  conference,  that  would  of
    itself put him at risk.  She went on to find that neither  she  nor  Dr
    Smith had viewed the DVD and that the evidence given by a  witness  who
    was present at the conference was equivocal.  The Secretary of  State's
    concern was that the DVD was clearly highly material evidence  and  was
    available to the Tribunal.  Steps might have been taken to resolve  the
    technical difficulty, in view of the importance of it.

13.  Secondly, as the author of the grounds  noted,  the  only  mention  of
    Article 8 in the determination was at the end of it, in paragraph  146,
    where the judge found that the Article was not engaged.  The author  of
    the Rule 24 response correctly pointed out that the judge had  referred
    earlier in the determination to submissions  on  Article  8  but  there
    were, nonetheless, no findings mad by the judge regarding  this  aspect
    of the case (save for her finding that Article 8 was not engaged).   It
    was  clear  that  Article  8  was  relied  upon,  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's ill-health and his private life ties.

14.  Moreover, the judge clearly found that the appellant's return  to  Sri
    Lanka on three occasions between 2004 and  2006  told  against  him  in
    relation to his claim to have  been  tortured  earlier,  prior  to  his
    arrival here. However, there was a ceasefire in those years,  again  as
    noted by the author of the grounds, and many  people  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka.  The Secretary of State accepted that the inference drawn by the
    judge was unsafe, in the light of the weight she gave  to  this  factor
    and in the absence of further  findings  that  took  into  account  the
    ceasefire.

15.  Ms  Jegarajah  agreed  that  Miss  Everett  had  highlighted  the  key
    concerns, in relation to errors of law.

Conclusion on Error of Law

16.  The determination is extremely thorough and has been   prepared  by  a
    very experienced judge, with  characteristic  concision.   Taking  into
    account the submissions from the parties, I conclude, however, that the
    decision does contain a material error of law.  So far as Article 8  is
    concerned, it is clear that the appellant relied upon his human rights,
    in relation to mental ill-health and private  life  ties.   He  arrived
    here in 2001 and has been present ever since, save for the three visits
    to Sri Lanka made between 2004 and 2006.  Although the judge considered
    suicide risk in some detail, her overall conclusion was that Article  8
    was not engaged.  That conclusion required supporting reasons.  If,  on
    the other hand, the proper conclusion was that Article 8  was  engaged,
    then a full assessment of the position under the  rules  and,  perhaps,
    outside them, was required instead.

17.  A salient feature of the appellant's case was his claim to  have  been
    to tortured in Sri Lanka prior to his arrival in this country in  2001.
    The judge gave weight to his three visits to Sri Lanka  as  an  adverse
    factor but without expressly taking into account the ceasefire in those
    years, which encouraged many supporters of the Tamil cause  to  return.
    The adverse weight given to the visits featured in  the  assessment  of
    the reliability of some of the medical  and  psychiatric  evidence,  as
    well as in the assessment of the appellant's claim  to  be  of  adverse
    interest to the authorities.

18.  Finally, the DVD showing the appellant's attendance at the  conference
    in  September  2013  was  plainly  material  evidence.   It   is   most
    unfortunate that technical problems prevented it from  being  shown  in
    full.  Of obvious importance in the appellant's case that his  diaspora
    activities put him at risk is precisely what he said (or did  not  say)
    at the conference.  Of  course,  the  burden  of  proof  lay  with  the
    appellant but, on the other hand, it appears that the  technical  fault
    lay with the DVD player rather than the disc itself.

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside and  remade.



20.  In a brief discussion regarding the appropriate venue and  the  extent
    of any fact finding required  in  the  remaking  of  the  decision,  Ms
    Everett  suggested  that  the  appropriate  venue  was  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and Ms Jegarajah said that it should be  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On reflection, I conclude, in the light of  the  Presidential  Practice
    Statement, that extensive fact finding will be required in this unusual
    case.  The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross, to be remade by a judge other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre.

21.  So far as directions are concerned, I have no doubt that there will be
    a Case Management Review hearing at Hatton Cross in due course.   There
    will obviously be a need for a DVD player  at  the  hearing  (and  this
    should be tested beforehand to ensure that it is in working order).  As
    noted  above,  the  case  is  unusual  and  highly  complex,  with  the
    attendance of at least four witnesses.  In my view, a day should be set
    aside for the hearing of the appeal (and an allocation  of  six  points
    made).   No findings of fact are preserved.

Notice of Decision

22.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It is  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross to be  remade,  by  a  judge
    other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction may amount to a contempt of court.



Signed        Date 28 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

