
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06881/2015
                                                               AA/06883/2015
                                                               AA/06885/2015
                                                               AA/06886/2015
                                                               AA/06888/2015
                                                               AA/06893/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 September 2016                           |On 12 October 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 S A H R (1)
                                  Z S A (2)
                                   Z A (3)
                                   A M (4)
                                   A A (5)
                                   Z A (6)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms C Grubb instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)  in  order  to
    protect the anonymity of the respondents.   This  order  prohibits  the
    disclosure directly or indirectly  including  by  the  parties  of  the
    identity of the respondents.  Any disclosure and breach of  this  order
    may amount to a contempt of court.  This order shall  remain  in  force
    unless revoked or varied by the Tribunal for court.

Introduction

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 3. The appellants are a family and are citizens of  Pakistan.   The  first
    and second appellants (A1 and A2) are aged 44 and 39  respectively  and
    are married.  The remaining appellants (A3, A4, A5 and  A6)  are  their
    children.  A1 and A2 also have a further child who is not  a  party  to
    these proceedings.

 4. The appellants arrived at Heathrow Airport on  a  flight  from  Lahore,
    Pakistan on 8 February 2014.  They were  in  transit  to  the  USA  but
    entered the UK.  They claimed asylum.  The principal appellant  was  A1
    and, in effect, the claims by his family were dependant upon his claim.



 5. A1 claimed that his family was a prominent Shi'a family in Pakistan and
    that his family had been the target of persecution by Sunni  extremists
    and that he would be at risk on return.  Further, A1  claimed  that  he
    was wanted by the Pakistani authorities as he was alleged to have  been
    involved in an attack upon the  leader  of  the  Sipah-e-Sahaba  on  22
    August 1994 when two of his  bodyguards  were  killed.   The  appellant
    alleged that he had been added to the original indictment of the  trial
    of those involved which took place in 2005 and that if he  returned  to
    Pakistan  he  would  be  arrested  and  would  face  an  unfair  trial,
    conviction and imprisonment by a military court.

 6. On 30 March 2015, the Secretary of State refused A1's claim for  asylum
    along with the other appellants.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard over two days by Judge A D Troup.  Judge Troup rejected the claim
    that the appellants (in particular A1) would be at risk of  persecution
    as a result of being part of a prominent Shi'a family in Pakistan.

 8. However, Judge  Troup  found  that  A1  was  wanted  by  the  Pakistani
    authorities and was likely to be arrested and tried for murder before a
    military court in Pakistan.   The  circumstances  of  that  trial  were
    reasonably  likely  to  be  unfair  and  that,  as  a  result,  A1  had
    established there was a real risk that he would be  persecuted  because
    of his imputed political opinion or religion.   On  that  basis,  Judge
    Troup allowed the appeals of each of the appellants.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Permission was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 13 January 2016 but on  28  January  2016,  on  renewal,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UTJ Coker) granted  the  Secretary  of  State  permission  to
    appeal.

10. On 2 March 2016, the appellants served a Rule 24  response  seeking  to
    uphold Judge Troup's decision to allow the appeals on  the  basis  that
    there was a real risk that A1 would face persecution as a result of  an
    unfair trial before a military court in Pakistan  arising  out  of  the
    attack and killing of two bodyguards on 22 August 1994.

11. Thus, the appeals came before me.

The Secretary of State's Case

12. In his oral submissions, Mr Richards, who represented the Secretary  of
    State relied upon the grounds  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.  The grounds are relatively concise and are as follows:

         "The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error  of
         law in the Determination.

         It is submitted that the FTTJ has made a number of errors  in  this
         determination which  are  material  and  render  the  determination
         unsafe.

         The FTTJ has singularly failed to address  matters  which  were  in
         conflict between the parties.   In  particular  he  has  failed  to
         adequately explain why at Para.49 he accepts the HO  position  that
         it was improbable that the appellant could have been deported  from
         Kuwait to Pakistan without the Pakistani authorities being aware of
         his arrival, but then accepts from the expert that he was wanted by
         the Pakistani authorities and on his own account was able to  enter
         the country unnoticed.

         It is submitted that the acceptance of the expert evidence  to  the
         effect that the appellant was a wanted man  in  Pakistan  does  not
         explain how he was able to re-enter the country on deportation from
         Kuwait.  This was a point raised by the S of S on refusal and  also
         clearly raised at the hearing by the presenting officer.

         It is submitted that the FTTJ has not properly  engaged  with  this
         question.

         Further,  the  FTTJ  accepts  from  the  expert  (and  it  is  well
         publicised) that cases involving  terrorism  in  Pakistan  are  now
         heard by Military Courts and that this means that the appellant  is
         unlikely to receive a fair trial.  It is submitted  that  the  FTTJ
         has failed to acknowledge that the appellant claims  to  have  been
         charged with murder allegedly committed in 1994 in the  context  of
         sectarian violence and why this matter would now be dealt with by a
         military court.  This is especially so  given  that  the  FTTJ  has
         accepted the validity of a court judgment from the civil courts  in
         Pakistan stating that the appellant,  when  located  and  arrested,
         would be tried by that court.

         Having mentioned documents it is further submitted  that  the  FTTJ
         has not engaged with the judgment in Tanveer Ahmed at all  in  this
         determination in terms of looking at the evidence as a whole before
         deciding whether or not the appellant has shown that his  documents
         can be relied upon.  This is important because the FTTJ has clearly
         rejected the appellant's evidence that he was at risk on account of
         religious persecution in Pakistan, and the  expert's  evidence  was
         that the appellant could not be found on the current "most  wanted"
         list in Pakistan.

         It is submitted that these material errors render the determination
         unsafe and permission to appeal is requested."

13. Mr Richards indicated that he had nothing further to add to the grounds
    other than to submit  that  the  issues  were  whether  the  judge  had
    properly resolved conflicts in the  evidence  and  had  given  adequate
    reasons for his findings.

The Issues

14. The grounds raise, essentially, three points  challenging  the  judge's
    findings that A1 was wanted by the Pakistani authorities as he  claimed
    and that he would face an unfair trial before a military court.

15. First, the judge had failed adequately to explain why he accepted  that
    it was improbable that A1 could, as he claimed, have been deported from
    Kuwait (where he had lived from June 1997) to  Pakistan  on  18  August
    2013 without coming to the attention of the Pakistan authorities if  he
    was wanted whilst accepting the expert evidence that he was,  in  fact,
    wanted by the Pakistan authorities.

16. Secondly, the judge had failed properly to assess  the  reliability  of
    the documents, in particular the FIRs and a  copy  of  the  High  Court
    judgment relating to those charged arising out  of  the  attack  on  22
    August 1994 and naming A1 as a "proclaimed offender".   In  particular,
    it is argued that the judge failed to consider documentary evidence  in
    the light of the Judge's rejection of A1's  claim  to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution as a prominent member of a Shi'a family.

17. Thirdly, the judge failed to deal with the evidence that  A1  would  be
    subject to a trial before the civil court in Pakistan, having  accepted
    the validity of the High Court  judgment,  by  accepting  the  expert's
    evidence that A1 was likely to be tried before  a  military  court  and
    was, as a result, unlikely to receive a fair trial.

The Appellants' Case

18. Ms Grubb, on behalf of the appellants, relied upon the Rule 24  notice.
    She submitted that the substance of the Secretary of State's  challenge
    was to the judge's acceptance of the expert's evidence.  In short,  she
    submitted that there would need to be good reason to  depart  from  the
    expert opinion purporting A1's claim  to  be  wanted  by  the  Pakistan
    authorities and to be at risk of prosecution before a  military  court.
    She pointed out that the Secretary of State did not seek in her grounds
    of appeal to argue that the  expert  report  was  flawed.   There  was,
    therefore, no proper basis on which it could be said that the judge was
    not entitled to rely upon it.

19. As regard the Secretary of State's first point, Ms Grubb submitted that
    the  judge  had  not,  as  the  grounds  claim,  stated  that  it   was
    "improbable" that A1 could enter Pakistan unnoticed if  he  was  wanted
    but rather had stated that at "first sight" it was improbable.   Having
    considered the expert report, the judge had  adequately  reasoned  that
    even if his use of an agent was "at first sight" improbable,  that  did
    not undermine the clear and unequivocal evidence of the expert.

20. As regards point 2, Ms Grubb submitted that the judge was  entitled  to
    rely upon the expert report that since 2015, and  therefore  since  the
    original High Court proceeding in  2005,  the  nature  of  the  offence
    alleged against A1 would result in a trial before a military  court  in
    Pakistan.

21. As regards point 3, Ms Grubb submitted that the judge was  entitled  to
    rely upon the expert evidence that the FIRs and  High  Court  documents
    were genuine.  The expert, in her  addendum  report,  had  through  her
    assistant verified the authenticity of the documents and the judge  was
    entitled to rely upon them on the basis that they were genuine.

Discussion

22. Central to A1's claim that he was at risk of prosecution for murder and
    would face an unfair trial on return it was, of  course,  that  he  was
    wanted by the Pakistan authorities and that he  had  been  named  in  a
    number  of  FIRs  and  as  a  'proclaimed  offender'  in  the  original
    indictment in which a number of others  were  tried  in  2005  for  the
    attack on 22 August 1994.

    Point 1

23. The judge had before him two reports from Mrs  Uzma  Moeen,  an  expert
    (and her expertise is not challenged) in which she  set  out  enquiries
    that had been  made  in  relation  to  the  FIRs  and  the  High  Court
    documents.  These are summarised at paras 5-9 (the FIRs) and 10-18  (in
    relation to the court documents).  The expert's clear  and  unequivocal
    view  is  that  the  documents  are  genuine.   Judge  Troup   referred
    extensively to the expert's report and, in particular for this purpose,
    her conclusion in relation to the  genuineness  of  the  document  (see
    paras 38-40 of his determination).

24. Judge Troup dealt with the Presenting Officer's submission that it  was
    improbable that A1 was wanted if he was able to pass unnoticed  by  the
    authorities into Pakistan when he was deported from Kuwait at paras 48-
    50 as follows:

         "48.     Mr Olphert went  on  to  submit  that  it  was  less  than
             probable that  A1  could  have  entered  and  exited  Pakistan
             unnoticed by the authorities and his explanation that  he  had
             used an agent on each occasion was not credible.  Even  if  it
             were accepted that he used agents on each occasion  (which  it
             is not), he  could  not  possibly  have  used  an  agent  when
             deported from Kuwait: the authorities in Pakistan  would  have
             been aware that A1 as a Pakistani national was being  returned
             and would thus have been alert to A1's arrival.


         49.  I would agree with Mr  Olphert  that  at  first  sight  it  is
             improbable that A1 could have been  deported  from  Kuwait  to
             Pakistan without the Pakistani authorities being aware of  his
             arrival.  I have found however, from the expert evidence, that
             A1 is wanted by the authorities in Pakistan, and  yet  on  his
             account was able to enter the country unnoticed.


         50.  At paragraph 76 of her first report (page 406  of  bundle  2),
             Mrs Moeen said that she had "verified his ... details  on  the
             FIA  database"  (pages  291-294  of  bundle  1)  although   by
             paragraph 20 of her second report (page 5  of  bundle  3)  Mrs
             Moeen  had  apparently   been   unable   to   obtain   express
             confirmation  that  A1  was  registered  on  the  Most  Wanted
             Terrorists list of the Federal Investigation Agency.  However,
             reading the documents at pages 291-294 together with  the  FIR
             and  the  judgment,  both  naming  A1,  I  find  that  it   is
             realistically likely that A1 is wanted by the  authorities  in
             Pakistan.  It follows from that  finding  that  A1  used  some
             means of  avoiding  detection  when  arriving  in  or  leaving
             Pakistan.  As unlikely therefore as his claimed use of  agents
             may appear at first sight, I find that it does  not  undermine
             the credibility of his account as a whole."

25. Clearly, the judge had  well  in  mind  what  was  being  said  by  the
    Presenting Officer.  Contrary to what is said in the grounds,  at  para
    49 the judge did not wholly accept the Presenting Officer's submission.
     As he makes clear the judge only considered it "at first sight" to  be
    improbable.  The case of A1 was that he had  used  an  agent  to  avoid
    detection.  The judge referred to this at para 50.  The  judge  had  to
    consider the argument put forward by  the  Presenting  Officer  in  the
    light of all the evidence including the  expert's  evidence  which  the
    judge accepted.  It was properly a matter  for  the  judge  whether  he
    considered the "at  first  sight"  improbability  put  forward  by  the
    Presenting Officer sufficient to undermine the expert's evidence as  to
    the genuineness of the documents which were only consistent with a view
    that A1 was wanted by the Pakistan authorities as he  claimed.   Having
    grappled with the arguments, the judge was entitled to  take  the  view
    that his "at first sight" view of  the  improbability  of  A1  entering
    Pakistan unnoticed if he was wanted was not sufficient to displace  the
    clear and unequivocal evidence from  the  expert  that  the  documents,
    showing that A1 was in fact wanted were genuine and substantiated  A1's
    claim.  In my judgment, the  judge's  finding  was  not  irrational  or
    otherwise unsustainable on the basis of the evidence before him and for
    the reasons he gave in paras 48-50 of his determination.

    Point 2

26. The judge considered the expert's evidence as to whether, if wanted, A1
    would face a fair trial on return.  The Secretary of  State's  position
    was that A1 would face a trial before a civil court, as had  others  in
    2005 when a number were acquitted.  A1's case  based  upon  the  expert
    evidence was  that  now,  as  a  result  of  changes  to  the  Pakistan
    Constitution in January  2015,  A1  would  face  prosecution  before  a
    military court which created a real risk of an unfair trial and,  as  a
    consequence, persecution by the state based upon his imputed  political
    opinion or religion.  At  paras  46-47,  Judge  Trump  dealt  with  the
    expert's evidence and this issue as follows:

         "46.     ... I note however from paragraph 77 of Mrs Moeen's report
             (page  406  of  bundle  2)  that  military  courts  have  been
             introduced since the beginning of 2015 which  do  not,  in  my
             opinion, offer a fair trial.  Thus, since the decision of  the
             Upper Tribunal in AW was made nearly five years ago, there  is
             expert evidence before me that suggests the situation  now  is
             different from that at the time of their  decision.   At  page
             406, Mrs Moeen says:

             '77      In reply to the query whether it is  likely  that  he
                  will receive a fair trial, if his cases come [before]  the
                  courts in Pakistan now, I must point out  that  all  cases
                  relating  to  terrorist  activities,  including  sectarian
                  violence and killings, are tried  in  Military  Courts  in
                  Pakistan now.  It is  to  be  noted  that  these  Military
                  Courts are set up after passing of the Constitution  (21st
                  amendment) Act 2015 on 7 January 2015.  It  is  also  well
                  known that establishment of these Military Courts  by  the
                  Parliament was challenged in the Supreme Court of Pakistan
                  due to non-transparency of  procedure  and  speedy  trial.
                  However, Pakistan's Supreme Court allowed military  trials
                  of suspects in terrorism cases on 5  August  2015.   These
                  Military Courts can sentence civilians to death in  speedy
                  trials held in secret without due process or the oversight
                  of human right experts, the media or the  public.   In  my
                  considered view, the establishment of Military Courts  for
                  trial of civilians amounts to a parallel  system  for  all
                  intents and purposes which is wholly contrary to the known
                  existing judicial system having  been  set  up  under  the
                  Constitution and the law.  Therefore,  in  my  view,  once
                  returned to Pakistan, [A1's]  return  will  not  remain  a
                  secret for an extended period  of  time  and  he  will  be
                  arrested by the authorities due to his alleged involvement
                  in sectarian violence and killing.  Hence his trial  under
                  the newly established speedy trial Military Courts,  which
                  I do not see as a fair prospect for a  man  who  maintains
                  his innocence and fears to be targeted by the  authorities
                  and  anti-Shia  extremists  due  to  his  Shia  faith   in
                  Pakistan.'

         47.  Mr Olphert submitted in closing that there is  a  'functioning
             judicial system' in Pakistan.  He pointed to the  judgment  in
             the murder trial in which fourteen of the  sixteen  defendants
             were acquitted, which would not have happened, he said, if the
             trial had been less than fair.  Equally, on A1's evidence  his
             father was arrested on 3 November 1994  (paragraphs  24-25  of
             his statement at page 14 of bundle 1) but was acquitted  by  a
             magistrate as appears from the judgment at  pages  102-103  of
             bundle 1 on  24  December  1995.   I  have  duly  noted  those
             examples of the 'functioning judicial system' in Pakistan  but
             it is A1's case that he  would  not  be  tried  by  the  anti-
             terrorism court in Lahore like the sixteen defendants  in  the
             murder trial, or tried by a magistrate like  his  father,  but
             rather by the Military Courts described by Mrs Moeen.  I  have
             to conclude from the evidence of the expert that  it  is  less
             than realistically likely that A1 would in such  circumstances
             receive a fair trial and would thus be at risk of  persecution
             by state actors by reason of his imputed political opinion  or
             religion."

27. The expert evidence was clear, despite the fact that others  allege  to
    have been involved in the attack in August 1994 had been tried before a
    civil court, the law in Pakistan had moved on  and  acts  of  terrorism
    "including sectarian violence and killings" would now be  tried  before
    military courts with the prospect of  an  unfair  trial.   It  was  not
    suggested before me that if A1 were tried before a  military  court  he
    would not be at risk  of  an  unfair  trial  and  the  consequences  as
    claimed.  The judge was entitled to accept the  expert  evidence  that,
    despite the earlier prosecution in the civil courts, there was  a  real
    risk that A1 would be prosecuted in  a  military  court  and  with  the
    consequent risk of an unfair trial.

    Point 3

28. Finally, in relation to the  Secretary  of  State's  challenge  to  the
    judge's acceptance of the documents, in particular the FIRs  and  court
    documents, the expert report was, again, clear and  unequivocal,  based
    upon  verification  with  the  Pakistan  authorities,  that  they  were
    genuine.  If they were genuine, then the judge  was  entitled  to  rely
    upon their contents.  In a case where the genuineness of a document  is
    not raised nor can be established, in order to  determine  whether  the
    documents are "reliable" the accepted  approach  is  to  consider  them
    together with all the evidence in the round (see Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]
    Imm AR  318).   Perhaps,  unusually,  here  the  judge  had  clear  and
    unequivocal expert evidence that these  documents  were  genuine.   The
    Secretary of State has not put forward any argument that  the  expert's
    report is in any way flawed in its assessment and conclusions.

29. The Secretary of State relies, in her grounds, upon the fact  that  the
    judge did not take into account that he had  rejected  the  appellant's
    claim based upon being part of a prominent Shi'a family.   However,  it
    is clear from the judge's reasoning at paras 53-61, this was not  based
    upon any adverse credibility finding.  At worst,  the  judge  concluded
    that A1 had "greatly exaggerated his importance and the consequences of
    his public displays of devotion" (see para 58).  The judge's assessment
    was that the facts did not disclose a real risk of persecution and that
    in any event there was a sufficiency of protection  from  the  Pakistan
    authorities to protect Shi'as.  None  of  this  undermined  the  expert
    evidence that the documents were genuine.

30. The grounds also rely upon the fact that the expert concluded that  the
    appellant could not be found on  the  current  "Most  Wanted"  list  in
    Pakistan as he claimed.  But in fact what the expert said at para 20 of
    her addendum report was that the Pakistan authorities  had  refused  to
    verify whether A1 was in fact the man named as the "no 11 in  the  Most
    Wanted List of the FIA".  There was no positive evidence  that  he  was
    not included on that list, just as there  was  no  positive  supporting
    evidence that he was included on the list.  I see no basis  upon  which
    that being the position it can be argued that the judge was  not  fully
    entitled  to  accept  the  expert's  evidence,  which  was  clear   and
    unequivocal, that the relied upon documents were genuine.

31. For these reasons, I reject the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.

Decision

32. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellants' appeals on asylum grounds did not involve the making of  an
    error of law.  That decision, therefore, stands.

33. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.



                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Date: 12 October 2016
