
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA 06564 2007

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 June 2014                               |On 12 February 2015          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                awara mohamed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this case we see no need for an order restricting publication and we
    make no order.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Iraq against a decision of First-tier
    Tribunal who dismissed his appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State to remove him from the United Kingdom. It his case that he  is
    a refugee or otherwise entitled to international protection.   In  this
    case in particular he contended that he was  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection under the Qualification Directive. His appeal was  dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal eventually on 22 May 2008 but found its  way
    to the Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal set aside that  decision
    and ordered that the appeal be decided again in this Tribunal.

 3. There was a directions hearing before Senior Immigration  Judge  Storey
    (as he then was) on 3 March 2011 and relevant part of that decision  is
    in the following terms:
         "I further direct that in the case  of  Mohamed  the  next  hearing
         should proceed on the basis that the appellant had been  found  not
         credible in relation to aspects of his account save for:
         (1) his Kurdish ethnicity;
         (2) his Sunni religion faith; and
         (3) his home area being Kirkuk.
         This is a case in which the Immigration Judge  has  been  found  to
         have materially erred in law (see Court of Appeal consent order and
         accompanying statement of reasons dated  30  September  2009).   In
         respect of this appellant the sole purpose of the hearing  to  come
         is to examine whether he faces  risk  on  return  applying  current
         country guidance."

 4. When that decision was made  on  3  March  2011  Judge  Storey  clearly
    contemplated a relatively swift disposal but that did  not  happen.  We
    assume this was because this Tribunal was awaiting the decision of  the
    Court of Appeal in the case we now know as HM  (Iraq)  &  Anor  v  SSHD
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1536.  That was as decision where the  current  country
    guidance  was  challenged.  Subsequently  the  relevant  guidance   was
    affirmed  in  HM  and  others  (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2012]  UKUT
    00409(IAC) which we must follow.

 5.   We are quite satisfied  that  the  circumstances  outlined  by  Judge
    Storey in his directions do  not  qualify  a  person  for  humanitarian
    protection or any other kind of protection.

 6. There was no appearance before us. We are satisfied that proper service
    was effected on the appellant at his last known  address  for  service,
    being an address in Middlesbrough, and  on  his  then  representatives,
    Refugee and Migrant Justice.  Records show that notification was  given
    by first-class post on 12 May 2014 and that gives ample  time  for  the
    appellant or his representatives to have contacted us directly if there
    had been a query.

 7. The appellant has not disappeared from  the  scene.   Mr  Saunders  has
    produced a file note showing that the appellant  presented  himself  to
    the Tees Reporting Centre in March 2014 where he expressed a desire  to
    leave the United Kingdom.   We have looked at this carefully. It cannot
    be properly construed as an indication that he wanted  to  abandon  the
    appeal and it is not evidence that he has left the United  Kingdom  but
    it is evidence that as recently as March he was  in  contact  with  the
    authorities and made it plain he no longer  wanted  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 8. Mr Saunders was further able to show that as recently as 10 June he was
    in contact with the authorities.

 9. We do not think that the appellant has any real  interest  in  pursuing
    this appeal or any expectation that it will be allowed.  If he has been
    in contact with his solicitors who have given the kind of  advice  that
    could be expected from a competent firm of advisors who  aware  of  the
    country guidance then it is unsurprising that he has seen no  point  in
    making the journey from Middlesbrough.

10. We are satisfied on the evidence before us that he cannot show that  he
    comes within the terms of the directive.  We  follow  established  case
    law and country guidance and we dismiss the appeal that is before us.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 February 2015               |












