
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06181/2014
                                                               AA/06643/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   (1) s m
                                   (2) j m
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Manning (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Birk,  promulgated  on  25th  March  2015,  following  the  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 5th March 2015.  In the determination,  the
    Judge dismissed the appeals of the  first  and  the  second  Appellants
    herewith, whereupon they both applied for, and were granted, permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are sibling sister and brother.   The  first  Appellant,
    the sister, was born on 21st January 1994.  The second  Appellant,  the
    brother, was born on 6th August 1990.  Both are nationals of  Zimbabwe.
    Both come from Harare, and arrived in the UK in April 2009 on  a  multi
    visit visa.  Their mother and sister already reside in the  UK.   Their
    mother had made a claim for asylum which was rejected by an Immigration
    Judge on 25th January 2010.  Following this, on 30th April  2012,  both
    the Appellants made an application for leave to remain outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and when that was refused on  25th  May  2012,  they
    claimed asylum on 4th June 2014, and the Respondent issued her  refusal
    letter on 6th August 2014.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is that they have each been physically  assaulted
    and threatened by ZANU-PF groups on a number of occasions due to  their
    mother being a member of the MDC, and because she  was  a  teacher,  so
    that both the Appellant  children  were  seen  as  traitors  and  spies
    because  they  had  travelled  to  the  UK  (see  paragraph  5  of  the
    determination).  The Appellants' case, however, is that they themselves
    were not members of the MDC.  They were also not themselves involved in
    politics.  They had each attended  meetings  in  the  UK  by  going  to
    Zimbabwe vigils.  They claimed that they would have now been viewed  as
    spies and traitors since they could not demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-
    PF regime.

The Judge's Findings

 4. By the time of the hearing before  Judge  Birk,  there  was  additional
    evidence provided to her in the form of photographic  evidence  that  a
    former solicitor had sent the Appellant's mother  pictures  of  himself
    with a prominent ZANU-PF member.  The Judge accepted this as a credible
    proposition.  She held that,

         "I find that the Appellants' passports are held by the solicitor as
         they would have been handed to him to advance their claim and  that
         this means that the solicitor has their details and is aware of the
         family background and that he has connections to  the  ZANU-PF.   I
         find that there is a risk that the ZANU-PF could be  alerted  about
         the Appellants on return" (paragraph 23).

 5. The Judge also then went on to look at the  Appellants'  own  political
    involvement with the MDC and held that they were not members themselves
    and also had not been  politically  active.   Such  support  that  they
    showed for the MDC  was  "only  very  low  level  support  in  the  UK"
    (paragraph 24).

 6. The Judge went on to apply the country guidance  case  of  CM  (EM  CG;
    disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059 and observed once again  that
    the Appellants do not have a significant MDC profile.  They  both  live
    in Harare.  Neither Appellant has demonstrated that they  are  featured
    on any of the lists for being targeted for  harassment.   She  observed
    that the case guidance indicated that a failed asylum seeker without  a
    significant MDC profile would  not  face  a  real  risk  of  having  to
    demonstrate loyalty to ZANU-PF (paragraph 25).

 7. What the Judge did, however, also additionally add was that, "there has
    been persecution in the past and there is  a  risk  that  their  former
    solicitor may have connections with the ZANU-PF and  there  is  a  risk
    that this could cause them some difficulties on return" (paragraph 25).
     The Judge did, in considering this particular aspect of the claim,  go
    on to then hold that,

         "... however, the  Appellants  have  not  established  that  facing
         adverse attention would cause them to face treatment  amounting  to
         persecution on return as it does not raise their profiles to be one
         that of having a significant MDC profile.  I find that  they  could
         return to Harare.  Alternatively looking at return to Bulawayo they
         could relocate and I do not find it unduly  harsh  or  unreasonable
         for them to do so" (paragraph 25).

    The  appeal  was  thereafter  dismissed  both  on  asylum  grounds,  on
    humanitarian grounds, as well as on human rights grounds.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application argue that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
    paragraph 339K of HC 395  and  CM  (EM  country  guidance;  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059.  This is because the Appellants would be
    at risk of persecution during the  second  stage  of  interrogation  on
    arrival at the airport.  Further, it would be unduly harsh for them  to
    relocate to Bulawayo.  Accordingly, the Judge failed to  consider  that
    the Appellants were in a heightened risk category.  This was given  the
    Judge's own findings that they had suffered past persecution.  In these
    circumstances, internal relocation to Bulawayo would  be  unduly  harsh
    for the Appellants who were of Shona ethnicity.

 9. On 27th June 2015, permission to appeal was granted.

10. On 19th August 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered, this  was  to  the
    effect that the Judge had specifically considered the country  guidance
    case and had concluded that on return the Appellants  would  not  reach
    the level of persecution  required  as  their  profiles  would  not  be
    significant MDC profiles.  The finding was entirely open to the  Judge.
    Even if the Appellants are of Shona ethnicity this does not  cross  the
    threshold of persecution required under the law.

The Hearing

11. At the hearing before me on 27th November 2015,  Ms  Manning  submitted
    that the facts here were  that  the  Appellants  had  suffered  serious
    assault because their mother was a teacher and a  member  of  the  MDC.
    The Appellants were targeted for that reason.  Secondly, the  solicitor
    was a ZANU-PF member with prominent connections and would  have  passed
    on information to the authorities thus placing the Appellants at  risk.
    The Judge had found the  Appellants  to  be  credible  in  every  other
    respect.  The only  issue  was  whether  these  facts  would  point  to
    persecution at the lower standard.  The Judge  was  wrong  to  conclude
    that it would not point to persecution.  This was because at paragraphs
    23 and 25 the Judge had already found there to be past persecution, and
    it was reasonable to assume that this persecution will continue in  the
    future.

12. For her part, Ms Everett submitted that the Judge  had  looked  at  the
    country guidance case.  He had found that the Appellants themselves did
    not have an MDC profile of any significance.  They were not politically
    active.   Therefore,  they  themselves  would  not  be   at   risk   of
    persecution.  Whilst  it  was  accepted  that  internal  relocation  to
    Bulawayo might well be difficult, it could still  occur  within  Harare
    itself.

13. In reply, Ms Manning submitted the persecution here had  been  by  non-
    state agents and the state had been unable to prevent such  persecution
    by ZANU-PF members.   It  was  likely  to  continue  now.   The  family
    background here was such that persecution would follow.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  Judge  involved
    the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1)  of  TCEA  2007)  such
    that I should set aside the  decision.   My  reasons  are  as  follows.
    First, the Judge has made a clear finding  that,  "on  account  of  the
    Appellants' former solicitor being seen with a prominent ZANU-PF member
    and passing on information, that, I find that there is a risk that  the
    ZANU-PF could be alerted about the  Appellants  on  return"  (paragraph
    23).  In addition, the Judge has gone on to say that, "there  has  been
    persecution in the past and there is a risk that their former solicitor
    may have connections with the ZANU-PF and that there  is  a  risk  that
    this could cause them some difficulties on return" (paragraph 25).

15. Second, the Judge had clearly concluded that,

         "... the Appellants have been consistent in their oral and  written
         evidence as to the assaults that they each suffered from the  ZANU-
         PF.  I find that there is no reason to find that these assaults did
         not take place bearing in mind the  power  and  actions  that  were
         taken by the ZANU-PF at that time in Zimbabwe ..." (paragraph  21).



16. In the light of these two different sources  of  risk  that  the  Judge
    adverted to, paragraph 339K of HC 395 was plainly relevant.

17. This reads that,

         "... the fact that a person has already been subject to persecution
         or serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution or  harm,
         will be regarded as a serious  indication  of  the  person's  well-
         founded fear of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated".

18. The existing country guidance  decisions  had  to  be  applied  in  the
    context of this background.  That being so, it was clear that,  if  the
    Appellants had suffered persecution in the past, as a result  of  their
    mother being a teacher, then this would have placed the  Appellants  in
    an enhanced or heightened risk category by  association,  and  this  is
    clear from paragraph 10 of CM (EM CG; disclosure)  Zimbabwe  CG  [2013]
    UKUT 00059.   These  were  not  matters  that  the  Judge  gave  proper
    consideration to.  Accordingly, given that "anxious scrutiny" has to be
    applied, I find that the Judge fell into error.

Re-Making the Decision

19. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    Judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am allowing this appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted
    back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard  by  a  Judge  other  than
    Judge Birk, under Practice Statement  7.2(b)  in  that  the  nature  or
    extent of the judicial fact-finding, which is necessary  in  order  for
    the decision and the appeal to be remade is such that, having regard to
    the overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. I am particularly concerned in that there has been no proper evaluation
    made of the role of the  Appellants'  previous  solicitor  in  exposing
    these Appellants to further risk given that he has  been  seen  with  a
    prominent member of the ZANU-PF.  These are matters, however, that must
    be explored upon evidence being heard before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    again.

21. So also, must the situation with respect  to  internal  relocation,  be
    properly explored given that the Appellants are of Shona ethnicity.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original Judge.  This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  in
Birmingham to be determined by a Judge other than Judge Birk.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    4th December 2015

