

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06512/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 17th March 2014                           |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Broudie Jackson and
                       Canter
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be a national of Guinea aged 20. Her  dependent
    is her daughter who was born in the UK and is now  3  years  old.  They
    have permission to appeal against the determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Holt) to dismiss their appeal  against  a  decision  to
    remove them from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  That decision was dated the 27th June
    2013 and followed from  the  Secretary  of  State's  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's claim to international protection.




    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The first matter in issue was whether the Appellant was at risk of harm
    as a victim of trafficking for purposes  of  sexual  exploitation.  The
    basis of her claim was that she had been  targeted  by  traffickers  in
    Guinea in September 2009. She had been attending a political rally when
    soldiers had opened fire on the crowd and in the ensuing chaos she  had
    been assisted to escape by a man named Paouri. This man had  taken  her
    to Sierra Leone where he had held  her  captive  and  forced  her  into
    domestic servitude. He had subsequently passed her on to  a  man  named
    John who told her that he was looking for a nanny for his  children  in
    the UK.   She claims that she was brought to the UK on a false passport
    in March 2010  and  was  immediately  forced  into  prostitution.    By
    December 2010 she was pregnant. She escaped and claimed asylum, stating
    that she feared return to Guinea  where  she  could  be  re-trafficked,
    and/or rejected by her family and  wider  society  for  having  been  a
    prostitute.

 3. The Appellant's daughter was born in May 2011. This gave  rise  to  the
    second plank of the claim. The Appellant  expressed  a  fear  that  her
    daughter, as an ethnic  Fulla,  would  be  subject  to  Female  Genital
    Mutilation (FGM) and/or that as a single mother with a young child they
    would be particularly vulnerable.

 4. The Respondent had rejected all  of  these  grounds  for  international
    protection. In a letter dated 21st June 2013 the Respondent noted  that
    fingerprint records showed the Appellant to be one  M  B,  national  of
    Sierra Leone, who  had  made  applications  for  entry  clearance  from
    Freetown in August 2008 and September 2009.   Although  the  Respondent
    agreed that both Guinea and  Sierra  Leone  are  source  countries  for
    trafficking, it was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  given  a
    consistent account discharging the burden of proof and showing that she
    had in fact been trafficked. The Competent Authority had concluded that
    she was not a victim of trafficking and a NSPCC report to the  contrary
    was simply a repetition of the Appellant's account and based on her own
    evidence.  In  the  alternative  the  Respondent  considered  that  the
    Appellant had demonstrated a "resourcefulness and capability" in coping
    with life in the UK and she could employ  those  same  tactics  in  the
    event of her return to her home country.   It was not accepted that she
    was in any danger of re-trafficking, even  if  her  account  was  true.
    The Respondent considered there to be a sufficiency of  protection  for
    victims of trafficking within Guinea and Sierra Leone.    In respect of
    her claimed fear for  her  daughter,  the  Respondent  noted  that  the
    Appellant had not adduced any evidence to show  that  she  herself  had
    been subject to FGM, and stated that if  she  wished  to  avoid  family
    pressure that her daughter be cut she could choose to live  apart  from
    her family.  The Respondent considered that the Appellant  could  avoid
    any danger of FGM by moving elsewhere within  Guinea  and  by  availing
    herself of the protection of the state and/or NGOs.
 5. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  that  the
    person who made the applications for entry clearance  in  Sierra  Leone
    was not her. The Tribunal rejected this "blanket denial" in  favour  of
    the "very detailed" fingerprint evidence provided by the Respondent and
    the fact that the photograph on the Sierra Leone passport of M B bore a
    remarkable  similarity  to  the  Appellant.   The  Tribunal  found  the
    Appellant and M B to be one and the same.  It followed from  this  that
    the Appellant had made two applications to come to the UK as a  student
    in 2008 and 2009 which demonstrated that she was "keen and motivated to
    be in the United Kingdom"; it also followed that her account of  flight
    from Guinea to Sierra Leone in 2009 could not be true.  The  fact  that
    the Appellant spoke French (officially a language  of  Guinea  and  not
    Sierra Leone) did not change that,  since  there  may  be  many  French
    speakers in Sierra Leone.    It was found that the Appellant's  account
    of how she came into contact with Paouri  was  vague,  superficial  and
    lacking in detail.     On the matter of escape from John  the  Tribunal
    considered it improbable that the Appellant would not know the name  of
    the strange woman who was kind enough to take her all the  way  to  the
    Home Office in Croydon; the Appellant had  further  given  inconsistent
    evidence about this, having told a counsellor that she had been  helped
    by women who had simply directed her there.   The  Tribunal  considered
    other evidence that had been supplied by the Appellant, namely  reports
    by Ms Chapman of the NSPCC and Ms Massamba of  the  Merseyside  Refugee
    and Asylum Seekers Pre and Post Natal Support Group.  Of these  reports
    the determination states:


         "46...I find there is scant  evidence  that  they  have  critically
         assessed the appellant's account. They do not seem aware of, and do
         not really comment upon, any inconsistencies.  I  find  that  their
         reports are written with an  attitude  of  sympathetic,  uncritical
         acceptance of everything stated by the appellant. I have  no  doubt
         that they are motivated by a  desire  to  assist  and  protect  the
         appellant having decided that she is a  vulnerable  single  mother,
         but, I find that theirs was not a forensic approach.  There  is  no
         acknowledgement that they are independent or  impartial  witnesses.
         They do not claim to be expert  witnesses,  owing  a  duty  to  the
         Tribunal rather than the parties (equating to part 35 of the  Civil
         Procedure Rules)... crucially I am not  satisfied  that  either  Ms
         Massamba or Ms Spencer Chapman was party to the fingerprint  and/or
         photographic  evidence  and  the   information   about   the   visa
         applications. If they were,  there  is  no  acknowledgment  of  the
         potential weight and significance of that evidence...."


 6. In respect of FGM the Tribunal accepted that this "monstrous  practice"
    is widespread in both Guinea and  Sierra  Leone.  It  was  not  however
    accepted that the Appellant had been subject to FGM herself. No medical
    evidence had been  provided,  nor  was  there  any  evidence  from  the
    hospital  where  she  had  given  birth  to  that  effect.   In   those
    circumstances the Tribunal could not be satisfied that there was a real
    risk to her daughter.  The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

    Error of Law


 7. The challenge to the Upper Tribunal is on one  ground  only:  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in its approach to the report by  Ms  Spencer
    Chapman of the NSPCC.  It is submitted  that  this  expert  report  was
    prepared exceptionally by the NSPCC even after the Competent  Authority
    had found that the Appellant was not a victim of  trafficking  and  the
    local authority had found her to be an adult. It  was  prepared  by  an
    experienced practitioner who was able to place  the  evidence  in  this
    case in the context of objective evidence on trafficking, how survivors
    of trafficking might behave and present their evidence.    As such,  it
    is submitted, the First-tier Tribunal should have placed this report at
    the centre of its consideration  of  credibility,  rather  than  as  an
    "afterthought".     Further  the  Appellant  takes   issue   with   the
    suggestion that Ms  Spencer  Chapman  was  not  aware  of  the  alleged
    discrepancies in the evidence, in particular the  matter  of  the  visa
    applications.


 8. The report of Ms Spencer Chapman is dated the 20th February 2012.   She
    begins by explaining why she and her team in the NSPCC  National  Child
    Trafficking Advice and  Information  Line  (CTAIL)  have  the  relevant
    expertise and experience to be involved in this case.  CTAIL was set up
    in 2007 in response to the government's recognition that  there  was  a
    dearth in awareness and training about  child  trafficking.  They  work
    with the Home Office, the police,  children's  social  services,  youth
    offending teams and others to offer a  multi-disciplinary  approach  to
    cases. Ms Spencer Chapman has ten years of experience in  working  with
    asylum seekers and has been a Children's Services Practitioner with the
    NSPCC since 2008. She is a qualified social worker and counsellor.   Mr
    Brown submitted that the determination arguably contains  an  error  of
    fact amounting to an error of law in that paragraph 46 suggests that Ms
    Spencer Chapman was not an expert, or alternatively that  she  was  not
    putting herself forward  as  an  expert.  I  would  agree  that  it  is
    difficult to read this report without concluding that the author is  an
    expert who is very much aware of her role. That she has  not  in  terms
    referred to  the  Ikarian  Reefer,  Procedure  Rules  or  any  Practice
    Direction does not automatically diminish the weight to be attached  to
    her evidence: RB (Somalia) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 277.


 9. Further error is identified in the grounds of appeal in that the First-
    tier Tribunal found that Ms  Spencer  Chapman  was  not  aware  of  the
    fingerprint evidence, or that if  she  was  that  she  paid  sufficient
    attention to it. The report is  dated  February  2012  and  Ms  Spencer
    Chapman states at the outset that she has "looked at the case documents
    in detail". Any "case document" by that stage would have  set  out  the
    issue of the Freetown applications since the matter was first raised by
    the  Respondent  in  February  2011  and  had  been  addressed  in  all
    subsequent material, for instance  in  the  asylum  interview  and  the
    Appellant's own witness statement. That she was aware of this matter is
    clear from the body of the report since Ms Spencer  Chapman  refers  to
    "discrepancies between the visa applications and M's  account"  on  the
    first page and then again on no fewer than five occasions.  Furthermore
    Ms Spencer Chapman specifically considers reasons why  the  Appellant's
    account may not tally with the visa records, for instance the fact that
    traffickers instruct their victims to present a particular narrative in
    order to avoid detection. It was therefore an error for the Tribunal to
    proceed on the assumption that this report was prepared in ignorance of
    this issue, which was the main plank of the Respondent's case.   As the
    use of the word "crucially" in paragraph 46 makes clear, this erroneous
    understanding was central to the decision to place limited weight on Ms
    Spencer Chapman's evidence.   I am satisfied that this  error  of  fact
    amounts to an error of law.


10. In granting permission to appeal Judge  Davey  comments:  "the  Judge's
    decision appears to have failed to recognise the report's relevance  to
    credibility issues and needed to be an integral part of the findings on
    credibility and not, as it appears, an "add-on"  (Mibanga  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367)". Although this is  an  otherwise  well-written  and  thorough
    decision, I must agree.   The whole point of the report of  Ms  Spencer
    Chapman was that it was an expert assessment of the Appellant's account
    offered in the full knowledge that there were serious discrepancies  in
    the evidence, and  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  had  already  been
    rejected by both the Competent Authority and social workers  conducting
    the age assessment.   As such it  was  of  great  significance  to  the
    Appellant's case and merited more careful attention than it received in
    paragraph 46 of this determination.



    Disposal

11. I find that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  contains  an
    error of law such that it should be set aside.  The  error  is  in  the
    approach taken to the NSPCC report as identified above and as such  the
    credibility findings made cannot be preserved.  In those  circumstances
    the parties agreed that should an error be found this matter  would  be
    an appropriate one to remit  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  given  the
    extent of the judicial fact-finding required.




      Decisions


12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does contain an  error  of  law
    such that it is set aside.


13. The decision is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

14. In view of the matters raised in this appeal  and  the  fact  that  the
    dependent Appellant is a minor I make a direction for anonymity  having
    regard to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                3rd May 2014
