
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06856/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                            NIROSAN SELVARATHINAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy (counsel), instructed by Ravi
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Andrew promulgated on 20 October 2014,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background

3.    The appellant was born on 18 May 1986. He is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

4.    On 28 August 2014, the respondent refused the  appellant's  claim  for
asylum. The appellant appealed against  that  decision  to  the  First  Tier
Tribunal.

The Judge's Decision

5.     First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  ("the  Judge")  dismissed   the
appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision  on  all  grounds.  The
Judge relied on the case of GJ and Others (post-civil  war:  returnees)  Sri
Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and found that the appellant is not  active
within the Diaspora and so would not be of interest to  the  authorities  in
Sri Lanka.

6     Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  15  June  2015,  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Eshun gave permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

    "There are eight grounds of appeal. While some are weaker than  others,
    it is appropriate to grant permission for all the grounds to be argued.
    "

The Hearing

7.    Mr Paramjorthy, Counsel for the appellant, adopted the  terms  of  the
grounds of  appeal  as  his  principal  submission  and  told  me  that  the
determination contains a clear error of law. Mr Paramjorthy focused  on  the
Judge's refusal to grant an adjournment and said that the Judge's  reasoning
was influenced  by  the  paucity  of  evidence  of  the  appellant's  family
removing to India, and that, if an adjournment had  been  granted,  evidence
which has come to the appellant's hands since the decision  was  promulgated
could have been produced which could have altered the  judge's  findings  in
fact.

8.    Mr Nath, for the respondent, referred me to the respondent's  Rule  24
response dated 15 July 2015 and adopted the terms of that Rule 24  response.
He told me that the respondent's position  is  that  if  the  appellant  has
fresh evidence, his remedy is to submit a fresh claim for asylum  and  that,
in any event, the determination does not contain a  material  error  of  law
and the findings within the determination are findings which  were  open  to
the  Judge;  that,  in  reality,  the  appellant's  appeal   is   simply   a
disagreement with the findings of the Judge.

Analysis

9     There are  eight  grounds  of  appeal.  Rather  than  making  detailed
submissions in relation to each of the eight grounds of appeal, counsel  for
the appellant focused on the first ground  relating  to  the  refusal  to  a
request to adjourn the hearing and obtain further evidence (Ground 1 in  the
grounds of appeal).

10.   This case was heard on 17 October 2014, so that the procedure for  the
hearing is governed by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
Rules 2005. Rule 21 of those Procedure  Rules  deals  with  adjournments  at
appeals. Rule 21(3) of the 2005 Rules is in the following terms:

    "21.   (3)   The Tribunal must not, in particular, adjourn a hearing on
    the application of a party in order to allow the  party  more  time  to
    produce evidence, unless satisfied that-

             (a) the evidence relates to a matter in dispute in the appeal;

             (b) it  would  be  unjust  to  determine  the  appeal  without
             permitting the party a  further  opportunity  to  produce  the
             evidence; and

             (c) where the party has failed to comply with  directions  for
             the production of the evidence, he has provided a satisfactory
             explanation for that failure."

11     The  Judge  dealt  with  the  adjournment  request  at  [13]  of  the
determination and referred to the "overriding objective" which is  found  at
Paragraph 4 of the 2005 Rules and is in the following terms:

    "Overriding objective

    4.     The overriding objective  of  these  Rules  is  to  secure  that
    proceedings before the Tribunal are  handled  as  fairly,  quickly  and
    efficiently as possible; and, where appropriate, that  members  of  the
    Tribunal have responsibility for ensuring this, in the interests of the
    parties to the proceedings and in the wider public interest."

12.   In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was
held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.

13.   In R (on the application of AM (Cameroon) v AIT [2007]  EWCA  Civ  131
the Court of Appeal said that unfair  decisions  on  interlocutory  matters,
such as adjournments or the admission of evidence, can amount to  errors  of
law.  Such decisions will have to be grounds for arguing that  they  display
gross procedural unfairness or a complete denial of  natural  justice.   The
Court of Appeal thought that was the  case  because  the  Immigration  Judge
refused to adjourn when the appellant was medically unfit to give  evidence;
because he listed the case for a day when counsel  was  not  available;  and
because he refused permission for evidence to be taken on the phone.

14    The question for me is therefore whether or not  the  refusal  of  the
application to adjourn deprived  the  appellant  of  his  right  to  a  fair
hearing. I am  told  that  since  the  determination  was  promulgated,  the
appellant has obtained documentary evidence that his family left  Sri  Lanka
and entered India early  in  2014  and  that  his  parents  are  treated  as
refugees in India.

15    At [13], the judge refused to grant an  adjournment,  stating  "I  was
satisfied that I would be able to hear  oral  evidence  relating  to  this",
referring to the appellant's contention that his family removed to India  in
February 2014. The judge commences [27] by stating "The only other  evidence
that I have that the appellant's parents and brothers are in  India  is  the
affidavit..." The judge does not, however,  reach  a  conclusion  about  the
appellant's family's whereabouts. The judge does not determine  whether  the
appellant's family have remained in Sri Lanka or have removed to India.

16.   The Judge  refused  the  application  to  adjourn,  finding  that  the
appellant had sufficient time to obtain  documentary  evidence  because  his
solicitors were acting for him when the grounds of appeal were filed  on  15
September 2014. The appeal was heard on 17 October 2014. The judge does  not
explain why she believed that one month and two days was sufficient time  to
obtain the documentary evidence.

17.   The location and circumstances of the appellant's family is  a  matter
which is capable of determining whether or not the  appellant  falls  within
one of  the  risk  factors  set  out  in  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC).  I  therefore  find  that
there was an unfairness in refusing to allow the appellant further  time  to
produce documentary evidence to support what is set out by the appellant  in
the witness statement relied on before the First Tier Tribunal.

Conclusion

18    I therefore find that the  determination  promulgated  on  20  October
2014 is tainted by a material error of law.

Remittal to the First tier Tribunal

19.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    '(a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.'

20.   In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the  matter
will be a complete re hearing.

21.   I consequently remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge (IAC) other than  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Andrew.

Decision

22.   The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by  a
material error of law.

23.   I set aside the decision.

24.   I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for determination of new.


Signed      Date 1st September 2015


                                        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
