
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06019/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 11 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR jan agha khomerkhel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Lay of Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms I Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and the
    respondent is  a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  1999.
    However, for convenience, I refer below to Mr Agha as the appellant and
    to the Secretary of State as the respondent, which are the designations
    they had before the proceedings at the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C  Newberry
    promulgated  on  10  January  2015,  allowing  the  appellant's  appeal
    pursuant  to  the  Refugee  Convention  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 8 August 2014, in  which  the  Secretary  of
    State  refused  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection in the United Kingdom.

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge C. Newberry gave the  following  reasons  for
    allowing the appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 3.

          i. [20] It is common ground that the appellant is  a  minor,  the
             assessed date of birth being as 1 January 1999 and that he  is
             from Afghanistan. It is also accepted that in  Afghanistan  he
             was uneducated and illiterate. It is also  accepted  that  the
             appellant  lived  with  his  parents  and  family  in  Nanghar
             province in a village called Safar in the Esarak District.

         ii. [21] One of the  most  important  questions  in  the  case  is
             whether the appellant's father was a Talib and a member of the
             Taliban. The appellant maintains  that  he  was.  He  says  he
             remembers his father carrying a rifle. His father would travel
             early in the morning to a local Taliban base, returned late at
             night. Nangarhar province is a known  Taliban  stronghold  and
             has been for  a  considerable  time...  It  does  make  in  my
             judgement, plausible that a male adult and  a  Pashtun  living
             there, could be a  member  of  the  Taliban.  The  appellant's
             written statement dated 4/9/13 indicates that the  appellant's
             father had already introduced his brother to the  Taliban  and
             the Taliban base. The appellant's brother had  told  him  that
             his brother had gone to jihad "in the mountains to  fight  the
             Americans".

        iii. [23] The respondent maintains that the appellant has  "adduced
             no evidence to confirm your father's role as a Taliban and  it
             is not accepted that your father is a member of the  Taliban".
             The respondent  considered  the  appellant's  account  of  his
             father's role in the Taliban was a "vague account".

         iv. [24] In my view it  is  not  realistic  to  expect  a  Taliban
             operative  to  give  any  meaningful  information  about   his
             activities or rank in the Taliban. What a minor does not  know
             cannot be extorted by torture.

          v. [27] The respondent maintains that the appellant's description
             of his two-day stay at the camp was vague because he  did  not
             know the distance  travelled  from  his  home,  he  could  not
             remember the time taken to get there, he was  unable  to  name
             the camp and he did not know  the  names  of  the  people  who
             trained him.

         vi. [28] Child  recruits  may  have  a  variety  of  reactions  to
             military training and the level of encouragement to capture  a
             young mind may vary. Initial tolerance may be a better policy.
             The descriptions of what happened at the camp do not  seem  to
             me to be vague or inconsistent. Similarly an uneducated  child
             in remote of Kurdistan might not be familiar  with  kilometres
             and the conversion of time taken to distance travelled.

        vii. [31] At paragraph 28 of the refusal letter reference  is  made
             to the UNANA Mission  Report  which  confirms  the  widespread
             practice of child recruitment by the Taliban. It  also  refers
             to  children  being  "tricked".  The  respondent  accepts   at
             paragraph 20 that child recruitment happens.

       viii. [32] In my view, is the son of a Taliban operative,  the  risk
             of forced recruitment is a real possibility. At  paragraph  30
             of the refusal letter the respondent makes the point that  the
             appellant will not be removed until he is an adult,  and  that
             being so he would no longer be a child  and  therefore  forced
             recruitment of a child could not occur. The reason behind this
             concession is that it is not safe to return the  appellant  to
             Afghanistan. Further  there  is  little,  if  any,  basis  for
             inferring with certainty inherent in this  paragraph  that  it
             will be safe when he is an adult.

         ix. [39] At paragraph 39 of  the  refusal  letter  the  respondent
             summarises its case. The respondent  accepts  the  appellant's
             identity, age and nationality, but rejects that his father  is
             a member of the Taliban, that his father tried to recruit  him
             into the Taliban, that his father took him to the camp for two
             days, that the appellant is at risk of recruitment,  that  the
             child is unattached or an orphan, that the appellant failed to
             take advantage of a reasonable  opportunity  to  claim  asylum
             whilst in the safe country.

          x. [40] For the reasons indicated above,  (primarily  the  expert
             report) in my  view  there  is  a  real  likelihood  that  the
             appellant's father was a member of the  Taliban.  Given  that,
             seeking to recruit his sons is consistent with those  beliefs.
             Child recruitment is far from perfection and in  my  view  was
             the objective of taking the appellant and indeed  his  brother
             to the base. It is not the appellant's  case  that  he  is  an
             orphan or unattached. On the appellant's evidence both parents
             are alive and in relation to his father, is the fear  that  on
             return his that he would be killed,  seriously  harmed  and/or
             forcibly recruited to the Taliban, either by his  father,  the
             Taliban or both. In my view this is a real possibility.

         xi. [42] The only  evidence  of  enforcement  appears  to  be  the
             reference in  the  refusal  letter  at  paragraph  47  of  the
             Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission where reliance
             was placed on records of what was recorded in 2010.  There  is
             no evidence of what "resolution" of  human  rights  violations
             actually were. Of equal concern is there is no  evidence  that
             since 2010 of what this Commission has done since then and  no
             explanation by the respondent why the absence of  records  for
             four or five years should mean this body is still  effectively
             functioning. There is  much  evidence  of  Taliban  in  forced
             recruitment of children, but no evidence of  any  prosecutions
             for it. Mr Zadeh in his report paints a different picture.

        xii. [43] The withdrawal of funding in 2012 is not consistent  with
             the  respondent's  contention  that  the  rule   of   law   is
             effectively protecting the population of  Afghanistan.  In  my
             view the appellant cannot expect with any degree of  certainty
             that if returned who would be afforded meaningful protection.

       xiii.  The  Judge  analysed  the  expert  report  and  concluded  at
             paragraph 47 that since the appellant would have  to  relocate
             to a Pashtun area, he will inevitably come to the attention of
             the Taliban who inhabit such areas. Notwithstanding  being  in
             such areas, the likelihood of  gaining  employment  is  remote
             because of the absence of his own family.

        xiv. [48] In addition to the significant problems, the expert deals
             with the issue of employment in his report. He draws attention
             to the difficulties  inherent  in  seeking  and  or  obtaining
             accommodation for the appellant.

         xv. [15] I have  concluded  that  the  appellant's  father  was  a
             Taliban and a member of  the  Taliban.  I  do  not  find  that
             looking at the evidence in the  round  of  a  minor  that  his
             accounts  was  vague  and  that  his  credibility  should   be
             impugned.

        xvi. The appeal was allowed on the appellant's asylum claim.

    Grounds of appeal

 4. The respondent in her grounds of appeal stated the  following  which  I
    summarise. The Judge stated at paragraph 51 of the  determination  that
    in  light  of  the  expert's  report,  relocation  to  Kabul  would  be
    unreasonable and expose the  appellant  to  a  considerable  danger  of
    serious harm. The panel in AK (article 15  (c)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
    UKUT  163  (IAC)  issued  the  following  guidance;  (iv)  whilst  when
    assessing a claim in the  context  of  article  15  (c)  in  which  the
    respondent  asserts  that  Kabul  City  would  be  a  viable   internal
    relocation alternative, it is necessary to take into account  (both  in
    assessing "safety" and "reasonableness") not only the level of violence
    in that city but also the difficulties experienced by that city's  poor
    and also the many Internally Displaced Persons  (IDP's)  living  there,
    these considerations will not in general make return to Kabul unsafe or
    unreasonable. The Judge has failed to give adequate reasons for finding
    that it would be  unreasonable  or  dangerous  for  this  appellant  to
    relocate to Kabul.

 5. The appellant relies upon the report of Mr Zadeh upon which  the  Judge
    has afforded decisive weight. His report is unduly vague and failed  to
    adequately engage with the particular facts of the appellant's case. It
    is not sufficiently clear  from  the  report  that  the  assertions  it
    contains  are  supported  by  reliable  evidence.  With  respect,   the
    respondent is unjustifiably subjective and appears  to  exaggerate  the
    risks to the appellant. One example  is  "the  type  of  pressure  that
    master Khomerkhel's father exerted on both brothers can be very  highly
    plausible in Kandahar province. Especially against the  Pashtuns,  this
    type of behaviour is common." The expert report gives a  firm  view  on
    the frequency of intra-family Taliban recruitment, without reference to
    facts or figures. The evidential value of this view is nil.  The  other
    generalisation is that "Pashtun young men like the appellant belong  to
    a category of Afghan population who are at  serious  risk  due  to  the
    ethnicity". This appears to be a sweeping generalisation, made  without
    reference to reliable  evidence.  Other  examples  were  given  in  the
    grounds of appeal.

 6. It is contended that the examples listed, illustrate the  inappropriate
    approach taken by the expert in the  report  as  a  whole.  The  global
    reading of the expert's report, no weight can properly be  attached  to
    it, save where it may be supported by  reliable  independent  evidence.
    The Judge has failed to approach the report from adequately critical or
    impartial perspective. The majority of  the  determination  appears  to
    consist of no more than the mechanical repetition of  the  report,  and
    wholesale acquiescence in this conclusions without  due  scrutiny.  The
    Judge thereby materially misdirected himself in law, by  accepting  the
    assertions of the expert at face value without conducting any  adequate
    independent assessment of  its  reliability.  He  has  also  failed  to
    consider whether this expert is considered to be an appropriate  person
    to give evidence on the matters stated. The Judge has further erred  by
    failing to direct himself as to the country guidance case of AK. He has
    not given adequate reasons for  departing  from  the  country  guidance
    case.

 7. The Judge has failed to consider the evidence in assessing credibility.
    The Judge's cumulative assessment of credibility  is  vitiated  by  his
    failure  to  have  any  regard  to  a  material  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's evidence. This material inconsistency  was  highlighted  in
    the refusal letter at paragraph 18 which stated "upon arriving  in  the
    UK and undergoing Home Office  checks,  it  was  found  that  you  were
    fingerprinted by the Greek authorities on  17  May  2013.  During  your
    screening interview, you stated that you had been  fingerprinted.  When
    it was put to you that the Home Office were aware that you were stopped
    on the 17 May 2013, you claimed "no it's not mine". During your written
    statement, you confirmed that you  had  been  fingerprinted,  held  and
    detained by the Greek authorities for 20 days. Your inability to remain
    consistent has damaged your credibility".

    The hearing

 8. At the hearing both parties agreed that there is an error of law in the
    determination. Mr Hodson submitted that he is not in a position to  put
    up many contravening arguments because the Judge has veered  off  to  a
    path which was  never  argued.  He  further  added  that  it  would  be
    untenable for him to say that the Judge's  reasoning  is  adequate.  He
    said that the nationality issue of the appellant was not addressed  and
    that the Judge failed to make  crucial  findings  or  engage  with  the
    evidence.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

 9. I am the view  that  the  Judge  materially  fell  into  error  in  his
    assessment of the appellant's appeal. The Judge failed to properly take
    into account the country guidance case of AK but instead  placed  undue
    reliance and weight on the expert report without giving full and cogent
    reasons for his departure. In AK it was stated that  when  assessing  a
    claim in the context of article 15 (c) in which the respondent  asserts
    that Kabul City would be a viable internal relocation  alternative,  it
    is necessary to take into  account  (both  in  assessing  "safety"  and
    "reasonableness") not only the level of violence in that city but  also
    the difficulties experienced by that city's  poor  and  also  the  many
    Internally Displaced Persons (IDP's) living there, these considerations
    will not in general make return to Kabul unsafe  or  unreasonable.  The
    Judge's almost sole reliance on the  expert  report  for  his  decision
    brought him into material error.

10. The Judge failed to take into account the credibility of the  appellant
    as raised by the respondent  in  her  reasons  for  refusal  letter  at
    paragraph 18 where the appellant was inconsistent about whether he  had
    been fingerprinted by the Greek authorities on 17 May 2013. The Judge's
    failure to take into account this inconsistency as it reflects  on  the
    appellant's credibility, brought him into material error.

11. I am satisfied that there is a material error in the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, in that he did not give adequate reasons for
    his findings on many issues in the appeal. Mr Hodson very sensibly  did
    not submit otherwise.

12. Consequential to my finding that there is a material error  of  law,  I
    set aside the determination of the first-tier Tribunal Judge preserving
    none of the findings.

  13. Both parties agreed in such an event, the appeal ought to be sent back
      to the First-tier Tribunal so that findings of fact  can  be  made.  I
      agreed that this was the proper course  of  action  to  take  in  this
      appeal in accordance with section 7. 2 (b) (i) the Senior  President's
      Practice Statement of 25 September 2012 as I was of the view that  the
      appeal requires judicial fact-finding and should to be  considered  by
      the First-tier Tribunal.

14. The re-making of the decision on appeal will be undertaken by a  First-
    tier Judge in the First-tier Tribunal other than by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Newbury on a date to be notified.

    Decision

15. The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed and  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.  The case is remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana Date 30th day of July 2015
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge
