

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA066722015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 6 June 2016                                |On 10 June 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                   REMZIA BADULA IDRIS (or HANNA IBRAHIM)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr A Dewar, Advocate; Peter G Farrell, Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant presently identifies herself as Remzia Badula Idris, born
    on 4 January 1989, a citizen of Eritrea.   She  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against a  decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Debra  Clapham,
    promulgated on 4 April 2016, dismissing her appeal against  refusal  of
    recognition as a refugee.

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal are quite lengthy.  In  essence  they
    are as follows.

      i) At paragraph 43 the judge criticised the appellant for giving  very
         little detail of her life in Saudi Arabia, and at paragraph 44  for
         giving further information about why she was deported  to  Eritrea.
         This approach is inconsistent and structurally flawed.

     ii) The judge erred in fact about the  information  the  appellant  had
         given, failed to state what further  information  she  should  have
         given, failed to consider the nature  of  the  questioning  of  the
         appellant (at interview), and raised matters  which  the  appellant
         had not been asked to address.  This ground is developed under  the
         following headings:

          a) Criticism over lack of detail of life  in  Saudi  Arabia.  The
             interview record is set out, from Q/A 52 to 69 and 72  to  78.
             The appellant gave further information about Saudi  Arabia  in
             her witness statement, in particular at pages 4, 5 and 6.   It
             was an error of fact to describe this as "very little detail".
              The judge failed to give the case the most anxious scrutiny.

          b) Detail about marriage.  The appellant confirmed  her  marriage
             at her second screening interview.  At  substantive  interview
             she answered questions about her marriage.  She  gave  further
             information in her witness statement at page 9  paragraph  34.
             She had thus given details about the date and  length  of  the
             marriage and reasons for separation.  It was incumbent on  the
             judge to refer to this information and to give  the  case  the
             most anxious scrutiny.

          c) Information about parents and father's death.   The  appellant
             said at Q/A 15 that her mother died when she was 2 years  old.
             The judge should not have expected the  appellant  to  provide
             details of a woman of whom she had very  little  memory.   The
             judge overlooked this fact.  The judge said at Q/A 28 that her
             father was taken away by soldiers in 2000 when she would  have
             been 11 years old.  She  confirmed  this  information  at  the
             hearing.  She was asked nothing further.  She  confirmed  that
             in her witness statement.  The judge failed  to  consider  the
             paucity of the questions relating to the  appellant's  father.
             The judge criticised her for giving  very  little  information
             about him, and also for giving further  information  when  she
             was asked.  This was an inconsistent and fundamentally  flawed
             approach.

          d) Information relating to Ethiopian passport.  The appellant was
             criticised for being unable to explain how she obtained a visa
             to Saudi Arabia and how she obtained  an  Ethiopian  passport,
             subsequently renewed.  Reference is made to Q/A 22, 29, 34-36,
             39, 40, 41, 46 and 54.  The appellant had said that  passports
             were obtained illegally  through  agents  in  both  Sudan  and
             Ethiopia who engaged in corruption.  The matter  was  arranged
             by her aunt when she was a child.  Although she was a child  a
             passport was obtained for her in an  adult  identity  as  they
             were told it was difficult to obtain a passport for  a  person
             "under age".  The judge accepted that forged  passports  could
             be  obtained.   The  criticism  [by]  the  FtT   was   "wholly
             inadequately reasoned".

    iii) There was more than adequate information before the judge to accept
         that in terms of her knowledge, language and claimed  history,  the
         appellant had shown to the lower standard that  she  was  Eritrean.
         Reconsideration was sought.

 3. Mr Dewar adopted the grounds in full, and submitted that the  essential
    complaint was that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  some  significant
    adminicles of evidence at all, and failed to give proper  consideration
    to others.  There was a detectable lack of anxious scrutiny.  On a fair
    reading of the decision, the judge adopted  an  inconsistent  approach,
    criticising the appellant both where she failed to provide  information
    and where she did so.  Although the judge maintained there was  a  lack
    of detail, Mr Dewar directed me to the grounds and to the transcript of
    the  interview  to  demonstrate   the   appellant   provided   detailed
    information and responded to each question asked -  points  (a)  and  (
    b).  On point (c), at Q/A  15  and  28  the  appellant  explained  what
    happened to  both  her  parents.   It  was  curious  to  criticise  the
    appellant for failing to give information about a mother who  had  died
    when she was aged only 2.  What information could have  been  expected?
    The criticism was entirely unfair.  On point (d), the judge at  43  and
    46 of her decision came to scathing conclusions about the obtaining  of
    a passport but again there was a  clear  explanation  provided  by  the
    appellant and it was  baffling  why  the  judge  should  have  said  at
    paragraph 46 that she was "at a complete loss to  understand  how  [the
    appellant] managed to obtain an Ethiopian passport which  passport  was
    subsequently renewed."

 4. Mr Dewar referred to MN and KY v SSHD [2014] UKSC at paragraph 31:
    There is another important aspect to cases such  as  the  present.  The
    higher courts have emphasised the special responsibility carried by the
    tribunals in the context of asylum appeals. It  is  customary  in  this
    context to speak of the need for  "anxious  scrutiny"  (following  R  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex p  Bugdaycay  [1987]  AC
    514, 531 per Lord Bridge of Harwich). As a concept this is not  without
    its difficulties, but I repeat what I said in R  (YH)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2010] 4 All ER 448, para 24:
          "...   the   expression   [anxious   scrutiny]   in   itself   is
          uninformative. Read literally, the words are descriptive not of a
          legal principle but of a state of mind: indeed, one  which  might
          be thought an 'axiomatic' part of any judicial  process,  whether
          or not involving asylum or human rights. However, it has by usage
          acquired special significance as  underlining  the  very  special
          human context in which such cases are brought, and the  need  for
          decisions to show by their  reasoning  that  every  factor  which
          might tell in favour of an applicant has been properly taken into
          account. I would add,  however,  echoing  Lord  Hope  [in  R  (BA
          Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] 1 AC
          444, para 32], that there is a  balance  to  be  struck.  Anxious
          scrutiny may work both ways. The cause of genuine asylum  seekers
          will not be helped by undue  credulity  towards  those  advancing
          stories  which  are  manifestly   contrived   or   riddled   with
          inconsistencies."

 5. Mr Dewar argued that the decision showed a failure to take  account  of
    every factor which might tell in favour of an applicant, which amounted
    to a lack of anxious scrutiny, and so the decision was irrational.   If
    due weight had been given to the evidence in favour of  the  appellant,
    the judge would have reached  a  different  conclusion.   On  a  proper
    reading of the evidence she had shown that she was Eritrean, and had  a
    well found  fear  of  persecution.   The  appellant  had  the  required
    knowledge of Eritrea to demonstrate that  she  is  a  citizen  of  that
    country.  The  explanation  offered  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and
    accepted by the judge that she could have acquired that  knowledge  was
    itself wholly implausible (refusal letter paragraph 24).  The  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and the appeal should be
    allowed.

 6. Mr Dewar  accepted  my  observation  that  if  I  were  to  accept  his
    submission that there had been material error of law, but  not  to  the
    extent that there could only rationally have been  one  answer  to  the
    case, the outcome ought to be to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    fresh hearing.

 7. The Secretary of State's response to the grounds of appeal  under  Rule
    24 is dated 29 April 2016.  It states that it is written without  sight
    of the file, interview records  and  witness  statement.   However,  it
    points out that on the face of the decision - paragraphs 26, 31(i)  and
    42 - the appellant admitted at the hearing that most of  what  she  had
    told the respondent was a lie.  The Tribunal was entitled to  base  its
    decision upon that, as well as upon the significant number of differing
    accounts the appellant had provided.  It was notable that the appellant
    had not been re-examined in light of the significant number of  adverse
    issues which  had  emerged  from  cross-examination,  particularly  her
    admissions of lying.  It was a matter for the judge  in  light  of  the
    submissions for both sides to determine the weight to be given  to  the
    appellant's evidence and claims.  The judge had given adequate  reasons
    for not finding the appellant credible.

 8. Mrs O'Brien relied upon that response, and  pointed  out  that  it  was
    plain that the appellant had given entirely different accounts  of  her
    identity and history.  She had admitted that her previous  versions  to
    the Home Office were false.  The criticisms  made  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal were too narrowly drawn.  Looking at the case as a whole, it was
    easy to see why the judge concluded that the appellant continued to  be
    a stranger to the truth.  To labour now the evidence she gave about her
    life in Saudi Arabia was an attempt to distract from the  poor  overall
    case she had put.  Even her name and true identity  remain  a  mystery.
    It was far from unclear why  the  judge  had  taken  the  view  of  the
    evidence which she did.  The judge's  concern  was  not,  for  example,
    about matters the appellant could not have known because she was only a
    toddler, but about the evolving and changing  narrative  she  advanced.
    On the matter of the appellant's marriage, the appellant's  consistency
    was to be analysed not only by  reference  to  what  she  said  at  her
    substantive interview but  also  by  what  she  said  at  the  hearing,
    admitting she was a false witness, and at her screening interview, when
    she put forward an entirely different story.  She gave different  years
    for her marriage and two different names for her  husband.   The  judge
    had not referred in her conclusions backwards  in  detail  to  all  the
    contradictions in the case, but the decision had to be read as a whole,
    including the submissions for the respondent at paragraph 31(i) to  (v)
    on why this continued to be a manufactured claim.   The  appellant  now
    asked for the judge's conclusions to be assessed in particular by  what
    she said at one of her several interviews, but the overall context  was
    wider than that.  Once that context was examined it did not  show  that
    the appellant had been  bound  to  succeed,  but  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to reject her case for the reasons given.

 9. Mr Dewar in response  said  that  the  submission  for  the  respondent
    focused on questions of fact, but the overriding issue here was one  of
    law, as exemplified in the citation above.  It went too far to say that
    if the appellant was once an admitted liar, her further story  must  be
    false and did not require to examined.  Either the  judge  had  applied
    anxious scrutiny or she had not; and in this case she plainly had  not.



10. I reserved my decision.

11. The thrust of the grounds of appeal is that the  judge  went  wrong  in
    finding the appellant's account inconsistent  and  lacking  in  detail,
    putting that conclusion in context of certain of  the  information  she
    provided.  However, the context into which the appellant seeks  to  put
    the judge's conclusions is artificially restricted and in truth has  to
    be framed much further.

12. The judge cautioned herself at paragraph 41 about the need to  approach
    issues of credibility with care.  The  reasoning  at  paragraphs  41-50
    should be read in full, and in context.  On that approach, it is  plain
    the judge expressed sensible reasons for  finding  that  the  appellant
    failed to establish the truth of  her  claims,  in  their  most  recent
    version, even to the lower standard, and that there was no  failure  in
    the duty of anxious scrutiny.

13. I see considerable force in the submission by Mrs O'Brien  that  rather
    than the decision disclosing any such deficiency, the  case  fell  into
    the category at the end of the passage which Lord Carnwath confirmed in
    MM and KY: "The cause of genuine asylum seekers will not be  helped  by
    undue credulity towards those advancing stories  which  are  manifestly
    contrived or riddled with inconsistencies."  The  judge  in  this  case
    founded on inconsistencies  over  such  fundamental  matters  as  name,
    nationality, age, names of the appellant's husband, and whether or  not
    she has a sibling.

14. Although advanced under a heading of legal error, the grounds of appeal
    resolve into  no  more  than  an  insistence  that  the  truth  of  the
    appellant's latest version of herself should have been accepted.

15. While that is sufficient to dispose of the case, I note that the  judge
    went on to find in the alternative that  even  if  the  appellant  were
    Eritrean then given her departure  from  that  country  in  2002,  well
    before the critical date of  September  2008,  and  having  been  found
    otherwise wholly incredible, it was not to be assumed, applying country
    guidance, that she would be perceived as having committed  any  act  of
    disloyalty or would be at real risk of persecution or serious  harm  on
    return.

16. The appellant has not sought to tackle these  alternative  conclusions,
    by which her appeal would have failed in any event.

17. The determination has not been shown to be  affected  by  any  material
    error of law, and it shall stand.


            [pic]


            9 June 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




