
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06063/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th June 2015                             |On 26th June 2015             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     zl
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Shah of Counsel instructed by Eden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant has appealed against a decision of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Birk promulgated following a hearing  on  23rd  September
    2014.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born in December 1977 who
    arrived in the United Kingdom as a visitor on 26th April 2013 with  her
    dependent daughter who was born in December 2005.

 3. The Appellant's visit visa was valid between 11th April 2013  and  11th
    October 2013, and on 30th July 2013 she made an  application  to  claim
    asylum.  The Appellant underwent a screening interview on  16th  August
    2013 and a substantive asylum interview on 7th October 2013.

 4. The application was refused by letter  dated  31st  July  2014,  and  a
    Notice of Immigration  Decision  dated  6th  August  2014  was  issued,
    indicating that a decision had been made to remove the  Appellant  from
    the United Kingdom following refusal of her  asylum  and  human  rights
    claim.

 5. The appeal was heard on 23rd September 2014 and dismissed,  Judge  Birk
    (the judge) finding that the Appellant was not entitled  to  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection, and that her removal from the  United  Kingdom
    would not breach her human rights.

 6. The Appellant was subsequently granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

Error of Law

 7. The appeal  came  before  me  on  23rd  January  2015.   After  hearing
    submissions from both parties I set aside the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 8. I found that the judge had erred by failing to consider the evidence in
    the round.  The judge had referred to Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439,
    but had not considered whether documentary  evidence  could  be  relied
    upon, after looking at all the evidence in the round.  The  judge  made
    findings that two attempted kidnappings did not occur, and then went on
    to consider  documentary  evidence  in  relation  to  FIRs  and  arrest
    warrants.  The judge found that because the incidents had not  occurred
    as claimed by the Appellant, the documents  submitted  to  support  the
    Appellant's account were not reliable.

 9. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  with  no  findings
    preserved.  The hearing was adjourned for  a  continuation  hearing  to
    take place so that further evidence could be heard.   Full  details  of
    the application for permission to appeal, the grant  of  permission  by
    Judge White, and my reasons for finding an error of law  are  contained
    in my decision dated 29th January 2015.

Re-making the Decision

The Law

10. The Appellant is entitled to asylum if she is outside  her  country  of
    nationality and is recognised as a refugee, as defined in regulation  2
    of  the  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of   International   Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 as a person who falls  within  Article
    1A of the 1951 Geneva Convention.  The onus is on her to prove that she
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention  reason  (race,
    religion, nationality, membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or
    political opinion), and is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling  to
    avail herself of the protection of the country of her nationality.

11. The Appellant is eligible for humanitarian protection  under  paragraph
    339C of the Immigration Rules if she does not qualify as a refugee, but
    establishes substantial grounds for believing that if she  was  removed
    from the United Kingdom, she  would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious harm, and is unable or, owing to such risk, unwilling to  avail
    herself of the protection of the country of return.

12. In relation to Articles 2 and 3 of  the  1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) it is for the Appellant to establish
    that if removed from the United Kingdom there is a  real  risk  of  her
    being killed, or subjected to torture or inhuman or degrading treatment
    or punishment.

13. The burden of proof is on the Appellant  and  can  be  described  as  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood, which is a  lower  standard  than  the
    normal civil standard of the balance of probabilities.  I must look  at
    the circumstances as at the date of hearing.

Documents

14. In re-making this decision I have taken into account  the  Respondent's
    bundle of documents with Annexes A-H,  the  Notice  of  Appeal,  and  a
    further bundle of documents submitted by the Respondent comprising  151
    pages.

15. I had also been provided with  an  initial  bundle  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant comprising 52 pages, a second bundle  comprising  pages  133-
    387, a third bundle comprising  pages  388-408  and  a  seventeen  page
    skeleton  argument.   I  also  received  a  further  witness  from  the
    Appellant dated 12th June 2011.

16. Mr Shah did not have the  Respondent's  bundle  comprising  151  pages,
    although this had been provided to a representative of his  instructing
    solicitors at a Tribunal hearing on 18th March 2015, which subsequently
    had to be adjourned.  The hearing  was  therefore  put  back  for  that
    bundle to be provided to Mr Shah.

17. When the hearing resumed both representatives indicated that they  were
    ready to proceed and there was no application for an  adjournment.   Mr
    Shah confirmed that the Appellant claimed asylum on the  basis  of  her
    membership of a particular social group that being  a  Pakistani  woman
    who  feared  her  former  husband,  and  in  the  alternative   claimed
    humanitarian protection.  The Appellant also claimed that to remove her
    from the United Kingdom would breach Articles  2  and  3  of  the  1950
    Convention.  Mr Shah stated that no reliance was placed upon Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention.

The Appellant's Claim

18. The Appellant's claim as considered by the First-tier Tribunal  is  set
    out in a screening interview, a substantive  Asylum  Interview  Record,
    and her witness statements dated 2nd September 2013 and 18th  September
    2014 and may be summarised as follows.

19. The Appellant married MA on 5th February 2014.  There is one  child  of
    the marriage born in December 2005.  The Appellant has two sisters, one
    living in the United Kingdom and one living in Denmark.   She  has  two
    brothers living with their families in Pakistan and  her  mother  still
    lives  in  Pakistan.   Her  father,  who  was  a  lawyer,  passed  away
    approximately four years ago.

20. The Appellant suffered domestic violence from MA,  and  he  forced  the
    Appellant and her daughter out of the matrimonial home  in  2007.   The
    Appellant then went to live with her parents.  In 2008 MA divorced  the
    Appellant and started to threaten her by  telephone,  stating  that  he
    would kill her and kidnap her daughter.

21. There was an attempted  kidnapping  on  15th  November  2012  when  the
    Appellant was returning from school with her daughter.   MA  and  armed
    men attempted to kidnap the Appellant's daughter but were unsuccessful.
     The Appellant's younger brother, who was a lawyer, immediately went to
    the police and filed an  FIR.   The  Appellant  believes  that  MA  was
    arrested by the police but paid a bribe and was released.

22. The second incident occurred on 13th January 2013  when  the  Appellant
    and her daughter were in a  market.   MA  and  other  armed  men  again
    attempted to kidnap her daughter but were unsuccessful.  The  Appellant
    informed her brother who went to the police station and  filed  another
    FIR.  The Appellant believes that MA was arrested again, but once again
    paid a bribe and was released.

23. MA has significant power and influence in Pakistan although  he  spends
    the majority of the year working in a hotel in Italy.

24. There have been further threats made by telephone.  In April  2013  the
    Appellant applied for a visa to visit her sister in the United Kingdom.
     This was granted and the Appellant and her daughter  arrived  in  this
    country on 26th April 2013.

25. She was  told  by  her  brother  in  Pakistan  that  telephone  threats
    continued and she subsequently decided to claim asylum.  The  Appellant
    fears MA will cause her harm if she returns to Pakistan, and fears that
    her daughter will be kidnapped.  She does not believe that  the  police
    in Pakistan would be able to protect her, and does not believe that she
    would be able to live away from her home area in Pakistan as she  would
    have no family support and she would be a single  woman  with  a  young
    child to support, and in any event MA has influence outside their  home
    area of Kaharian in Gujrat.

The Refusal

26. The reasons for refusal are contained in the Respondent's letter  dated
    31st July 2014.  In summary it was not accepted that the Appellant  had
    been married to MA as claimed.  It was not accepted that  attempts  had
    been made to kidnap the Appellant's daughter.

27. It was acknowledged that copy FIRs and four arrest warrants in the name
    of MA had been submitted, but  the  Respondent  having  considered  the
    evidence in the round did not find that these documents could be relied
    upon.

28. The Respondent contended that the Appellant had delayed claiming asylum
    having arrived in the United Kingdom  on  26th  April  2013,  and  this
    adversely affected her credibility.

29. The Respondent believed that the Appellant would be able to  return  to
    her home area and would not be at risk.

Oral Evidence

30. The Appellant gave evidence with the assistance of  an  interpreter  in
    Urdu.  There were no difficulties in communication.

31. The Appellant adopted as her evidence her witness statements dated  2nd
    September  2013  and  18th  September  2014  which  have  already  been
    summarised.  In addition she adopted her statement dated 12th June 2015
    in which she stated that it would not be possible for her  to  live  in
    Pakistan.  She did not have  anybody  to  support  her  financially  or
    emotionally.  She described herself as having a  very  basic  education
    and coming from a rural area, and stated it would not be  possible  for
    her to find employment and survive as a single mother.

32. The Appellant has never  had  employment  and  would  not  be  able  to
    relocate to another part of  Pakistan  as  there  would  be  nobody  to
    accommodate her, and there would always be threats to herself  and  her
    daughter.

33. The Appellant was cross-examined.  I have recorded  all  questions  and
    answers and will not reiterate them in full here.

34. In summary the Appellant stated that she has two brothers in  Pakistan,
    the older brother who works for the government, lives in Islamabad with
    his wife and has four children.  The younger brother is  a  lawyer  who
    lives in Kaharian with his wife and  six  children.   Her  mother  also
    lives in Kaharian.

35. The Appellant attended a private fee paying school and  left  when  she
    was 16 or 17 years of age without qualifications.   Her  daughter  also
    attended a private school.

36. The Appellant said that both kidnapping attempts were reported  to  the
    police and an FIR issued on each occasion.  She did not make the report
    to the police station, but a police officer came to see her so that she
    could sign the FIR.

37. It was put to the Appellant that she owned property  in  Pakistan  with
    her brother and she stated that the land referred to was not hers,  but
    belonged to her brother, even though the land deed specifically  stated
    that she and her brother had purchased it.

38. The Appellant said that after her divorce her father had supported  her
    financially and after his death her mother  and  sister  had  supported
    her.  She said that her brother, the lawyer, had not assisted her  with
    money because he had six children to look after.  Her other brother who
    lived in Islamabad had also not helped her.   The  Appellant  confirmed
    that she had visited the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2011  following
    a successful appeal against refusal of entry clearance  as  a  visitor.
    She had returned to Pakistan after visiting her sister.

39. The Appellant described her husband as living  in  Italy  but  visiting
    Pakistan two or three times a year.  She described him as  being  quite
    rich and having a lot of influence in Pakistan.

40. The Appellant said that when she visited the United  Kingdom  in  2013,
    the situation got worse in Pakistan so she  decided  to  stay  in  this
    country and claim asylum.

41. The Appellant stated that her lawyer brother had provided her with  the
    FIRs  and  arrest  warrants  but  he  had  told  her  in  a   telephone
    conversation that he no longer wanted anything to do with  her  because
    of the threats that were still being made and she now  had  no  contact
    with him.  She remained in contact with her mother.

42. The Appellant said that she had visited  Islamabad  before  her  father
    passed away, and the distance between Islamabad and her  home  area  in
    Kaharian was three or four hours by car.

The Respondent's Submissions

43. Mr Harrison relied upon the reasons for refusal letter dated 31st  July
    2014 in requesting that the appeal be dismissed.  I was asked  to  find
    that there was no satisfactory  evidence  that  MA  had  any  power  or
    influence in Pakistan.

44. The Appellant appeared to  come  from  a  family  of  lawyers  and  the
    indication given in the documents submitted  for  the  entry  clearance
    appeal was that her family had substantial assets.

45. Mr Harrison submitted that the Appellant attempted to  portray  herself
    as being uneducated, with no support, but the evidence did not  support
    that, and I was asked to  find  that  the  Appellant  did  have  family
    support in Pakistan, and the attempted kidnappings  had  not  occurred,
    and she had not received threats from MA, and neither had her family.

46. Mr Harrison confirmed that the Respondent did not accept that the  copy
    arrest warrants and FIRs were genuine documents.



The Appellant's Submission

47. Mr Shah relied upon his skeleton argument.  I was asked  to  find  that
    the Appellant had given a credible account, and to  take  into  account
    the expert evidence that had been submitted in relation to the FIRs and
    arrest warrants.  I was asked to find that  the  expert  report  proved
    that the documents could be relied upon.

48. I was referred to paragraphs 30 and 31 of the skeleton argument,  which
    relate to an extract from the Foreign and  Commonwealth  Office  Report
    2014, and the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan 2013.  This  evidence
    indicates that Pakistan slipped to 123rd out of 148 in  the  UN  Gender
    Inequality Index, and concern was expressed at the increasing  violence
    against women in Pakistani society.  Woman faced harassment and  police
    stations were avoided by most women.

49. I was also referred to the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan  Report,
    also in paragraph 31 of the skeleton argument which provided statistics
    for cases of violence against women.

50. I was asked to find that the Appellant had suffered  domestic  violence
    when she was married.

51. I was asked to  find  that  the  inconsistencies  referred  to  by  the
    Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter were not material and  did
    not affect the core of the Appellant's account.

52. I was asked to find that the background evidence indicated  that  there
    would  be  no  sufficiency  of  protection  or  reasonable  option   of
    relocation for the Appellant in Pakistan.  I was asked to find that the
    police would not protect her and MA would be able to trace her  if  she
    returned.  I was asked to allow the appeal.

53. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

54. I have taken into account all the evidence both  oral  and  documentary
    placed  before  me,  together  with  the  submissions  made   by   both
    representatives.  I have considered the evidence in the round and taken
    into account  the  circumstances  at  the  date  of  hearing.   I  have
    considered this appeal in the light of the provisions of paragraph 339L
    of the Immigration Rules.  I am conscious of the  need  to  take  great
    care before making adverse findings of credibility in asylum cases, and
    am aware of the importance of considering this appeal in the  light  of
    conditions in Pakistan.

55. The Respondent rejected the Appellant's claim primarily on  credibility
    grounds, the only part of  her  account  which  was  accepted  was  her
    nationality and identity.

56. The issue of the Appellant's marriage was not pursued by the Respondent
    before the First-tier Tribunal, and Judge Birk was satisfied  that  the
    Appellant had been married to and divorced from MA, who is  the  father
    of her daughter.  There were no oral submissions made to me in relation
    to the marriage, and I am satisfied that the Appellant was married  and
    divorced as claimed, and that MA  is  the  father  of  the  Appellant's
    daughter.

57. I have  considered  the  documentary  evidence  in  the  light  of  the
    principles set out in Tanveer Ahmed which in summary are that it is for
    an individual claimant to show that a document on which he or she seeks
    to rely can be relied upon.  A decision maker should consider whether a
    document is one on which  reliance  should  properly  be  placed  after
    looking at all the evidence in the round.  I carefully  considered  the
    two reports prepared by Dr Iqbal,  one  dated  13th  April  2015  which
    relates to two FIRs, and the second dated 5th June 2015  which  relates
    to four arrest warrants issued against MA, dated  17th  November  2012,
    1st December 2012, 7th February  2013  and  2nd  March  2013.   I  note
    paragraph 5 of Dr Iqbal's first report in which he states;

         "5.  It is very hard to get a definitive answer on the authenticity
             of the documents in question without verifying them  from  the
             sources that issued them.  Therefore, my  conclusions  are  my
             best views on the format, basic features and contents of these
             documents.

58. Dr Iqbal reaches similar conclusions in respect of  the  FIRs  and  the
    arrest warrants, commenting  that  both  FIRs,  which  are  dated  15th
    November 2012 and 13th January  2013,  match  all  the  features  of  a
    standard FIR and the contents reflect the description of  the  offences
    mentioned.  In relation to the arrest warrants Dr Iqbal concludes  that
    they match all the features of a standard arrest warrant.

59. I accept that Dr Iqbal  is  qualified  to  give  an  opinion  on  these
    documents, and I accept his conclusions  that  the  documents  produced
    match the features of standard documents  of  that  type,  although  Dr
    Iqbal does not state that the documents are genuine.

60. The core of the Appellant's account relates to the claim  that  MA  has
    twice attempted to kidnap her daughter.  It was  as  a  result  of  the
    attempted kidnappings, that the FIRs and arrest warrants  were  issued.
    I have carefully considered the Appellant's account as contained in her
    witness statements  and  interview  record.   I  find  that  there  are
    relevant inconsistencies in relation  to  the  incident  said  to  have
    occurred on 15th November 2012.   The  Appellant  stated  in  reply  to
    question 34 of her interview that she last  saw  MA  in  2007  when  he
    forced her to leave the matrimonial home.  She then  stated  (64)  that
    the first time she saw him again  was  the  attempted  kidnap  on  15th
    November 2012.  But this conflicts with the  FIR  dated  15th  November
    2012 in which she reports that many times when she had been on her  way
    home from school, MA had teased her daughter and threatened  to  murder
    both herself and her daughter.  There is clearly a conflicting  account
    as to whether the Appellant had never seen MA  between  2007  and  15th
    November 2012, or whether prior to 15th November 2012 on many occasions
    he had seen the Appellant on her way home from school with her daughter
    and he threatened to murder her.

61. In answer to question 51 of the interview the Appellant  explained  she
    had taken her daughter to school on 15th November 2012, and two  people
    came out of a car and tried  to  snatch  her  daughter.   This  account
    changed when answering questions 59 and 60 as to the number  of  people
    involved, the Appellant then stating there were two  or  three  people,
    and in answer to question 56,  the  Appellant  said  that  no  car  was
    involved.  There was a further  conflict  when  the  Appellant  answers
    question 80, when she  is  still  being  questioned  about  the  kidnap
    attempt on 15th November 2012, in which she refers to the driver of the
    car who had the weapons having escaped.

62. In relation to the number  of  people  involved  in  the  first  kidnap
    attempt, the FIR gives a different account as the  Appellant's  account
    to the police was that MA was accompanied by four other unknown persons
    armed with firearms.

63. I take into account the Appellant's account in interview was given with
    an interpreter, and there  is  always  the  possibility  of  errors  if
    evidence is given by an interpreter, but I find that there is  a  clear
    conflict in the accounts given by the Appellant,  in  relation  to  the
    number of people involved, and whether or not a car was involved.

64. There are further  inconsistencies.   In  answer  to  question  49  the
    Appellant was  asked  when  the  kidnap  attempt  took  place  and  she
    confirmed it was 15th November 2012 when she was taking her daughter to
    school.  She repeated in answer to question 51 that she was taking  her
    daughter to school and when she was by the school, two people came  out
    of a car.  In answer to question 68 the  Appellant  stated  when  asked
    what time of day this had occurred, that she did not remember  exactly,
    but then she said it was in the morning.

65. The Appellant was then asked (question 69) whether her daughter was  on
    the way to school, and she changed her account, to  say  that  she  was
    bringing her daughter home from school at the end of  the  school  day.
    This is a markedly different account from taking her daughter to school
    in the morning.  If this event had occurred, I find that it would  have
    made a significant impression.  No doubt the Appellant would have  been
    shocked, but I find that she would have been able to  describe  whether
    the incident had occurred on the way to the school in the  morning,  or
    on the way home from  school  at  the  end  of  the  school  day.   The
    Appellant did make  reference  to  the  interpreter  in  interview  not
    listening properly,  but  I  do  not  accept  that  this  explains  the
    conflicting and inconsistent accounts given.  The Appellant  in  answer
    to two separate questions stated that she was taking  her  daughter  to
    school, and the incident had occurred in  the  morning.   I  find  that
    these  inconsistencies  are   relevant   and   adversely   affect   her
    credibility.

66. The Appellant stated that she did not go to the police station to  make
    the FIR but her brother did  this,  and  she  confirmed  in  answer  to
    question 76 that she did not go  with  him.   She  was  asked  why  her
    signature was on the FIR, and she replied (question 77) that "he  might
    have come and asked for my signature."  This is a vague response and in
    oral evidence when asked  this  the  Appellant  stated  that  a  police
    officer came to her  house.   I  do  not  find  it  credible  that  the
    Appellant was not able to definitively state  in  interview  whether  a
    police officer had come to her house to ask her to approve the contents
    of the FIR and to sign it.

67. The Appellant was interviewed about the  second  kidnap  attempt  which
    took place on 13th January 2013,  commencing  at  question  87  of  the
    interview.  Once again it was noted that her signature was on  the  FIR
    although she had stated that her brother went to  the  police  station.
    Her explanation (question 76) was that "my brother came home and  asked
    for my signature."  I do not find it plausible  or  credible  that  the
    Appellant's brother would go to  a  police  station  and  have  an  FIR
    prepared, and then take the FIR away with him, and have  the  Appellant
    sign it in the absence of any police officer.

68. There are some differences in the account as contained in the FIR  when
    compared with the interview.  There is no mention in interview  of  the
    kidnappers being masked, whereas there is such a reference in the  FIR.
    There is no mention in the FIR of a shot being fired  whereas  this  is
    mentioned in interview.  The Appellant when interviewed made  reference
    to a white car and had no idea what make of car it was, although in the
    FIR it is specifically stated that it was a Toyota Corolla.

69. The Appellant was also asked in interview (question  113)  whether  she
    intended to return to Pakistan when she applied for  a  visa  in  April
    2013.  She said that she did  not.   The  Appellant  then  visited  the
    United Kingdom, her account having been the  victim  of  two  attempted
    kidnapping attempts during which attackers were armed and on  at  least
    one occasion a shot was fired, but she made no attempt to claim asylum.



70. If kidnapping attempts had occurred as claimed, I  find  it  reasonably
    likely that the Appellant would have attempted to claim asylum  without
    delay.  I do not find that the delay  alone  is  determinative  of  her
    claim, but I find  that  it  is  relevant  and  adversely  affects  her
    credibility.

71. In her oral evidence the Appellant claimed for the first time that  her
    lawyer brother no longer had any contact with her and did not  wish  to
    have any contact.  This was the individual who had made the  complaints
    to the police on her behalf, and who had provided  her  with  FIRs  and
    arrest warrants to produce to the Respondent, and who according to  the
    documents submitted with the appeal for entry clearance owned land with
    the Appellant and had financially supported her.

72. The Appellant was asked whether she owned land  with  her  brother  and
    denied this stating that the land belonged only to her brother.    This
    conflicts with paragraph 8 of her witness statement dated 16th February
    2011 which was produced before the Tribunal and  in  which  she  stated
    that she owned a property in Pakistan together with her brother and she
    attached the sale deed of the property.  She  also  confirmed  in  that
    witness statement at paragraph 6 that her  brother  would  provide  her
    with financial support.  The brother referred to is the brother who  is
    a lawyer.  The issue of financial support was put to the  Appellant  in
    interview (question 124).  She denied that her  brother  could  support
    her, stating that he had no children and could not support her.

73. I do not accept that the Appellant has been truthful in  her  evidence.
    Her evidence in her witness statement  dated  16th  February  2011  was
    accepted by the Tribunal who allowed  her  appeal  against  refusal  of
    entry clearance, accepting that she  had  financial  support  from  her
    brother and owned property with him.  This is in direct contrast to the
    evidence on this point that she has given for the Tribunal in  relation
    to her asylum claim.

74. I do not accept the Appellant's claim that her brother no longer wishes
    to have any contact with her and would not support her, having assessed
    all the evidence in the round.

75. I do not find that any credible evidence has been produced to  indicate
    that MA has any significant influence either in  the  Appellant's  home
    area, or in other parts of Pakistan.  The evidence  indicates  that  he
    works in a hotel in Italy and spends the greater part of  the  year  in
    Italy as opposed to Pakistan.  There is no requirement for evidence  to
    be given in corroboration of the Appellant's own evidence, but I am not
    obliged to accept a  bare  assertion  by  the  Appellant  that  MA  has
    significant influence in Pakistan.   There  has  been  no  satisfactory
    evidence whatsoever to support that assertion.

76. I have taken into account the expert reports in relation  to  the  FIRs
    and arrest warrants, and the evidence given by  the  Appellant,  and  I
    take into account the low standard of  proof.   I  do  not  accept  the
    Appellant as a witness of truth, and I do not find her account credible
    for  the  reasons  that  I  have  given  above.   I   find   that   the
    inconsistencies and contradictions do go to the core of the account and
    they are relevant.  I do  not  find  that  they  can  be  explained  by
    nervousness or problems with interpretation.  I do not accept  that  MA
    has threatened the Appellant and her family  by  telephone,  nor  do  I
    accept that any attempts have  been  made  to  kidnap  the  Appellant's
    daughter.

77. I therefore conclude that the claimant's account  has  been  fabricated
    and cannot be relied upon, and I find that the Appellant  could  safely
    return to her home area where her mother lives, and her brother who  is
    a lawyer, together with his family.  I find that the Appellant's family
    have  property  and  assets,  as  was  detailed  in   the   Appellant's
    application for entry clearance.  The Appellant is joint owner of  some
    of that property and land.  I find that the Appellant's brothers  would
    support her if that was needed.

78. In  relation  to  sufficiency  of  protection,  I  have  considered  AW
    (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC), and set  out
    below paragraph 34;

         "34. The starting point in assessing whether the Appellant would be
             given sufficient protection if  returned  to  Pakistan  is  to
             consider whether there  is  systemic  insufficiency  of  state
             protection.  In relation to Pakistan,  having  regard  to  the
             case of AH and also to the case of  KA  and  Others  (Domestic
             Violence - Risk on Return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216  (IAC),
             it cannot be said that such a general insufficiency  of  state
             protection has been established.  Neither party submitted that
             there was, nor do we find, that the background evidence before
             us demonstrates such an insufficiency."




79. I do not find that the issue of internal relocation arises.  My finding
    is that the events complained of by the Appellant in relation to MA did
    not occur, and that she could return to her home area where  she  would
    have family support, and where there is sufficiency of  protection.   I
    conclude that the Appellant has not established that she  would  be  at
    risk if returned to Pakistan, and therefore the claim  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection fails for the reasons  given  above.   For  the
    same reasons I find that there is no risk of a breach of Articles 2  or
    3 of the 1950 Convention.

80. This is not a case where Article 8 is pursued as a  Ground  of  Appeal.
    However for the avoidance of any doubt, I find that the best  interests
    of the Appellant's child will be to remain with her mother, and  return
    to Pakistan, as both are citizens of that country.  I have  found  that
    there would be no risk, the Appellant's child could  be  reunited  with
    family members, and recommence her private schooling.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and  was  set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision  as
follows.

I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection.

I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction.   This  is  continued
pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.
No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
Appellant.  Failure to comply with this direction could lead to  a  contempt
of court.






Signed                              Date 16th June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 16th June 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
