
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06459/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 7th August 2017                            |On 21st August 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                           Mr Ahmed Mohammed Arif

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Norman, Counsel, instructed by RBM Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1st January 1952.  He  lived
    in Kirkuk and ran a business together with his  business  partner.   He
    claims to have been the victim of  threats  and  demands  from  a  Shia
    militia group seeking to obtain payment from him.  As a result of  such
    threats, damage and extortion the appellant came to the United  Kingdom
    and sought asylum.   The claim was refused on 15th August 2014.

2.   The appellant sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 3rd October 2014  but
    was dismissed.  The appellant sought permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal which was granted.  Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hemingway  found  a
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    set it aside indicating that there should be a de novo hearing.

3.   Thus the matter came  for  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan on 6th January 2017.   He  did  not  find  the  account  of  the
    appellant as to what happened to him in Kirkuk to be credible  nor  did
    he find any reason why the appellant could not  return  to  Iraq.   For
    those reasons the appeal was dismissed.

4.   The appellant once again sought to challenge that  particular  decision
    and leave to do so was granted to the Upper Tribunal, both in terms  of
    the assessment of credibility and of the approach taken by the Judge to
    return, particularly in the light of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]
    UKUT 544.  Thus the matter comes before me to determine that issue.

5.   As to the issue of return Mr  Mills  for  the  respondent  most  fairly
    concedes that the lead case of AA requires a fact-sensitive  assessment
    of return which  has  not  been  done  in  this  case  and  constitutes
    therefore an error of law.

6.   He submits, however, that the conclusion as to the credibility  of  the
    claim itself was properly open to the Judge.   The  challenge  that  is
    made in essence is that documents capable of  supporting  the  account,
    namely a letter/report from the police in Iraq and a death  certificate
    were disregarded by the Judge as the  Judge  had  already  come  to  an
    adverse finding as to credibility.  The merits of the matter are finely
    balanced, because the Judge considers  each  document  within  a  wider
    context and finds that the documents are not reliable and gives  little
    weight to them.  What  is  absent,  however,  from  the  assessment  of
    credibility, and indeed from the  assessment  of  return  is  a  proper
    consideration of the appellant's medical  condition.   There  were  two
    medical reports that were presented at the hearing. One is from Phillip
    Rees, a psychological practitioner from Birmingham Solihull  NHS  dated
    23rd December 2016.  An account of what happened is  set  out  in  that
    report together with an assessment of  the  appellant's  mental  health
    condition of depression and anxiety.  The condition is said  to  relate
    very much to the events that had taken place.  There  is  report   from
    psychological therapist, Helena Rogers,  of 13th December 2016  .It  is
    said that those reports raised important matters ,which ought  to  have
    been considered when assessing credibility in the round and  were  also
    clearly relevant to the issue of return.

7.   It was also submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  the  Judge  was
    applying western standards to some of the concerns in the  claim.   For
    example, the Judge finds it  unlikely  that  the  appellant's  business
    partner would not be targeted in the same way as the appellant.  It  is
    submitted on behalf of the appellant that such was because  he  was  an
    Arab and therefore in a slightly better position.

8.   Mr Mills invites me to preserve the findings as to credibility  and  to
    direct a rehearing on the issue of return.  It seems to me overall that
    it would be unfair to a Judge to compartmentalise  matters  in  such  a
    way, particularly  given  the  absence  of  any  reference  to  medical
    evidence.  That is particularly relevant now because, as  I  understand
    it the appellant had a stroke last week, and indeed  appears  in  court
    with the help of his daughter, clearly very unsteady on his  feet.   No
    doubt there  will  be  an  up-to-date  medical  certificate  or  report
    prepared.

9.   In all the circumstances and having regard to  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Direction, I set aside the decision of Judge Chohan as a whole
    and remit to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing on all issues.

10.  One of the difficulties in  this  case  has  been  many  documents  not
    necessarily clearly  identified.   It  is  the  responsibility  of  the
    appellant to prepare a definitive and paginated bundle for use  at  the
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that the decision is  set  aside  to  be
remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.










Signed            [pic]                      Date 17 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

