
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06544/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2016                      |On 14 April 2016                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                    [A I]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Starck Uberoi
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant which is unopposed by the  Secretary
    of State.  The  appellant  has  appealed  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Omotosho) who dismissed his appeal against asylum in  a
    Decision and Reasons promulgated on 16 December 2015.   In  short,  the
    grounds were that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  into  account
    an  expert  report,  drew  adverse   inference   from   the   lack   of
    corroboration, failed to take into account witness evidence, failed  to
    take account of the appellant's age and gave inadequate reasons for the
    sufficiency of protection.

2.   Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede  on  17  February
    2016 on all grounds.

3.   The Secretary of State in a  Rule  24  response  does  not  oppose  the
    application for permission. Mr Clarke confirmed the same at the hearing
    this morning.

Decision and reasons re error of law

4.   Accordingly having considered the issues and the Decision  and  Reasons
    by the First-tier Tribunal  I  am  satisfied  that  there  has  been  a
    material error of law such that the decision should be set aside.

5.   The appellant claimed that he was at risk on return to Afghanistan.  He
    arrived in the UK as a minor in 2008,  claimed  asylum  and  thereafter
    failed to pursue his claim and left the care of social  services.  That
    claim was subsequently withdrawn.  He issued a new claim in 2010 on the
    basis of political opinion. He was in fear of the Taliban and there was
    reference to involvement in a blood feud.

6.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the  appellant's  claim  lacking  in
    credibility, mainly  because  of  inconsistencies  in  his  account  as
    between that given in 2008 and the details given  in  2010,  and  other
    inconsistencies in the evidence.

7.   In an otherwise thorough Decision and Reasons the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to take account of the country expert report which supported the
    appellant's claim subjectively as to risk  on  return,  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal flight, and  further  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to take into account the evidence of  Mr  N  Rahmatullah  as  to
    material facts where it found that there was a need for support.

8.   I am further satisfied that in considering the inconsistencies  by  the
    appellant the First-tier Tribunal failed to  consider  the  appellant's
    age in its assessment and reasoning.  For  all  of  those  reasons  the
    findings as to credibility cannot be sustained and there was a material
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

9.   There is a material error of law.  The  decision  and  reasons  is  set
    aside.  I conclude that the appropriate course of action  is  to  remit
    this matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing  de  novo  because
    none of the findings of fact can be preserved.  The rehearing  will  be
    at Taylor House (excluding Judge Omotosho) on a date to be fixed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10.4.2016

G A Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10.4.2016

G A Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

