
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: aa/06483/2014
                                                               aa/06485/2014
                                                               aa/06490/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 July 2015                      |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

|                      |ZFM                            |First Appellant      |
|                      |PA                             |Second Appellant     |
|                      |AmA                            |Third Appellant      |
|                      |(Anonymity Direction Made)     |                     |


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr B Hoshi, Counsel instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269)  we  make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellants. This direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We make this order  because
    the First-tier Tribunal made a similar order and  because  there  is  a
    risk (not necessarily a strong one) that publishing the identity of  an
    asylum seeker from Iran would of itself make  it  dangerous  to  return
    that person.

 2. We are concerned with appeals against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the appeals of the appellants against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State on 14 August 2014 to refuse to vary their  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom and to  remove  them  from  the  United
    Kingdom.  Each of the appellants and the respondents were  dissatisfied
    with the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  the  appellants  and  the
    respondent  were  each  given  permission  to  appeal.  In   fact   the
    Respondent's application was considered first.

 3. At the risk of over simplification and for the purposes of  introducing
    this decision, in broad terms the appellants complained that the  first
    appellant should have been recognised as a victim of domestic  violence
    under the Immigration Rules and given indefinite leave  to  remain  and
    the Secretary of State complained that the Tribunal was wrong to  allow
    the appeal, as it did, on asylum grounds and on  human  rights  grounds
    with reference to both Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights and Article 8 of the European Convention and Human Rights.

 4. We begin by considering carefully just  what  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decided.

 5. Uncontroversially the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the  appellants
    are citizens of Iran.  The first  appellant  was  born  in  1981.   The
    second and third appellants are her children  born  in  2007  and  2009
    respectively.  The appellants entered the United Kingdom  in  May  2011
    with leave until 21 December 2015  under  the  family  refugee  reunion
    policy.  The first appellant's husband had been granted asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The first appellant's marriage had  been  troubled  by
    her husband's violence for a long time.   The  marriage  finally  broke
    down in March 2013 when her husband was arrested and in April 2014  she
    sought indefinite leave to remain by reason of her  husband's  domestic
    violence.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to the  appellants'  solicitors'
    letter of 11 April 2014 for  the  full  relevant  history.  The  letter
    described  the  first  appellant's  husband  as  "violent  and  abusive
    throughout their relationship." The first  appellant  had  sought  help
    from her father and the authorities in Iran but little or no  help  was
    forthcoming.  She decided to try and make the  relationship  work  and,
    appropriately, the appellants joined their husband  or  father  in  May
    2011 under  the  refugee  family  reunion.   The  marital  relationship
    finally broke down in March 2013 when  the  first  appellant's  husband
    tried to suffocate her.  A prohibited steps order  and  non-molestation
    order were made and her husband was subject to criminal charges.

 7. It was the first appellant's  contention  that  she  and  her  children
    should be entitled to remain in the United Kingdom  indefinitely.   Her
    solicitors accepted that she did not satisfy the apparent  requirements
    of the Rules because she was not the spouse of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom  but,  according  to  the  solicitors,  a
    literal interpretation was  unlawful  because  such  an  interpretation
    would involve unjustified discrimination.

 8. In any event the appellants could not return to Iran safely.  The first
    appellant would remain at risk because her husband would not consent to
    a divorce and there was no one to protect her. Her father had died  and
    so could not  offer  even  the  little  help  that  had  been  possible
    previously.  Additionally the children would be taken from their mother
    at the father's insistence when they reached their  7th  birthdays  and
    such separation would be contrary to their human rights under Article 8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 9. Further her husband had made an accusation of adultery against her  and
    that could create real risks for her in the event of her return.

10. The First-tier  Tribunal  had  to  deal  with  the  preliminary  point.
    Although the appellants had raised asylum as a  ground  of  appeal  the
    first appellant had not been interviewed as an  asylum  seeker  and  no
    proper decision had been made by the Respondent.

11. The judge decided that the ground of appeal showed that  the  appellant
    wanted to be recognised as a refugee. If the respondent had  wanted  to
    interview the asylum seeker she should have tried to make arrangements.
     In fact interviewing might not have been possible  because  the  first
    appellant was regarded as a vulnerable witness.

12. There  was  also  evidence  from  the  police  saying  that  the  first
    appellant's husband had returned to Iran but had then come back to  the
    United Kingdom and had recently been sentenced to conspiracy to  supply
    a quantity of class A drugs.

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted the evidence that  the  marriage
    had been violent.

14. She noted that in July 2009 the first appellant's husband was convicted
    of assault and battery  at  the  Tehran  Public  Criminal  Court.   The
    conviction was based on the first appellant's complaint and  a  medical
    report.  Sentence was passed in the defendant's absence because he  had
    repeatedly failed to attend court.  He was ordered to pay "blood money"
    as a consequence of various injuries he had  inflicted  to  his  wife's
    hands, feet, eyes and neck.

15. In the United Kingdom police and social workers had been involved  with
    the family.  In April 2012 the  first  appellant's  husband  broke  her
    nose.  The police were called by concerned neighbours.  In  March  2013
    her husband attacked her and tried to suffocate her.  Again the  police
    were called and he was arrested.  That was  when  the  first  appellant
    decided that her marriage had  finally  broken  down.   The  appellants
    moved out of the family home  into  accommodation  provided  by  Social
    Services.

16. The first appellant reported to the police that her  husband  had  been
    dealing in drugs.

17. In March 2013 the first appellant's husband  was  arrested  for  making
    threats.  On 28 March a non-molestation order was made  in  the  County
    Court against him.

18. It appears that he did not attend that hearing  in  the  County  Court.
    Neither did he answer bail because he had returned to Iran.

19. He was charged under  the  Protection  from  Harassment  Act  and  with
    possessing Class A drugs with intent to supply.   He  was  arrested  at
    Luton Airport when he returned to the United Kingdom.  He was convicted
    of possessing class A drugs and harassment and  was  sentenced  to  two
    years' imprisonment suspended for two year and ordered to carry out 200
    hours' unpaid work.

20. He had also been convicted in Iran on 2 October 2013 at  Tehran  Public
    Criminal Court and sentenced to six months' imprisonment suspended  for
    two years for criminal damage.  He had  broken  windows  and  caused  a
    disturbance at the first appellant's family home.

21. He had also used a procedural device that required the first  appellant
    to choose between returning to Iran and losing her right  to  financial
    support in Iran.

22. The First-tier Tribunal was assisted by expert  evidence  and  accepted
    that the documents purporting to come from  the  courts  in  Iran  were
    genuine.  The judge also accepted the evidence  from  the  same  expert
    that honour killings are to  some  extent  tolerated  in  Iran  and  at
    paragraph 22 the judge said:

         "I am satisfied that should the first appellant be returned to Iran
         she faces a real risk of violence, if not death, from her  husband,
         and that such  behaviour  would  not  be  prevented  by  the  state
         authorities nor could she rely on state protection for her safety."

23. The judge then gave herself a five point direction in  accordance  with
    the speech of Lord Bingham in Regina v. Secretary of State for the Home
    Department (Appellant) ex parte Razgar (FC)  (Respondent)  [2004]  UKHL
    27.

24. The judge said that, even if she was wrong in her finding that it would
    be contrary to the first appellant's rights  under  Article  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights to remove her and that  she  was  a
    refugee, removal would be disproportionate.  The judge said:

         "This is because the first appellant is at serious risk of physical
         harm from her husband and I have no doubt he would seek and  obtain
         custody of the children.  They are, at present, settled with  their
         mother and attending school.  Any disruption to their  family  unit
         in these circumstances here would be wholly disproportionate."

25. It is a matter of record the judge made no finding  on  the  contention
    that the first appellant should be treated as if she were the victim of
    domestic violence inflicted by somebody  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.

26. The respondent's grounds are drawn carefully and make  three  different
    points.

27. The first contention is that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give any
    or adequate reasons of for its decision. The respondent  contends  that
    the Tribunal erred by failing to identify  the  Convention  reason  for
    allowing the appeal.  Further the Tribunal is  criticised  for  finding
    that the first appellant was able successfully to bring  a  prosecution
    in the courts in Iran  against  her  husband  because  of  his  violent
    behaviour.  The grounds suggest that this is prima facie evidence  that
    there is  state  protection  available  and  the  judge  erred  by  not
    explaining why, when state protection had been extended in the past, it
    was not available in the event of the first appellant's return.

28. The second point is quite different.  It complains  that  the  Tribunal
    acted on evidence that had not been disclosed to the respondent.

29.  The  third  point,  at  paragraph  8,  contends  that  the  Article  8
    consideration was flawed because it was made  on  the  assumption  that
    effective protection was not available and so if the decision to  allow
    the appeal on Article 3 and asylum grounds is  unsound  the  Article  8
    decision is unsound too.

30. The respondent's  Rule  24  notice  draws  attention  to  the  skeleton
    argument used before the First-tier Tribunal and the expert report.  We
    consider them now.

31. This explains that the first  appellant  contended  that  her  marriage
    broke down because of prolonged severe domestic violence.  As a  result
    of the first appellant having contact with the police because of  their
    support when she complained about domestic violence,  she  reported  to
    them that her husband was concerned with the supply of class  A  drugs.
    Her husband fled to Iran and, she said, commenced a prolonged  campaign
    of harassment against the first appellant's family  which  led  to  his
    being the subject of a suspended prison  sentence  in  Iran.   He  then
    returned to the United Kingdom.

32. On 11 April 2014 the first appellant applied for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as the victim of domestic violence, recognising that  there  was
    an issue about whether she qualified because she was not the partner of
    a person present and settled in the United Kingdom.

33. There is a helpful summary of the argument on that point.  It is  that,
    as the spouse of a  refugee,  the  appellant  should  be  afforded  the
    protection of the relevant Rule pursuant to "the interpretive  duty  in
    Section 3 of the Human Rights Act 1998".

34. Her asylum claim was based on her fear of being persecuted in  Iran  by
    the state as an alleged adulteress at the instigation of her husband or
    his family by way of "honour based violent reprisals" because  she  had
    left him and reported him to the police for serious criminal offences.

35. The Article 8 claim is based on the  need  to  be  protected  from  the
    children being taken away from her when  they  reached  the  age  of  7
    years.

36. We will consider this below.

37. The protection claim was based on fear of the Iranian state because she
    risked being seen as an adulteress.  The concern that she  risked  ill-
    treatment at the hands of her  husband's  family  was  a  separate  and
    further reason for allowing the appeal.  This was  expressed  to  be  a
    reason to allow it on Article 3 grounds.

38. According to the appellants, the respondent's  own  guidance  notes  on
    Iran say that a person accepted to be  an  adulteress  is  entitled  to
    protection.

39. It was further argued that, as a lone woman with  two  young  children,
    internal relocation would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  and  in  the
    circumstances there was no sensible prospect of avoiding persecution at
    the hands of her husband's family.

40. The main point advanced in support of the Article 8 claim was that  the
    children would be removed from their mother's care  when  they  reached
    the age of 7 years.  The best interests of the children  required  them
    remaining with their mother.

41. The grounds relied heavily on a report of Dr Md Kakhki dated 8  October
    2014.

42. Part of that report was devoted to an assessment of the authenticity of
    court documents relied upon by the appellant.  That is not in issue.

43. The other part of the report related to his expectations of  the  risks
    facing the first appellant in the event of her return.  He  also  found
    that the  document  dated  24  April  2013  in  the  European  calendar
    confirming that the first appellant's husband  had  used  a  device  to
    disentitle her to maintenance appeared to be genuine.

44. Having given suitable illustrations he said:

         "It is within this  stilted  legal  and  social  interpretation  of
         marriage,  as  a  unilateral  power  relationship  rather  than   a
         partnership of equals, that [the first  appellant's]  circumstances
         should be assessed".

45. The report then explains how women are at a practical  disadvantage  in
    the Iranian justice system.  There is a widespread belief that a man is
    entitled to beat his wife to discipline her and  that  the  authorities
    are loath to take action in domestic disputes.

46. There is also wide disparity of views amongst the judiciary. At the top
    of page 11 he says:

         "It is apparent from  the  above  account  that  there  can  be  no
         guarantee or even strong likelihood of an abused wife being able to
         secure protection in court by way of divorce, as the  line  between
         permissible violence and impermissible violence depends on the bias
         of the particular judge".

47. The report also emphasises how it can be seen as very  shameful  for  a
    wife to leave her husband and that honour killing is rife.  The  report
    referred to a study in 2008  that  noted  50  honour  killings  in  the
    previous seven months in Iran.  Dr Kakhki said at page 17:

         "Mr Azimi's history of being violent against his wife combined with
         his opinion on [the first appellant's] behaviour in the UK,  would,
         in my opinion, create a risk  of  honour  killing,  should  she  be
         returned to Iran.  As highlighted previously with reference to  the
         law, such killings can be legal and in any case, are  perceived  by
         the authorities as being to some extent justified."

48. Dr Kakhki appeared to agree that the  custody  of  the  children  would
    automatically transfer to the father when they are 7 years old although
    the law provides for the mother to continue contact.

49. He also indicated that (page 23) "adultery is not, in my  opinion,  one
    of the crimes that is punishable inside Iran if it was  only  committed
    abroad."

50. Nevertheless he opined that,  in  the  event  of  the  first  appellant
    returning to Iran, she was "likely" to face ill-treatment  as  part  of
    any investigation.  He regarded torture  as  "standard  practice"  when
    dealing with prisoners.  Dr Kakhki concluded  that  it  was  "possible"
    that the first appellant would be subject to illegal treatment  if  she
    was investigated for her allegedly  adulterous  behaviour  abroad.   He
    said this could be done within the context of a private complaint.

51. The skeleton argument makes it clear that there has been  no  challenge
    to the decision to accept Dr Kakhki's evidence.

52. At paragraph 24 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge says:

         "The first appellant also believes he has accused her of committing
         adultery."

53. It might have been helpful to have made  this  observation  at  a  much
    earlier stage because it  is  clearly  one  of  the  main  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal on human rights and/or asylum grounds.

54. It comes down to this.  The first appellant says that  she  has  had  a
    very unhappy violent marriage with a very ill-tempered domineering  man
    in Iran.  He fled to the United Kingdom as a refugee and she joined him
    with their children.  She has since left him and reported  him  to  the
    police for being involved in drug offences.  This caused  him  to  flee
    the United Kingdom and return to Iran (suggesting that he was  never  a
    refugee in the first place but that is a different issue) and  that  he
    is outraged by her behaviour.  There  is  clear  evidence,  and  it  is
    accepted, that he has contrived to require her to return to the  family
    home and (albeit somewhat buried in the Decision) clear  evidence  that
    the first appellant believes that he has accused her of adultery.

55. Read with Dr Kakhki's report this leads to the conclusion that there is
    a real risk that the first appellant will be murdered by way of  a  so-
    called "honour killing".  Dr Kakhki was careful  to  explain  that  the
    first  appellant  would  not  necessarily  be  in  trouble   with   the
    authorities but that is not really the point.  His evidence shows  that
    the first appellant's husband is not going to cooperate  in  a  divorce
    and is going to use the legal system to  thwart  her.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal clearly accepted the first appellant's contention that she had
    no one to support her in Iran.  There is no reason to doubt  her  claim
    that her father is dead and the need for a woman in Iranian society  to
    have a male  guardian  (the  appellant  does  not  have  one)  is  well
    established.

56. The Operational  Guidance  Notes  (which  of  course  cannot  bind  us)
    recognise that it may well be difficult for  a  woman  on  her  own  to
    relocate but appeared to accept that it may be possible in  appropriate
    cases.  However, we note that the grounds do not raise criticism of any
    finding or implied finding that internal relocation was not  an  option
    and we do not take this point any further.

57. Whilst it is clear that the first appellant's willingness  to  use  the
    judicial system, and the fact that  her  husband  had  been  convicted,
    tends to suggest that there is effective protection in Iran we  do  not
    accept that the  availability  of  some  kind  of  protection  in  some
    circumstances extinguishes the risk of honour killing.  Honour  killing
    is a premeditated determined attack and destruction  of  another  human
    being in pursuit of something which, from a Western perspective,  is  a
    wholly perverted and shocking idea  of  what  is  honourable.   However
    there is clear evidence that it is tolerated by the Iranian  state.  We
    cannot see any objection to the legality  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge's conclusion that first appellant would be at risk.

58. Once a risk is established then we accept that the first appellant is a
    refugee.  She is in trouble because she is a woman in Iran.

59. The other two appellants' appeals in  this  respect  are  dependent  on
    their mothers. They are children and, broadly, are entitled  to  remain
    with their mother.  In any event it cannot be in  their  best  interest
    for quite young children to be removed from the care of their mother to
    be entrusted to the care of a father in Iran whose violent behaviour is
    the main reason for the mother needing protection.  It follows that the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision is sufficiently clearly reasoned in law.

60. If the appellants are refugees then  it  would  be  contrary  to  their
    rights under articles 3 and 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights to remove them. It may not add anything  of  value  but  it  was
    right in law to allow  their  appeals  on  human  rights  grounds  with
    reference to articles 3 and 8.

61. We turn now to the appeal brought by first appellant.

62. The reasons  for  giving  the  appellants  permission  to  appeal  were
    explained pithily by Judge R A Cox when he gave permission.  He said:

         "They seek permission to appeal, in time, against the  decision  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Clough whereby she allowed their  appeals
         on asylum, Article 3 and Article 8 grounds.  It  may  therefore  be
         wondered why they seek  permission  to  appeal.   The  reasons  are
         twofold.  Firstly, it is correctly said that the  judge  failed  to
         make a finding on a material matter, namely whether A1 was entitled
         to leave under the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  victim  of  domestic
         violence (the original  basis  of  their  application)  -  material
         because it was a matter in issue and because  any  resulting  leave
         would be indefinite and not limited. Secondly  the  Respondent  had
         made application for permission  to  appeal  the  Judge's  decision
         (now, I understand, granted) and a Rule 24 response  would  not  of
         itself serve to give the Upper Tribunal jurisdiction."

63. It is vexing that  the  point  was  not  addressed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge because, as the grant makes clear, the first appellant's
    case had always been put very carefully on the basis that she should be
    entitled to protection under the Rule  relating  to  domestic  violence
    victims even though  she  was  not  the  partner  of  an  appropriately
    qualified person.

64. We understand the point Mr Hoshi is endeavouring to make.   It  is,  we
    think, agreed and it is certainly clear that if the first appellant was
    a victim of violence at the hands of a person  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom then she would qualify for indefinite leave to remain under the
    rules, the other requirements of the Rule seem to be made out.

65. The rules provide that a person  who  is  not  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom but who is the victim of domestic  violence  at  the  hands  of
    someone who is settled in the United Kingdom is entitled to  indefinite
    leave to remain but a person who is not settled and who is  the  victim
    of domestic violence at the  hands  of  person  who  is  similarly  not
    settled cannot satisfy the rules. The status of the victim in each case
    is the same but the relief is different because of the  status  of  the
    attacker is different.

66. We do not immediately see the point of this distinction. It may well be
    that it is an unintended consequence of changing the Immigration  Rules
    so that refugees now find it harder to get indefinite leave to  remain.
    It may be that all consequent changes have not been thought through. We
    do not know that and perhaps should not speculate.

67. We have considered the cases relied upon by  Mr  Hoshi.   We  certainly
    accept the principle that it is sometimes necessary to read into  Rules
    extra words to give a meaning that would now be wholly consistent  with
    current social values but probably not considered when  the  provisions
    were drawn.  Applying provisions intended to benefit married couples to
    couples in long-term unmarried relationships may  well  be  a  paradigm
    example.  Nevertheless we do find  it  necessary  to  direct  ourselves
    (although we had not forgotten the point) that it is not for judges  to
    be legislators and it is only permissible to  embark  on  the  kind  of
    creative interpretation urged by Mr Hoshi  if  the  alternative  is  so
    unconscionable it is unlawful.

68. We think Mr Hoshi may very well be right that the reason the protection
    extended to the "unsettled" victims of violence by  people  settled  in
    the United Kingdom was to make it easier for  them  to  complain  about
    domestic  violence  without  fearing  that  they   would   disadvantage
    themselves in their intentions to  remain.   Domestic  violence  is  an
    emotive and sensitive as well as a criminal issue and experience  shows
    that victims (usually women but not always) are very  often  vulnerable
    because they are emotionally  battered  as  well  as  physically  hurt.
    Additionally in the case of immigrants they are particularly vulnerable
    to bad advice and unjustified fear.

69. It would not surprise us in the least if it was seen as advantageous to
    favour such people in an attempt to redress  the  balance  slightly  in
    their favour in an attempt to stamp out a  social  evil.   However,  we
    cannot possibly know that that is right from construing the Rule  which
    is what we are here to do.  Neither can we  accept  that  there  is  no
    difference between a wife beater settled in the United  Kingdom  and  a
    wife beater recognised as a refugee in the United Kingdom.  The fact is
    that the refugee is not settled.  The  refugee  may  very  well  become
    settled but his status is not that of  a  settled  person.  It  is  not
    immediately clear why a victim's status in the  United  Kingdom  should
    improve by reason of being a victim of domestic violence.

70. We do not wish to be drawn into a debate on this point  because  we  do
    not see that as the role of the Tribunal. We just make the  point  that
    it is not right for Mr Hoshi to contend that there is no difference and
    therefore that the distinction can have no rational basis.  We  do  not
    have to be able to give the rational basis.  That is not our function.

71. The First-tier Tribunal clearly erred by not deciding what actually was
    the main point of the appeal. We have considered Mr Hoshi's  submission
    and we rule against him.

72. Putting all these things together we find that  although  the  Decision
    might have benefitted from more explanation it passes the crucial test.
     That is the Secretary of State knows  the  result  (the  appeals  were
    allowed) and knows the reasons (the evidence was believed, particularly
    the expert evidence which has not been challenged).  These things taken
    together were sufficient reason to allow the appeal  and  there  is  no
    material error shown in the decision to allow.

73. There is an error shown in the failure to consider  the  grounds  under
    the Immigration Rules but if had been considered the appeal would  have
    been dismissed.

74. We therefore dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's  appeals  against  the
    decision to allow the appeal on human  rights  and  Refugee  Convention
    grounds.

75. We allow the first appellant's appeal to the very limit extent that  we
    add to the First-tier Tribunal's decision that the appeal is  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 January 2016                |

