
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06698/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 February 2015                  |On 25 February 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Pasha Daneshvaran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Chandrasingh, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Iran and his date of birth  is  11  July
    1973.  I shall refer to the respondent  as  the  appellant  as  he  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant made an application for asylum and this  was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State in a decision of 19  August  2014.  He  appealed
    against the decision of the Secretary of State  to  remove  him  of  22
    August 2014.  The appellant's appeal was dismissed on asylum grounds by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pickup in a decision dated 10 November
    2014, following a hearing on 28 October 2014.  I granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal on 9 December 2014.  The matter came before me  to
    determine whether or not the Judge made an error of law. I drew to  the
    attention of the parties that I had been the Judge to grant permission,
    but neither had any representations on this matter and both  understood
    that the issue before me is not the same  as  that  at  the  permission
    stage.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The appellant's case in summary is that his uncle was a member  of  the
    Mujahedeen and as a result he was arrested and  executed  about  twenty
    years ago.  The appellant left Iran and  travelled  to  Dubai  in  1999
    where he worked in the family business  for  seventeen  years.   During
    this period he and his family  were  investigated  by  the  authorities
    about  their  involvement  with  the  Mujahedeen.    In  2003/2004  the
    appellant was diagnosed with cancer and had to travel to Iran in  order
    to receive treatment there.  Between 2003 and 2008  he  was  questioned
    numerous times by the Iranian authorities and judiciary in relation  to
    his perceived  links  with  the  Mujahedeen.   In  2008  the  appellant
    returned to Iran in order to reside there permanently.  In 2010 he  was
    asked to attend the Sepah office where he was questioned about  a  bomb
    in Esfahan.  In 2012-2013 the appellant was detained for  seven  months
    in Evin Prison where he was subjected to torture.  He was  released  in
    June 2013 as a result of the payment of a surety by his father.

4.   The appellant started his journey to the UK in June  2013  and  arrived
    here on 28 October 2013 when he made a claim for asylum.  He fears that
    should he be returned he would be at risk from  the  authorities.   The
    appellant has been in contact with his sister who lives  in  Dubai  and
    who told him that their father has been detained in order to  encourage
    the appellant to hand  himself  in.   He  has  now  been  released  but
    continues to be questioned.

5.   Before Judge Pickup there was a psychiatric report by Dr  Ganapathy  of
    14 October 2014 with an addendum of 20 October 2014.  In  addition  the
    appellant relied on a report prepared by Dr Mohammad M H Kakhki  of  26
    September 2014.  The  appellant  gave  oral  evidence  relying  on  his
    witness statements of 22 November 2013 and 15 October 2014.  The  Judge
    made the following findings

    (i)  "I find there is no part of the appellant's  account  that  I  can
         accept as probably true.  I do  not  accept  that  his  account  of
         events in Iran is accurate, truthful or reliable." ([40]).

    (ii) The psychiatric report was prepared after a single examination and
         consideration of only the  Home  Office  papers  and  a  letter  of
         instruction.  There is no indication of the length of the interview
         and the  report  is  based  on  an  uncritical  acceptance  of  the
         appellant's relatively short account of  claimed  events  in  Iran.
         The appellant was unable to identify to the doctor when in 2014 his
         symptoms of nightmares and flashbacks of  torture  commenced.   The
         Judge found that "the extent to which this report  can  assist  the
         appellant is limited" ([42]).  He went on to find as follows:-

                  "... the report,  even  taken  at  its  highest  does  not
                  confirm that he was  detained  and  tortured  as  claimed.
                  There may be other  reasons  for  symptoms  attributed  to
                  PTSD,  even  if  genuine  and   there   are   also   other
                  possibilities as how the appellant might  have  learnt  to
                  feign such symptoms, such as  in  discussion  with  others
                  claiming asylum.  No assessment was made of the stress  of
                  the asylum process  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  asylum
                  process and the delay in resolution  with  a  prospect  of
                  being returned to Iran.

             43    More  concerning  is  that  there  were  a   number   of
                  significant inconsistencies between the  chronology  given
                  to Dr  Ganapathy  and  the  appellant's  asylum  interview
                  accounts.  These are  set  out  in  the  addendum  report.
                  Surprisingly, the doctor did not detect these for himself,
                  even though he had all the Home Office papers, but instead
                  they had to be highlighted to him in a request for him  to
                  amend his report and a suggestion that he may have misread
                  his notes.   That  does  not  inspire  confidence  in  the
                  report.  The inconsistencies included the date of marriage
                  and divorce, a second marriage not referred  to,  and  the
                  year he was forced to sign a blank confession, as  to  who
                  paid for his release,  whether  he  was  detained  at  the
                  airport, the year he was detained for  seven  months,  the
                  year  he  was  diagnosed  with  cancer,  and  the  medical
                  treatment.   The  inconsistencies  were  not  just  as  to
                  precise dates, but entire years.  More significantly  they
                  include differences as to individuals involved  and  their
                  role in the appellant's history.

             44   Dr Ganapathy confirmed that the original report reflected
                  the information in his notes, although it was not  a  word
                  for word account of the interview.  It follows that  there
                  was  no  mistake  and  the   appellant   had   given   the
                  inconsistent account to the doctor.  However,  I  find  Dr
                  Ganapathy's blanket acceptance of the suggestion  made  to
                  him   by   the   appellant's   solicitors    that    these
                  inconsistencies were symptomatic  of  the  PTSD,  and  his
                  comment that they  are  explained  by  the  impairment  in
                  cognitive functions, rather concerning.   One  might  have
                  expected such an assessment to have  been  dealt  with  in
                  rather more detail and indeed in the  first  report.   One
                  might  expect  him  to  make  specific  comment   on   the
                  difference between an inability to recall, and the  giving
                  of specific dates that are inconsistent  with  an  account
                  previously given, and to address  any  distinction  to  be
                  drawn between confusion as to precise dates and the  roles
                  of the characters described in his account.   I  find  the
                  doctor  has  made  no   critical   assessment   of   these
                  discrepancies, dealing with the issue rather superficially
                  over a few lines of the addendum  report,  and  failed  to
                  consider  whether  these  discrepancies  might   also   be
                  explained by an untruthful feigned account.

             45   Overall,  I  find  the  deficiencies  in  the  report  as
                  highlighted  above  undermine  the  weight  that  can   be
                  attached  to  the   report   and   ultimately   that   the
                  inconsistencies rather undermine the appellant's  account.
                  In JL (medical reports - credibility China, it was stated
                  that those writing such reports should ensure that  before
                  forming their opinions they  study  any  assessments  that
                  have already been made of the appellant's  credibility  by
                  the immigration authorities.  The authors of such  reports
                  need to understand that what is  expected  of  them  is  a
                  critical and objective analysis of the symptoms displayed.
                   Although just because a  report  relies  heavily  on  the
                  account given by the person concerned, that does not  mean
                  that their reports lack  or  lose  status  as  independent
                  evidence, but it may reduce very considerably  the  weight
                  that can be attached to them.  I find that the report does
                  not meet the requirements of JL.

             46    In  summary,  I  found  Dr  Ganapathy's   report   poor,
                  superficial, and ultimately  unreliable  for  the  reasons
                  stated.  Whilst I have borne in mind  that  the  appellant
                  may have had difficulties recalling precise dates, he  did
                  not appear to have such  difficulties  during  his  asylum
                  account,  which  he  largely  stands  by.   There  is   no
                  suggestion that his ability  was  better  then,  including
                  when  giving  his  lengthy  witness   statement   to   his
                  representatives  in  November  2013,  but  worsened   when
                  interviewed by the doctor in October 2014.   Although  the
                  appellant has given a  further  witness  statement,  dated
                  after  the  medical  examination,  he  has  not  made  any
                  statement explaining the discrepancies in the  psychiatric
                  report.    I   find   that   the   discrepancies    stated
                  significantly undermine the credibility of the appellant's
                  account and thus the report more adverse to his claim that
                  (sic) helpful.

             47   Notwithstanding the above, I have approached the evidence
                  on the basis that a degree of caution and latitude  should
                  be accorded to the appellant's account and that  it  would
                  be unfair to concentrate on minor discrepancies that could
                  potentially be explicable by or attributable to PTSD."

    (iii)     The  Judge  highlighted  a  number   of   discrepancies   and
         inconsistencies in the appellant's account at [53] and he  went  on
         to find as follows:

             "54  I do not see that the appellant's various accounts as  to
                  this issue can coexist in the same world.  His  correction
                  witness statement of 2014  does  not  really  answer  this
                  concern.  There are more discrepancies here  than  can  be
                  explained by a PTS allowance  for  memory  problems.   The
                  appellant does not appear to have  difficulties  recalling
                  events,  even  if  precise  dates  are  not  able  to   be
                  remembered.   His  accounts  are   quite   elaborate   and
                  detailed.    However,   there   are    very    significant
                  discrepancies  about  his  accounts  that  I  find  cannot
                  adequately be explained by memory problems  or  confusion.
                  Some of the appellant's present account flies in the  face
                  of clear contrary evidence from his own accounts.

             ...

             60   I also find that  even  making  allowances  for  possible
                  confusion or memory lapses because of alleged  abuse,  the
                  appellant has failed to provide a  reasonable  explanation
                  for the inconsistencies and changes  in  his  account  and
                  that  this  further  undermines  the  credibility  of  his
                  account.   In  the  circumstances,  in  relation  to   the
                  unsupported assertion that his  uncle  was  executed,  the
                  appellant fails to meet the requirements of paragraph 339L
                  in respect of that  part  of  his  claim  and  it  remains
                  unsubstantiated and cannot be accepted.

             66   I have also considered the  medical  evidence,  including
                  the psychiatric reports and the other medical  information
                  and statements in the appellant's bundle but even taken at
                  its highest this is  insufficient  to  engage  Article  3.
                  Treatment for cancer  related  illnesses  and/or  PTSD  is
                  available in Iran, which has  a  well-functioning  medical
                  health  system.   I  note  that  the  appellant  has   had
                  treatment in the UK but he also  returned  from  Dubai  to
                  Iran  to  obtain  treatment  and  operations.   The   only
                  evidence of any  recent  or  pending  treatment  does  not
                  include cancer treatment.  Treatment for PTSD is  said  to
                  be antidepressants,  which  is  available  in  Iran.   The
                  appellant claims to have had suicidal thoughts but is  not
                  actively suicidal and there is no evidence  to  suggest  a
                  suicide risk because of return".

    (iv) The Judge took into account Dr Kakhki's report.  The  Judge  found
         that there were problems with the report and that  it  was  "rather
         poor" (see [50]).  He concluded that little if any  reliance  could
         be placed on it "it does not confirm the appellant's account to any
         material degree and is of marginal relevance to the issues  in  the
         case once the findings of fact herein are made, although may taking
         into account all the evidence as a whole,  including  this  report.
         Ultimately I find that the report does not  materially  assist  the
         appellant's case".

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.   Ground 1 argues that the Judge failed to  consider  the  report  of  Dr
    Kakhki which highlights evidence which postdates the  country  guidance
    case of SB (risk on return - illegal exit) Iran CG [2009] UKAIT  00053.
    Ground 2 argues that the Judge's assessment of Dr  Kakhki's  report  in
    contrast to the background  information  cited  by  the  respondent  is
    inaccurate.   Dr  Kakhki  refers  to  relevant  Amnesty   International
    evidence from 2011 which postdates the Danish Report relied on  by  the
    respondent and specifically deals with the material  issue  in  dispute
    which was persecution of family members of MEK (The People's Mujahedeen
    of Iran).  The sources cited by Dr Kakhki cannot without  justification
    be  described  as  "less  than  objective"  than  those  cited  by  the
    respondent.

7.   The Judge did not give reasons why he preferred  the  information  from
    the Danish Immigration Services cited by the respondent to the European
    Court of  Human  Rights  case  of  Abdolkhani  and  Karimnia  v  Turkey
    (application number 30471/08).

8.   Ground 3 argues that the Judge failed to  take  into  account  evidence
    relating to the appellant's mental health and assess credibility in the
    round.  The Judge found  that  the  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    account  "cannot  adequately  be  explained  by  memory   problems   or
    confusion" but he does not justify this finding.   The  Judge  rejected
    the findings of the expert  and  asserts  that  the  discrepancies  are
    evidence that the appellant is  not  telling  the  truth  in  order  to
    enhance his claim.   However  the  Judge  did  not  consider  that  the
    appellant has given inconsistent  evidence  in  other  aspects  of  his
    account which are not remotely material to his claim, for instance  the
    year he started his cancer treatment and the year he married or whether
    he is currently in a relationship.  The Judge did not make findings  in
    relation to the likely effects on the appellant  of  aggressive  cancer
    treatment on his cognitive functioning which was at pages 91-99 of  the
    appellant's bundle  and  which  would  have  a  direct  impact  on  the
    credibility assessment.

9.   The Judge did not have regard to Dr Ganapathy's  opinion  at  14(d)  of
    his report that the appellant is "unlikely to be able to take  part  in
    the legal proceedings in a meaningful way"  because  of  his  cognitive
    impairment.  The Judge dismissed the report of Dr Ganapathy because  it
    was "based on an uncritical acceptance of  the  appellant's  relatively
    short account of claimed events" and  he  ignored  the  tests  that  Dr
    Ganapathy carried out (see paragraph 13.3 of the report) and  the  fact
    that Dr Ganapathy had considered whether the appellant was  malingering
    or not.  The Judge does not give adequate reasons for  disregarding  Dr
    Ganapathy's analysis  that  the  appellant  was  not  malingering.   Dr
    Ganapathy is a medical professional who has fifteen years of experience
    in psychiatry and his view should accordingly be given more weight.

10.  I heard oral submissions from both parties.    Ms  Chandrasingh  relied
    on the grounds seeking permission to appeal and she asserted  that  the
    Judge did not take into account the appellant's illegal exit  and  that
    he would be returning to Iran as a failed asylum seeker.  The Judge did
    not make clear findings in relation to his illegal  exit  and  did  not
    consider Dr Kakhki's evidence in relation to this which  postdates  the
    country guidance case of SB.  The Judge failed to give adequate reasons
    for attaching no weight to Dr Kakhki's report.   The inconsistencies in
    the appellant's account were  not  in  relation  to  the  core  of  his
    account, a large number were not material and simply showed that he has
    memory problems.  The Judge did  not  take  into  account  the  testing
    undertaken  by  the  psychiatrist  and  that  it  is   an   independent
    assessment.

11.  Mr Whitwell made submissions in the context of the Rule 24 response  of
    29 December 2014.  He stated that both the medical report and  that  of
    Dr Kakhki were challenged by the Presenting  Officer  at  the  hearing.
    There was no reason for the Judge to depart from the  country  guidance
    case of SB and the Judge gave  reasons  for  attaching  little  if  any
    weight to Dr Kakhki's report and Mr Whitwell referred me to  paragraphs
    48, 49 and 50 of the determination.  Mr  Whitwell  indicated  that  the
    Judge accepted the finding of post-traumatic stress disorder but it was
    the causation that was in issue.

Error of Law

12.  There were a number of discrepancies in the  appellant's  account  that
    were raised by the Secretary  of  State  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.  The appellant could not remember the year that he married  and
    in his interview he stated that he returned to Iran to get  married  in
    2001.  In his witness statement he claimed to have  returned  to  Dubai
    with his wife the next day.  However in his interview  he  stated  that
    when he arrived in Iran in 2001 his passport was confiscated and he was
    told to report to the Revolutionary Court in Shiraz the next day.    It
    was not accepted by the Secretary of State that the  appellant's  uncle
    was a member of the MEK on the basis that there was not enough evidence
    to accept or reject this and that there was no  objective  evidence  to
    show that former members of MEK have  continued  to  face  problems  in
    Iran.

13.  The Judge found inconsistencies in the  appellant's  account  including
    those raised by the Secretary of State in the reasons of refusal letter
    and he found that there were  more  discrepancies  in  the  appellant's
    account  (see  [55]-[58]).  These  inconsistencies   related   to   the
    appellant's oral evidence.

14.  Dr Ganapathy is a full-time consultant psychiatrist working in the  NHS
    and there was no issue raised to his experience or expertise.  He  made
    the following findings:

         "13.3    On testing his cognitive functions he  was  orientated  to
                time, place and person.  His attention and concentration was
                impaired.  He was able to  repeat,  but  had  impairment  in
                recall on tests of memory, thus  suggestive  of  impairment.
                There was no impairment in writing or reading but  sometimes
                required that the questions were repeated a few times.   His
                insight into his condition was good".

15.  He went on to find as follows:

    14   Opinion and recommendations

         (a)  Diagnosis

             Based on the  history  and  examination,  Mr  Daneshvaran  has
             reported being subjected to torture whilst in prison for seven
             months in 2013.   He  has  presented  with  symptoms  such  as
             experiencing  flashbacks  and  nightmares  of  these   torture
             experiences as if he is reliving them.   There  is  associated
             anxiety symptoms, panicky  feelings,  hyper  vigilance,  being
             startled, depressive symptoms including suicidal attempts  and
             suicidal ideations.

             These features  are  consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of  post-
             traumatic stress disorder (PTSD (ICD10 code  F43.1).   I  have
             also taken into consideration as to whether Mr Daneshvaran may
             be malingering these symptoms.  On  balance  of  probabilities
             the information from history and mental  state  is  consistent
             with a diagnosis of PTSD.  Mr  Daneshvaran  has  not  had  any
             psychiatric admissions nor is there a family history of mental
             health problems and in these  situations  patients  can  mimic
             symptoms by observing other patients, however  this  does  not
             appear to be the case with Mr Daneshvaran.

         (b)  Prognosis

             Any significant improvement in his mental state is unlikely to
             be expected in less than six months after the commencement  of
             the treatment for PTSD.

         (c)  Recommendation of any treatment  or  any  details  of  current
             treatment/medication

             Based on the NICE guidelines on  the  treatment  of  PTSD,  Mr
             Daneshvaran will benefit from a combination of medications and
             psychological interventions.  He will need  to  be  considered
             for treatment with higher dose of  antidepressant  medications
             such as  sertraline  which  has  good  evidence  base  in  the
             treatment  of  PTSD.   He  will  need  to  be   referred   for
             psychological treatments for PTSD  at  the  earliest  possible
             opportunity.  It will be useful if a copy  of  the  report  be
             forwarded to his GP with Mr Daneshvaran's  consent  so  as  to
             pursue the treatment options by the NHS.

         (d)  Mr Daneshvaran's capacity to take a  meaningful  part  in  the
             legal proceedings, current understanding of  the  process  and
             when a change is likely to be expected.

             Mr  Daneshvaran  has  symptoms  of   PTSD   with   flashbacks,
             nightmares, anxiety and depressive  symptoms.   His  cognitive
             functions including attention, concentration  and  memory  are
             impaired based  on  the  assessment.   Hence  in  my  view  Mr
             Daneshvaran is unlikely to be able to take part in  the  legal
             proceedings in  a  meaningful  way  as  well  as  be  able  to
             understand the process.  His  fitness  to  take  part  in  the
             proceedings should be reassessed in six months' time after the
             commencement of the treatment for PTSD.

             Also if Mr Daneshvaran was expected to take part in the  legal
             proceedings in his current mental state or  deported  to  Iran
             the memories and discussions in relation to Iran is likely  to
             contribute to deterioration in his mental state and increasing
             the risks to his safety.

         (e)  Presence of any  suicidal  ideation  or  history  of  suicidal
             thoughts

             Mr Daneshvaran reported of suicidal thoughts on a daily  basis
             and feels that he does not want to wake  up  from  sleep.   On
             mental state examination he does not  appear  to  be  actively
             suicidal.

             He reported of attempting to inject the serum  injection  used
             for cancer treatment in his vein in 2011 with the intention of
             ending his  life.   He  reported  not  requiring  any  medical
             treatment and he still survived this.

             In 2013 whilst in prison he stated of attempting to  suffocate
             with  pillows  but  was  stopped  by  guards.   He   expressed
             hopelessness about his future and feels that sometimes  belief
             in faith helps him to overcome suicidal thoughts.  However  he
             stated of having stopped praying and prefers to be on his  own
             most of the time.

15.  It was open to the Judge to  reject  the  medical  evidence  or  attach
    little weight to it subject to adequate  reasons.   However  the  Judge
    appears to have accepted the diagnosis made by Dr Ganapathy or at least
    to have made findings based on the appellant having  PTSD  (see  [60]).
    Despite  the  strongly  worded  findings  in  relation  to  the  report
    ultimately the Judge accepts the doctor's diagnosis, but  he  does  not
    accept that it was caused by the appellant's  detention.  Dr  Ganapathy
    does not consider alternative causes of post-traumatic stress  disorder
    although he considers the possibility of malingering.  The  Judge  does
    not refer to the findings of Dr Ganapathy in relation to the  appellant
    giving evidence as cited above but he makes allowance for confusion  or
    memory lapse because of "alleged abuse" (see [60]).

16.  The Judge's findings are based on a number of inconsistencies, some  of
    which arise in the appellant's oral  evidence.   This  is  despite  the
    Judge seemingly having accepted  the  appellant's  diagnosis  of  post-
    traumatic stress disorder.  He should then have gone on to consider the
    impact of this on the appellant's cognitive functioning.   The  opinion
    of the doctor in relation to this goes further than "possible confusion
    or memory lapses because of alleged abuse." At  [58]  the  Judge  found
    that the appellant was a "poor witness in his own cause and  frequently
    either failed to answer questions or failed to answer the question  put
    to him.  Questions had to be put repeatedly  to  him  on  a  number  of
    occasions". In the opinion of the doctor the  appellant  is  unable  to
    take part in the proceedings in a meaningful way.  Having accepted that
    the appellant has post-traumatic stress disorder, the Judge  failed  to
    take into account material evidence, namely the impact of the  disorder
    on his ability to give clear and meaningful evidence.  This goes to the
    heart of credibility and is a material error of law.

17.  In addition in relation to Dr Kakhki's evidence again it  was  open  to
    the Judge to attach no or limited weight to this  evidence  subject  to
    reasons.  My concern is that the Judge has not given sufficient reasons
    to depart from the findings of the European Court of  Human  Rights  in
    Abdolkhani and Karimnia v Turkey (application  number  30471/08).   The
    Judge refers to background evidence produced by the appellant at 114 of
    the appellant's bundle, namely the OGN on Iran of 8 October 2012  which
    (at  15.76)  refers  to  the  Danish  Fact-Finding  Report  2013  which
    indicates that the ICRC (International Committee of the Red  Cross)  is
    facilitating the  voluntary  repatriation  to  Iran  of  former  ex-MKO
    members from Iraq and that once home they have the option  of  periodic
    follow-up visits  and  that  since  2003  600  MKO  members  have  been
    repatriated out of which the ICRC has assisted  200.   In  addition  at
    paragraph 15.77 it is stated that the same source  reported  that  upon
    return to Iran such persons were to state to  the  Iranian  authorities
    that they had given up their activities and "it was considered  likely"
    that such persons had been interrogated upon return and that  some  had
    probably been jailed and then released.  I am concerned that the  Judge
    attached insufficient weight to the case of the European Court of Human
    Rights and he preferred the vague and rather general assertions made in
    the OGN without giving adequate reasons.

18.  The Judge made a material error  of  law  and  I  have  set  aside  the
    decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal pursuant to Section 12(2) of
    the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.   I  heard  submissions
    from the parties in relation to venue.  It is clear that  none  of  the
    findings from the First-tier Tribunal can be maintained in light of the
    material error of law.  I remitted the case to the First-tier  Tribunal
    in the light of the nature and  extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding
    which is now necessary in order to  remake  the  decision  pursuant  to
    Section 12(2)(ii).

19.  The appellant submitted further evidence with a covering  letter  of  5
    February 2015.  The evidence is a letter  from  Leicester  City  Assist
    Practice relating to the appellant's mental health.  It is a matter for
    the First-tier Tribunal to consider the admission of this  evidence  at
    the substantive hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT to dismiss the appeal is set aside  and  the  matter
is remitted to the FtT for a de novo hearing.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 23 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

