

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06118/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts, Belfast            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MAHENDRAN NAGENDRAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

 Appellant:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 Respondent:  Mr McTaggart (of Counsel), instructed by Murphy Irwin and
                  Company Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision made on 08 June 2012 on behalf of the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  the  Appellant
    herein, the Respondent's claim for asylum was refused.  It was  further
    determined that he did not qualify for humanitarian protection and that
    to remove him from the United Kingdom would not infringe  any  relevant
    person's rights under Article 8 ECHR.

 2.  The  Respondent's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (the  "FtT")
    succeeded under Article 8 ECHR.  The basis of  the  FtT's  decision  is
    ascertainable from the following passages:

         "[40]     I  weigh  the  Appellant's  mental  health  difficulties.
             [Counsel]  submitted  that  the  mental  health   difficulties
             suffered  by  the  Appellant  do  mean  that   it   would   be
             disproportionate  to  remove  him  from  the  United   Kingdom
             ........   would be an unlawful interference with his personal
             and moral integrity.  I have considered the  decision  of  the
             European Court of Human Rights in the case of Bensaid  .......




         [41] In this case the Appellant still suffers from serious symptoms
             of PTSD and depression  associated  with  his  experiences  of
             torture in detention in Sri Lanka ....


         [42] I accept on the  basis  of  all  of  this  evidence  that  the
             Appellant's mental health would be severely  affected  by  his
             removal to Sri Lanka. I am satisfied that this would amount to
             an adverse effect on his  physical  and  moral  integrity  and
             therefore his private life.  Given the potential  severity  of
             the consequences of removal upon the Appellant, I am satisfied
             that  his  removal  would  not   be   proportionate   to   the
             Respondent's legitimate aim."

     The appeal was allowed accordingly.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the FtT had arguably
    erred in law by failing to  take  into  account  the  country  evidence
    relating to the availability of mental health treatment  facilities  in
    Sri Lanka.  Upon the hearing of the  appeal,  it  was  acknowledged  on
    behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  that  this  complaint   is   not
    sustainable,  having  regard  particularly  to  [32]   of   the   FtT's
    determination, wherein [449] of the country  guidance  decision  in  GJ
    [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) is reproduced.   It was acknowledged that  this
    had evidently been overlooked in formulating the Secretary  of  State's
    application for permission to appeal. It was accepted that it was  open
    to the FtT to conclude that [32] of GJ applies to the  Respondent.   It
    was further accepted  that  the  FtT  had  dealt  adequately  with  the
    relevant country evidence and had  given  sufficient  reasons  for  its
    findings and conclusions.  Mr Mills  conceded,  accordingly,  that  the
    appeal was without merit.

DECISION

 4. I consider that this concession was well made.  Accordingly, I  dismiss
    the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.


                                                 [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date: 30 October 2014
