
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06666/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 January 2016                       |On 15 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                    ms km
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding, Counsel instructed by Marsh & Partners
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an  appeal  brought  by  the  Appellant,  Ms  KM,  against  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Clarke made on 11 November
    2015.  The judge heard the Appellant's appeal against refusal of asylum
    at Taylor House on 7 October 2015.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of
    Albania and had claimed asylum on the grounds that she  feared  serious
    harm in Albania on the basis of her membership of a  particular  social
    group, being women who have had or are perceived to have  had  a  child
    out of wedlock.  The Appellant was married and possibly still is  to  a
    Mr MD and had come to the United Kingdom in June 2012 to  join  him  in
    London.  He did not it seems wish to pursue that relationship.

2.   The Appellant entered into a relationship with a man called Eddie  with
    whom she became pregnant with twins.  Those children were  born  on  11
    March 2013, seven weeks  prematurely.   The  Appellant's  son,  EM  has
    health problems.

3.   When Judge Clarke heard the Appellant's asylum appeal he gave a  series
    of reasons for disbelieving her account and finding that she would  not
    face serious harm in Albania.  The judge also took  account  of  health
    problems of the Appellant's son.  The judge set out the issues relating
    to that child at paragraph 18 onwards in his decision:

         "18. I move on to consider the impact of the Appellant returning as
             a single mother with young twins.  The twins were born  on  11
             March 2013 and are called E and  EM.   I  have  read  the  NHS
             letters provided in support of the appeal and the most  recent
             from Dr Ildiko Shuller reads how  E  has  been  passing  blood
             recently.  He may be suffering from inflammatory bowel disease
             and he is currently undergoing investigations.  The child  has
             been profoundly anaemic and has a probable  immune  deficiency
             disorder.   The  child  is   undergoing   investigations   and
             referrals to  specialist  treatment  centres  as  clearly  his
             health  is  being  impacted  and  whilst  he   remains   under
             investigation the writer believes that the child should remain
             in the UK so that they can establish the cause of his problems
             and initiate some treatment.


         19.  The Appellant and the twins do not enjoy the benefit of any of
             the Article 8 criteria under Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE.


         20.  However, in light of the medical  evidence,  I  conclude  that
             these are compelling circumstances such that immediate removal
             is not proportionate to the  public  interest  of  immigration
             control,  having  regard  to  the  Section  55  duty   towards
             children.  Clearly, it is in the child's best interests to  be
             able to have the investigations carried out so that there  can
             be a smooth transfer of his medical care from the  UK  to  the
             Albanian health authorities, and the child is young, was  born
             prematurely, and has a weakened system such  that  could  have
             irreversible damage to him should he be forced to  leave  with
             his mother now.  Whilst  no  timescale  was  provided  in  the
             letter, and whilst I have no power to direct a particular time
             for leave to remain to be granted under Article 8 outside  the
             Immigration Rules, I would have thought that six months  would
             be a sensible length of time.  Section 117B of the Immigration
             Act 2014  has  been  considered  whilst  concluding  that  the
             Appellant and her children do  not  meet  any  of  the  public
             interest requirements as found within this Section.   However,
             the compelling circumstances of not returning this  young  and
             vulnerable child whilst investigations are being  carried  out
             for a period of say  six  months  can  still  be  accommodated
             within the public  interest  for  immigration  control  to  be
             carried out, albeit at a somewhat delayed point in time.


             Decision


         21.  The appeal is dismissed on asylum and human rights grounds.


         22.  An anonymity order is not made."

4.   In the light of that decision the Appellant applied for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, such application being made to the First-
    tier Tribunal in the first  instance  on  11  November  2015.   In  her
    handwritten grounds prepared in person the Appellant argues that:

         "The judge has made a mistake about the culture in Albania.   I  am
         in danger.  I am, a member of a social group  e.g.  I  face  danger
         from my father and brothers.  Women in my situation are  in  danger
         of death.  I am targeted by reasons  of  my  gender.   Please  read
         paragraphs 23-44 of my Statement.  I will be a victim of an  honour
         killing."

5.   That application for permission to appeal came before Designated  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal McClure on 4  December  2015.   He  observed
    that the Appellant's application for permission was prepared in person.
     He refused permission to appeal in relation to  her  protection  claim
    for reasons that are set out in his notice of decision.  At paragraph 4
    of Judge McClure's grant of permission he provides as follows:

         "4.  The one matter that does concern me is with regard to the best
             interests  of  the  children  and  the  matters  set  out   in
             paragraphs 18 to 20 of the  decision.   The  judge  identifies
             that one of the two children appears to have an obstruction of
             the bowel and to be passing blood.  It is suggested  that  the
             public interest can be accommodated with leave  granted  under
             Article 8.  If it was disproportionate to remove the child  by
             reason of the medical condition, then the  judge  should  have
             arguably considered granting the appeal on article 8  grounds.
             In respect of article 8, the best interests  of  the  children
             and the medical condition of the child, the judge arguably has
             made an error of law.


         5.   On the limited ground indicated leave to appeal is granted."

6.   In  her  Rule  24  response  dated  18  December  2015  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State takes the following position:

         "2.  The Respondent opposes the Appellant's  appeal.   In  summary,
             the Respondent will submit inter alia that the  judge  of  the
             First-tier  Tribunal  directed  himself   appropriately.    In
             granting permission the Tribunal has limited  the  grounds  to
             the issue of best interests and Article 8.   It  is  submitted
             that the findings the judge makes under asylum and Articles  2
             and 3 of  the  ECHR  are  properly  considered  with  adequate
             reasons given.


         3.   In relation to the judge's findings on  best  interests  under
             Article  8  (paras  18-20)  the  grounds  of  appeal  are  not
             challenged.


         4.   The Respondent requests an oral hearing."

7.   Before me Mr Harding has appeared on behalf of  the  Appellant  and  Ms
    Isherwood on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   I  raised  with  both
    parties the issue of what the scope  of  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal actually was arising from Judge  McClure's  decision.   Although
    clearly he thought little of the Appellant's grounds prepared in person
    challenging the dismissal of her protection claim  and  stated  at  his
    paragraph 5 that "on the limited ground indicated leave  to  appeal  is
    granted", the head of the grant of permission simply says  "application
    is granted".  It also seems to me  that  the  appropriate  form  for  a
    partial grant of permission to appeal has not been used.  If permission
    to appeal is to  be  granted  only  on  limited  grounds  there  is  an
    appropriate form to be used when issuing the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal which gives an Appellant notice of their  entitlement  to  renew
    their application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  if
    they so wish.  I find that at least in principle permission  to  appeal
    has been granted on all grounds, i.e. those  raised  by  the  Appellant
    herself and the issue at  paragraph  4  of  Judge  McClure's  grant  of
    permission.  However, in discussion with Mr Harding, I pointed  out  to
    him that with respect to the Appellant she had not in any way been able
    to identify an arguable error of law in her own grounds of appeal.   He
    indicated to me that he did not intend to pursue any challenge  against
    the First-tier's decision dismissing the Appellant's protection  claim.
    I thought that wise in the circumstances.

8.   However, I did not need to hear further from Mr Harding in relation  to
    the issue identified by Judge McClure at his  paragraph  4  but  rather
    turned to Ms Isherwood  for  her  view  on  the  matter  as  it  is  my
    preliminary view that the findings made by the judge at paragraph 20 of
    his decision  appeared  to  me  to  amount  to  a  finding  there  were
    compelling circumstances such that the removal of the Appellant's son E
    was not presently proportionate and that it may well have simply been a
    slip in the judge's paragraph 21  where  he  appeared  to  dismiss  the
    appeal brought on human rights grounds.

9.   Ms Isherwood sought for a short period to dissuade me that that was  an
    appropriate analysis of the First-tier's decision.  She queried whether
    paragraph 20 of the  First-tier's  decision  contained  a  sufficiently
    clear finding that the removal of this child would be disproportionate.
     My response was twofold.  Firstly, that the  Respondent's  case  seems
    relatively clear or rather completely clear as represented at paragraph
    3 of the Rule 24 response wherein the  Respondent  indicates  that  the
    grounds of appeal are not challenged.  In my view this  refers  to  the
    issue identified by Judge McClure at paragraph 4, i.e. the issue  about
    the proportionality of the removal of the child Elvis.   The  Secretary
    of State's position seems clear then to me that she was  not  resisting
    in her Rule 24 response the proposition that the First-tier Judge erred
    in law in dismissing the Article 8 appeal.

10.  My second reason for finding that Ms Isherwood is incorrect about  that
    is because of the clarity of the  findings  made  within  paragraph  20
    itself.  There is no question in my view but that the judge intended to
    allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds in all the circumstances  of  the
    case.  I find that there is merely  a  slip  at  paragraph  21  of  the
    decision wherein the judge appeared to dismiss the human rights element
    of the appeal.

11.  My decision therefore is that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    does not contain any material error of law but that the record  of  how
    the First-tier's decision was decided needs to be corrected to indicate
    at paragraph 21 that the human rights appeal was allowed.  As a  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge, I am also able to exercise powers of a First tier
    Judge (s.4(1)(c) Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007),  and  Rule
    31 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
    Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 provides that the (First-tier) Tribunal  may
    at any time correct any  clerical mistake or other accidental  slip  or
    omission in a decision.

12.  If there is any procedural  irregularity  in  my  indicating  that  the
    record of the First-tier decision needs to be amended in that way,  and
    if it is necessary for me to set aside and re-make the decision of  the
    First-tier Judge, I do so, allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

    Notice of Decision

    The notice of decision of the First tier  Tribunal  dated  11  November
    2015 is to be corrected so as to indicate that the appeal is  dismissed
    on asylum grounds, but allowed on human rights grounds.


    Alternatively, I allow the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  on
    human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Although the First tier Judge did not make an anonymity order, I  find  that
it is appropriate to do so, as the appeal relates  to  health  issues  of  a
minor child.


Signed                     Date: 4.3.16
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
