

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
AA/06561/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London             | Decision Promulgated             |
|On 17 February 2015                      | On 27 July 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                       THE HON. MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                    HTTN
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, instructed by Thompson & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Preliminary
   We note that the First Tier  Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction  in
   relation to the appellant because of the nature of the case.  We consider
   it appropriate to make a  similar  order  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  under
   Procedural Rule 14(1) to prohibit the disclosure or  publication  of  any
   matter likely to lead members of the public to  identify  the  appellant.
   To give effect to this order the appellant is to be referred to as HTTN.

 1. At the end of the hearing we announced the appellant's  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal is dismissed and therefore we uphold the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal. Our reasons are set out below.

 2. The appellant is from Vietnam.  She arrived in the UK  on  4  September
    2012.  The Secretary of  State  accepts  she  was  trafficked  to  this
    country and this delayed her claim for asylum.  The  appellant  claimed
    asylum on 12 February 2014 on the grounds that she has  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in Vietnam because of her  political  opinion  that
    arose from her involvement in distributing leaflets  and  DVDs  for  an
    opposition party.  The Secretary of  State  rejected  her  claim  on  5
    August 2014 and the appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Verity on 24 November 2014 on the  basis  that  she
    did not find the appellant's account to be  credible.   It  is  against
    that decision that this appeal is brought.

 3. Although Mr Harris, representing the appellant, relied on  the  grounds
    of appeal as settled in the application, he submitted that  all  turned
    on whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge had gone behind  a  concession
    and thereby fallen into procedural unfairness.  We  can  summarise  his
    submissions in the following way.

 4. In the reasons for refusal letter, the SSHD conceded  many  aspects  of
    the appellant's accounts. In particular, the SSHD had accepted that the
    appellant had supported the Viet Tan Party.  Despite  this  concession,
    the Presenting Officer at the hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    cross-examined the appellant as to  her  motivations  for  distributing
    leaflets of that party.  We note there was no objection to this  course
    and, indeed, no proper objection could have been made.  The answers  to
    the cross examination raised doubts as to the concession given  by  the
    SSHD as to the appellant's support for the Viet Tan Party and  led  the
    judge to doubt that the appellant had  been  involved  in  politics  in
    Vietnam other than as a means of earning money (see paragraph 25).   By
    going behind a concession, the judge fell into procedural error because
    she had failed to give the appellant an opportunity to defend her  case
    on this basis.

 5. Mr Wilding submitted that there was no procedural unfairness.

 6. We accept Mr Wilding's submission that the Presenting  Officer  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal had good  reason  to  cross-examine  the  appellant
    about her involvement in distributing leaflets.  She  had  admitted  in
    her asylum interview (question 93) that she had  been  paid  1  million
    Dong to distribute  the  leaflets  and  it  was  this  point  that  the
    Presenting Officer pursued.  Although it had  been  accepted  that  the
    appellant had provided a coherent account of her political  affiliation
    up until the  hearing,  during  the  hearing  that  account  completely
    unravelled as a result of this cross-examination. This is evident  from
    both the record of proceedings and the decision and reasons  statement.
    In those circumstances, despite the concession made in the reasons  for
    refusal letter, once the evidence was before the judge he was bound  to
    take a view on it.  As the nature of the evidence had changed,  it  was
    open to the  judge  to  make  relevant  findings  irrespective  of  any
    concession previously given by the SSHD.

 7. Given that the concession was undermined by  the  additional  evidence,
    the only area of procedural unfairness would be if  the  appellant  was
    not given a fair opportunity to address the changes to the case against
    her.  It is clear from the First-tier Tribunal's record of  proceedings
    that the appellant had been represented by Mr Spurling of  counsel.  It
    would be unusual for a procedural issue such as that now pleaded not to
    have been identified by counsel during the hearing. In  answer  to  our
    enquiries Mr Harris admitted he had not obtained any evidence  from  Mr
    Spurling. Because Mr Harris had no comments from Mr Spurling, he  asked
    us to examine the record  of  proceedings  and  we  confirmed  that  Mr
    Spurling re-examined the appellant regarding the allegedly novel issues
    and made relevant submissions. This is not a case where counsel did not
    recognise the relevance of the  changes  arising  from  the  additional
    evidence.

 8. The fact that there was no application to  adjourn  to  deal  with  the
    obvious changes to the appellant's case is material  to  the  issue  of
    procedural fairness,  as  confirmed  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  NR
    (Jamaica) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 856. We  can  only  conclude  that  Mr
    Spurling decided he could deal with the issue at the hearing.  That was
    up to him.  But having done so means that it was open to the  judge  to
    proceed as she did and the complaint relating to procedural  unfairness
    falls away.

 9. As the principal ground is not made out, the other grounds  fall  away.
    In any event, none was pursued by Mr Harris.

10. Even if we are wrong on the main ground of appeal, we recognise that it
    would make no difference to the outcome of the appeal. In  the  absence
    of any documentary  evidence  to  substantiate  the  claim,  the  judge
    applied the credibility assessment  found  in  paragraph  339L  of  the
    immigration rules (which transposes article 4(5) of  the  Qualification
    Directive (2004/83/EC)). She found that the appellant's account of  her
    arrest, detention and  escape  to  be  implausible  and  therefore  her
    account fell below the relevant threshold. Her findings  and  reasoning
    on those points is unchallenged.

11. We add that none of what we say means we are wholly untroubled  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  reasons  statement.  Some  of  the
    language used  is  immoderate,  such  as  the  expression  "it  beggars
    belief". However, we are satisfied that, notwithstanding our  concerns,
    in this case the use of such  language  does  not  indicate  any  legal
    error.



Decision

The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed because  there  is
no error on a point of law in the decision  and  reasons  statement  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.  We uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.








                               Signed                     Date 27 July 2016


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McCarthy
