

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06390/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 5 February 2015                            |On 6 February 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                HAI QIONG LIN

                 (no anonymity direction requested or made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K H Forrest, Advocate,   instructed by Katani &
Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals on grounds which, in summary, submit that  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio erred as follows (numbering as corrected
    by Mr Forrest at the hearing):

         1.  No reasoning or  evidence  to  support  the  finding  that  the
         appellant had the ability and experience to fabricate her claims.

         2.  (i) Failing to take into  account  that  although  the  Chinese
         authorities do not have worldwide  control  of  the  internet  they
         monitor sites of groups opposed to the regime; (ii) conjecture that
         appellant could fabricate her claim [this duplicates  ground  1]  -
         alternatively,  irrationality  in  such  a  finding,  the   logical
         conclusion  of  which  would  be  to  refuse  all   claims;   (iii)
         impermissibly  taking  evidence   from  the  interpreter  that  the
         Chinese characters for "the party" [China  New  Peoples  Party,  or
         China New Democracy Party, which the appellant claimed to  support]
         could be translated both ways.

         3.  Failing to take into account that it is  well  known  that  the
         Chinese security services monitor  opposition  websites,  and  that
         absence of evidence of how the authorities identify users  of  such
         sites explicable as a closely guarded secret not available  to  the
         appellant.

         4.   Finding  the  possibility  of  the  appellant  disclosing  her
         identity accidentally to be remote  in  the  extreme,  rather  than
         applying the standard of whether it was reasonably likely.

         5.  It is judicial knowledge  that  Chinese  nationals  demonstrate
         outside the Embassy which is within two miles of  Chinatown;  error
         in finding it implausible that the appellant would distribute anti-
         government leaflets in Chinatown.

         6.  Conjecture that appellant's husband would  not  have  tolerated
         her subversive activities.

         7.  Founding on absence of evidence  from  relatives  or  a  police
         report from China, when mail would be monitored and there would  be
         a  risk  of  "the  individual"  being  "pressurised  to  tell   the
         authorities of the appellant's whereabouts".

         8.  Error in finding the appellant has motives to remain in the  UK
         and fabricate a claim, and might reconcile with her husband,  which
         (i) is irrational because its logical conclusion would be to refuse
         all claims; (ii) fails to take into account that the appellant  has
         relatives in China and is well-educated, and so could continue  her
         education there; and (iii) is speculative.

 2. Mr Matthews said that the determination made an  unsustainable  finding
    at paragraph 90 (ground  6)  and  made  too  much  of  the  appellant's
    possible motivation at paragraph 92 (ground 8), and that on  the  whole
    the errors  he  felt  bound  to  concede  were  significant  enough  to
    undermine the determination.  That concession was fairly  made.   As  I
    did not need to hear further from Mr Forrest, I observe  only  that  it
    does not appear to have been a point against the appellant that certain
    Chinese characters could be read two ways, and  that  is  the  sort  of
    minor matter which an interpreter might usefully clarify in course of a
    hearing.

 3. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of its
    findings are to  stand.   Under  s.12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of judicial  fact  finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge D'Ambrosio.



           [pic]


           5 February 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
