
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06131/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 September 2015                 |On 15 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Taylor-Gee, of counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. An anonymity order was previously in place. Pursuant to  Rule  14  of
       the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/269)  I
       make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs
       otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of  publication
       thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original Appellant.
       This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any  failure
       to comply with this direction could give rise to  contempt  of  court
       proceedings.

Introduction

    2. In this appeal, the appellant appeals against a decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal dismissing  his  appeal.  The  appellant  had  appealed
       against the respondent's decision taken on 19 August 2014  to  refuse
       to grant asylum or  Humanitarian  protection  under  the  Immigration
       Rules HC395 (as amended).

Background Facts

    3. The claimant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on 16  May  1987.
       He claimed asylum and asked to be recognised as a refugee  under  the
       1951 Refugee Convention. He claimed to have a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution in Sri Lanka on the basis of his fear of the  Sri  Lankan
       authorities because of his ethnicity and imputed  political  opinion.
       He claimed that his removal from  the  United  Kingdom  would  be  in
       breach of Articles 2 and  3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
       Rights.  That claim was refused on the basis that the respondent  was
       not satisfied that the appellant had established a well-founded  fear
       of persecution The respondent also considered that the appellant  had
       not demonstrated that there were substantial  grounds  for  believing
       that he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm on return to
       Sri Lanka so that he did not qualify for Humanitarian  Protection  or
       that his removal would breach Articles 2 or 3.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

    4.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
       determination promulgated on 26 March 2015, Judge  Turquet  dismissed
       the appellant's appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
       appellant had fabricated his account of events,  concluded  that  the
       appellant had invented his asylum claim and as a result found that he
       is not of adverse interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka. The judge
       found that his removal would not breach the  UK's  obligations  under
       the Refugee Convention or the Qualification Directive and  would  not
       breach his Article 2 or 3 Rights.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   On
       21 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  granted  the  appellant
       permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

Preliminary Issue

    6. In the Grounds of appeal the appellant asserted (Ground 1)  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to apply a  concession  made  by
       the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing. The concession was
       said to be that the Secretary of State accepted  that  there  was  an
       arrest warrant on the court file in  Sri  Lanka  in  respect  of  the
       Appellant. Grounds 2 and 3 (although incorrectly also numbered 2) set
       out errors alleged to have arisen as a  consequence  of  the  judge's
       failure to take this concession in to account.

    7. The appellant applied for an adjournment of the hearing and  for  the
       Secretary of State to respond setting out whether or not she accepted
       that the concession had been made. The application for an adjournment
       was refused. However, the Secretary  of  State  did  respond  shortly
       before the  hearing  indicating  that  she  did  not  accept  that  a
       concession had been made.

    8. Counsel who represented the  appellant  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       hearing, Ms Victoria Laughton, withdrew from the case and provided  a
       witness statement setting out her  recollection  of  events  together
       with her contemporaneous note  to  her  instructing  solicitor  which
       accorded with her witness statement. Ms  P  Ellis,  the  Home  Office
       Presenting Officer, who represented the Secretary  of  State  at  the
       First-tier Tribunal hearing also provided a short  witness  statement
       and a contemporaneous note from the hearing. Ms Ellis did not  accept
       that a concession had been made.

    9.  I  consulted  the  record  of   proceedings   and   read   to   both
       representatives a couple of passages from the notes (although  I  had
       some difficulty in reading parts of the notes).  It  was  clear  from
       those notes that the presenting officer  accepted  that  the  lawyers
       were bona fide. However, there was nothing in the judge's notes  that
       gave an indication that a concession  had  been  made  in  the  terms
       advocated Ms Laughton with regard to the arrest warrant.

   10. I also considered the fact that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
       directed to  notify  the  appellant  and  the  tribunal  whether  the
       evidence from Mr Mansoor (sic) was accepted. The respondent  did  not
       respond to this direction.

   11. Both representatives made submissions to me. I concluded that it  was
       clear that both  representatives  were  honestly  representing  their
       recollection of events. As the parties were in disagreement,  without
       having to undertake an investigation, hear evidence on the point from
       the representatives and  reach  a  conclusion,  it  would  have  been
       difficult to find a material error of law in respect of  the  judge's
       failure to take that alleged concession into account in  the  absence
       of an indication of such a concession in the judge's notes.

   12. However, as set out below I did  consider  that  there  are  material
       errors of law and that the decision should be set-aside. On the basis
       of the evidential issue regarding the  arrest  warrants  I  concluded
       that the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
       de novo hearing.

   13. I also consider that there is  a  real  risk  of  unfairness  to  the
       appellant. Having heard the submissions it is clear that evidence was
       not led in connection with the arrest warrant that Ms Laughton  would
       most probably have led had she not considered that the  Secretary  of
       State had conceded the matter. That evidence may have made a material
       difference to the judge's conclusions on the risk to the appellant on
       return to Sri Lanka in light of the risk categories identified in  GJ
       (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). I have also borne  in  mind  the
       special responsibility carried by the  Tribunal  in  the  context  of
       asylum appeals and the need for decisions to show by their  reasoning
       that every factor which might tell in favour of an applicant has been
       properly taken into account - R (YH) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
       Home Department [2010] 4 All ER 448, para 24. There is a real risk of
       unfairness to the appellant if he does not  have  an  opportunity  to
       have this matter considered fully.

   14. Given the problems that have arisen on this  issue  it  would  be  of
       assistance to the First-tier Tribunal to have clarity on the position
       of the Secretary of State regarding the arrest warrant. I  was  asked
       to make a direction for the Secretary of State to make  her  position
       clear.  I  agreed  to  make  such   a   direction   and   asked   the
       representatives to agree a form of words. My  direction  is  set  out
       below.  I am grateful for the assistance of both  representatives  in
       dealing with this difficult issue.

Submissions

   15. Ground 2 of the grounds of appeal assert that  the  judge  failed  to
       explain why the appellant would not be  at  risk  on  return  if  two
       lawyers had confirmed an arrest warrant in respect of  the  appellant
       was on the court file in Sri Lanka. It was submitted  by  Ms  Taylor-
       Gee, at the hearing that even if the arrest  warrant  was  fraudulent
       (which for the avoidance of doubt was not accepted by the  appellant)
       the judge had failed to consider and  explain how the mere  existence
       of an active arrest warrant on file would not  of  itself  place  the
       appellant at risk on return. If the genuineness of  the  lawyers  was
       not disputed and what they had seen and recorded regarding the arrest
       warrant, it was illogical for the judge not to accept that there  was
       an arrest warrant on the court file. The Sri Lankan authorities would
       pursue the appellant even if the  documents  were  false.  Ms  Savage
       submitted that  there  is  no  presumption  that  the  documents  are
       reliable. At paragraph 69  -  71  of  the  decision  the  judge  made
       numerous findings of  inconsistencies.  The  burden  of  proving  the
       existence of the arrest warrant  is  on  the  appellant.  There  were
       numerous broader inconsistencies found by the judge.  If  the  arrest
       warrant was not genuine then it is not necessarily the case that  the
       authorities would act on a fraudulent warrant.

   16. In ground 3 the appellant asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons for placing little weight on the  letters  from  the
       lawyers and arrest warrant. In the case of PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA
       Civ 1011 clearly states at paragraph 41 that if the judge  considered
       that the arrest warrant was fraudulent sufficient  justification  was
       required as  to  how  that  conclusion  was  reached.  Ms  Taylor-Gee
       submitted that the judge did not give any detailed  analysis  of  how
       the appellant could have arranged for false documents to be placed in
       the court records. Ms Savage submitted that with regard to sufficient
       justification the judge did give a detailed analysis as  set  out  in
       paragraphs 69-71 as to why little weight was placed on the documents.
       This was in accordance with the requirements in PJ. The fact that the
       Secretary of State failed to undertake enquiries is irrelevant as the
       Secretary of State is not obliged to make enquiries and the judge  is
       not obliged to accept the documents as reliable.

   17. In ground 4 the appellant asserted that the judge erred by failing to
       give adequate reasons for the rejection of the medical report and  in
       ground 5 that the judge failed to consider the evidence in the round.
       Ms Taylor-Gee submitted that although there has to be some  order  to
       the decision when writing the decision up, in this case the judge has
       made her findings regarding the credibility of the  appellant  before
       considering the medical or other corroborative evidence.  Only  after
       making those adverse findings did the judge  then  consider  if  this
       moved her from her previous findings.  It  was  submitted  that  this
       approach was incorrect in accordance with the cases  of  IY  (Turkey)
       [2012] EWCA Civ 1560 and Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367.  There  was  no
       discussion of the medical report and no reasons given as to  why  the
       judge disagrees with the conclusion. The judge had an  obligation  to
       give good reasons if she was going to  reject  the  evidence.  It  is
       clear from paragraph 76 of the judge's  decision  that  the  previous
       findings on credibility informed the judge's approach. The judge  was
       merely paying lip service to the requirement to consider the evidence
       in the round. The fact that the judge states at paragraph 78 that the
       fact that the appellant has given an  account to medical personnel is
       not evidence that it happened as claimed is  highly  indicative  that
       she had not approached the medical report in the correct way.

   18. Ms Savage submitted that paragraph  43  clearly  indicates  that  the
       judge, in setting out her decision in some sort  of  order,  did  not
       indicate that  some  matters  were  considered  by  her  to  be  more
       important than  others.  The  fact  that  the  medical  evidence  was
       considered after the other evidence does not mean that the judge  did
       not take it into consideration in her overall assessment  and  before
       reaching her ultimate conclusion which is set out  at  paragraph  81.
       This conclusion is  reached  after  the  medical  evidence  has  been
       considered. The medical  evidence  was  clearly  taken  into  account
       before reaching a conclusion. The weight to be attached  to  evidence
       is a matter for the judge. Paragraph 78 of the judge's decision  must
       be considered alongside paragraph 74 where the judge records that the
       medical evidence notes that the injuries could have  been  caused  by
       other causes. The judge records in detail in  paragraph  74  why  she
       considered the report to be of limited evidential value in  assessing
       the appellant's claim. The conclusion reached was  entirely  open  to
       the judge.

Material error of law

   19. I consider that the judge has undertaken a very thorough analysis  of
       many aspects of the case  and  has  reached  conclusions  on  several
       issues that were clearly open to her. However, I find that there were
       material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   20. With regard to the judge's analysis and  conclusions  on  the  arrest
       warrant she set out at paragraph  68  that  she  had  considered  the
       evidence in the round. She then set out is some detail  the  evidence
       regarding the general position with regard to corruption in Sri Lanka
       that  she  had   taken   into   consideration   together   with   the
       inconsistencies in the appellant's account of the document which  led
       the judge to the conclusion that, despite accepting that  Mr  Marsook
       and Mrs Pinnalawatta  are lawyers, she could place little  weight  on
       the lawyers' letters as evidence that the appellant is the subject of
       an arrest warrant in respect of prevention of terrorism  charges  and
       is of adverse interest to the authorities. The judge  concluded  that
       she could place little  weight  on  the  arrest  warrant  and  police
       message. It is not entirely clear whether or not the judge considered
       that there simply was no arrest warrant on file or that she  accepted
       that the lawyers had seen a document but that it was fraudulent.  The
       finding is that little  weight  is  to  be  placed  on  the  lawyers'
       letters, the arrest warrant and police message. If the latter,  there
       was no explanation by the judge as to how she considered the document
       had been placed on the file in this particular case and  no  detailed
       analysis  and  explanation  of  this  feature  of  the  evidence   (a
       requirement indicated in para 42 of the case of PJ). If the judge did
       not accept that there was an arrest warrant on file  at  all  then  a
       clear conclusion should have been  reached  with  sufficient  reasons
       given as to why she reached that conclusion in  the  absence  of  any
       challenge to the bona fides of the lawyers.

   21. If the judge accepted that there was an arrest warrant on  file  even
       if fraudulent she did not set out sufficient reasoning as to why  she
       considered that his would not present a risk on return to Sri  Lanka.
       The judge correctly  referred  to  GJ  and  Others  (post-civil  war:
       returnees) Sri Lanka [2013] UKUT 00319. When  setting  out  the  risk
       factors indicated in that case the judge referred to a  person  on  a
       stop list. In GJ it was set out  that  a  person  on  a  'stop  list'
       comprises:

           '... a list of those against whom there is an extant court order
           or arrest warrant' (para 356(7)(d)).

   22. At paragraph  81  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  the  judge
       concluded  that,  'I  do  not  find  that  there  are   any   factors
       attributable to this appellant, which would cause him to be at risk'.
        There is no specific mention of,  or reasoning given by,  the  judge
       as to why the arrest warrant, even if it were fraudulent,  would  not
       give rise the adverse interest of the authorities. Whilst it  clearly
       is a finding that is open to the  judge  the  lack  of  analysis  and
       reasoning regarding the arrest warrant amounts to an error of law.

   23. In respect of the medical evidence and the overall  approach  of  the
       judge there is some  doubt  that  the  judge  did  consider  all  the
       evidence in the round and that she considered  the  medical  evidence
       before arriving at her conclusions. I acknowledge that the weight  to
       be given to expert evidence is a matter for the  First-tier  Tribunal
       judge. In this case there are indicators that the judge did reach her
       conclusion before considering the medical evidence. At  paragraph  78
       the judge set out, 'For the reasons given above I have not found  the
       appellant to be credible... I do not find the fact that he has  given
       an account to medical personnel, is evidence per se that it  happened
       as claimed, taking into account my pervious findings'.

   24. The judge appears to have erred by approaching the  medical  evidence
       in the manner specifically disapproved in the  case  of  Mibanga.  At
       paragraph 24 the court set out:

           '... What the fact finder does  at  his  peril  is  to  reach  a
           conclusion by reference only to  the  appellant's  evidence  and
           then, if it be negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be
           shifted by the expert evidence' and at 25 '... She addressed the
           medical evidence only after articulating  conclusions  that  the
           central allegations made by the appellant were  ...  wholly  not
           credible'.

   25. I consider that there was a material error of law in the approach  of
       the judge to the medical evidence.

Decision

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
       material error of law.  I set aside that decision pursuant to section
       12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

   27. I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for the case to be  heard
       before a different judge pursuant to section 12(2)(b) and 12(3)(a) of
       the TCEA. The case has been listed at Hatton Cross for  2  hours  for
       hearing on 14 January 2016.

   28. I also make the following directions (pursuant to section 12(3)(b) of
       the TCEA) to the Secretary of State for the Home Department:

       Directions

       The Tribunal directs  that  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department:

        1. Must within 42 days of the date of receiving  these  directions,
           notify  the  appellant  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal   whether
           evidence from Mr Marsook and Ms Pinnalawatta is accepted, and

        2. Whether the existence of the arrest warrant on  the  Sri  Lankan
           court file is accepted.

        3. If there is no response by the Secretary of State the First-tier
           Tribunal may draw an inference in the appellant's favour.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 14 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
