
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06163/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 February 2015                           |On 18 May 2015                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Mrs TS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mrs TS is a citizen of Pakistan born in 1974.  She appealed  against  a
    decision of the Secretary of State made on 1 August 2014 to  remove  by
    way of directions.  She was refused asylum.

 2. Although in proceedings  before  me  the  Secretary  of  State  is  the
    Appellant for convenience I retain the designations as they were before
    the First-tier Tribunal, thus Mrs TS is the Appellant and the Secretary
    of State is the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant has two  children  born  in  2001  and  2005.   They  are
    dependants in her appeal.

 4. Her immigration history is not in dispute.  She entered the UK  with  a
    visit visa on 8  December  2012.   On  18  January  2013  she  made  an
    application for leave to remain on the basis of Article  8.   This  was
    refused on 12 December 2013.  An appeal was dismissed on 12 June  2014.
    On 30 June 2014 she claimed asylum.  As indicated this was refused on 1
    August 2014.

 5. The basis of her claim was that she is a member of a particular  social
    group, namely, as a widow with two children.  She fears her in-laws.

 6. In summary, she and her husband  lived  with  their  children  and  her
    husband's father in the house of her sister-in-law and her husband.  In
    November 2011 her father-in-law died.  Her husband  died  in  September
    2012.  She was mistreated  by  her  in-laws  who  complained  that  the
    property that was left to her husband  and  sister-in-law  jointly  was
    theirs.  They fraudulently signed  documents  to  put  everything  into
    their names.  They also made threats against her  saying  that  if  she
    made any attempt to claim the property she and her  children  would  be
    killed.  Her  father,  who  visited  her,  said  she  should  seek  the
    protection of the police.  She went to the police station to file a FIR
    against her in-laws.  However the police  began  harassing  her  father
    instead.  She came to the UK  to  escape  her  in-laws.   She  received
    threatening phone calls from them in the UK.

 7. The refusal letter stated, in summary, that it was accepted that  there
    is a property dispute and that she is a widow with two children. It was
    noted that when she came to the UK she planned to return  and  did  not
    claim asylum for a long time after receiving phone calls and  there  is
    no evidence of the threatening phone calls. She has family in  Pakistan
    she can return to.

 8. She appealed the refusal.

 9. Following a hearing at Birmingham on 23 September  2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Birk dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human
    rights grounds but allowed it on humanitarian protection grounds.

10. Her findings are at paragraphs [23ff].  It was  accepted  there  was  a
    property dispute between the Appellant  and  her  in-laws.   The  judge
    found there was a legal process which could be  used.   She  noted  the
    Appellant's evidence that she does not intend to pursue a  claim  about
    the property dispute.  Her position is that her fear stems from her in-
    laws thinking that she may pursue a claim [23].

11. As for the historical  account  the  judge  found  the  fact  that  she
    reiterated in her evidence that it was her intention when  she  arrived
    in the UK to return to Pakistan and she was not thinking  of  remaining
    here was 'inconsistent with the level of abuse and  conduct  which  she
    claims was directed at her and her children'.  She went on to find that
    'this is sufficient evidence to show that the  land  dispute  and  that
    there was some resulting hostility between herself and her in-laws  but
    that the treatment by her in-laws were not of sufficient seriousness or
    gravity for her to be concerned about her safety or that she  would  or
    her children would be harmed on return at that point' [24].

12. The judge went on (at [25]) to consider  affidavits  and  letters  from
    relatives and others but found that there was nothing  which  indicated
    that the 'information they relay  is  from  their  individual  personal
    knowledge'.  She found that they did not  corroborate  the  Appellant's
    evidence of historical events.  Also, it was conceded that the father's
    evidence was inconsistent with the Appellant's  on  the  issue  of  the
    visits to the police station.

13. At [26] having considered evidence from other sources including medical
    evidence and from the children's school, she found there  to  be  'very
    little weight in the evidence from these sources which  show  that  the
    Appellant and her children have suffered the events that the  Appellant
    claims occurred'.

14. The judge noted a FIR but stated  that  while  it  indicated  that  the
    Appellant had made a formal complaint, she had not found the  truth  of
    the matters complained about.  She repeated that it was unexplained why
    if matters were sufficiently serious for her  to  report  them  to  the
    police she was still considering returning to Pakistan after her  visit
    [27].

15. The judge considered the evidence that  what  precipitated  her  asylum
    claim was threatening phone calls.  She found the Appellant's  evidence
    about the number of calls to be vague  [28].   Also,  although  it  was
    claimed by the Appellant that her sister-in-law  in  the  UK  had  also
    taken these calls there was no evidence to confirm that in the  sister-
    in-law's statement.  Further, without  explanation,  the  sister-in-law
    had not attended the hearing to give evidence [29].

16. The judge went on (at [30]) to consider, and for  several  reasons  she
    gave, reject evidence from the Appellant's brother  about  phone  calls
    being received, concluding (at [31])  'there  is  a  lack  of  credible
    evidence in support of such calls having been made and so I do not find
    that such calls were made'.

17. In further analysis the judge  found  that  the  in-laws  'are  not  so
    powerful and threatening' as claimed and that the Appellant  'was  only
    able to give generalisations about their influence which I do not  find
    credible and which do not establish that they are able to or would seek
    her out on return' [32].

18. She concluded (at [33]) 'I do not find that the Appellant is in  danger
    from her in-laws ... even though there may be  an  issue  between  them
    regarding a property dispute which has caused some difficulties between
    them'.

19. The judge went on to sum up her conclusions as follows (at  [36]):  the
    Appellant 'has not established that hostilities between herself and in-
    laws have reached a level whereby the Appellant faces a risk of serious
    harm or that her in-laws have the ability to carry  out  any  threats'.
    However, she did find that the relationship and family unit with her in-
    laws has 'broken down and that she would no longer be able to return to
    live there with them'.

20. She found that the Appellant had 'exaggerated the extent of ill feeling
    and poor relationship that she has now with her in-laws'  and  that  it
    did not extend to 'acts of violence or serious threats in the UK or  in
    Pakistan'.

21. The judge found that the Appellant 'had to be pressed to tell the truth
    about her family in Pakistan' at first saying she  had  none  but  when
    pressed accepted that she had cousins.   The  judge  noted  that  in  a
    previous determination it had been found  she  had  'many  cousins'  in
    Pakistan. However, in the judge's view, this did not mean that she  has
    a male family member in Pakistan who she can turn to for support or who
    she can reside with.

22. The judge took into account that it was found that 'her brother in  the
    UK would support her in Pakistan but this would not mean that she has a
    male presence with her in Pakistan'.  The judge took into account  that
    the Appellant is an educated woman, indeed educated to degree standard,
    and has worked in Pakistan doing private  teaching.   Also  taken  into
    account that she is a widow returning  with  two  children,  the  judge
    found that 'the situation that would face the Appellant upon return  is
    that she is without any male family assistance, presence or protection'
    [36].

23. Having considered background material as to the difficulties which face
    women on their own in Pakistan the judge in her consideration  of  risk
    concluded (at [39]) as follows: the background material shows that  she
    'would face a very serious risk that she  and  her  children  would  be
    destitute upon return because she would struggle to find  work  despite
    her education and the obligation of childcare would  fall  solely  upon
    her'.  Also 'she has no long term financial means  to  support  herself
    even if her brother in the UK offers to provide some financial support.
     She has no family network in Pakistan that she can realistically  rely
    upon as I find that although she does have relatives that she is not in
    contact with them and there is no evidence that they  could  offer  her
    support'.  The judge found that she would not be able to relocate to 'a
    more modern or progressive or  more  non-rural  area  to  make  matters
    better for herself because she will still face the serious  problem  of
    being without any family or male support'.  This (the judge  concluded)
    'is not within the ambit of the Refugee Convention or Articles 2  or  3
    of the Human Rights Convention but I do find that she  is  entitled  to
    Humanitarian Protection'.

24. The judge ended by considering and dismissing the appeal on  Article  8
    grounds.

25. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
    on 13 November 2014.

26. At the error of law hearing before me Mr  Shilliday  sought  simply  to
    rely on the brief  grounds.   No  issue  was  taken  with  the  judge's
    findings.  The problem was the legal conclusion  she  drew  from  them.
    She had failed to explain which form of serious harm under  Article  15
    of  Council  Directive  2004/83/EC  she  would  be  at  real  risk   of
    experiencing.  Having found she was not entitled  to  protection  under
    Article 2 or 3 of the ECHR it might be inferred that Article 15(c)  was
    the relevant part but such was unclear and  there  was  an  absence  of
    reasoning in respect of a situation of internal armed conflict.  It was
    thus unclear why the Appellant had succeeded.  He  invited  me  to  set
    aside the decision and remake it dismissing it.

27. In reply Mr Ahmed reminded me of the judge's findings  at  [36  -  39].
    She had given adequate reasons for reaching her  findings  and  thereby
    allowed the appeal.  The Respondent's position amounted to nothing more
    than disagreement.

28. Mr Shilliday responded by repeating that no issue was  taken  with  the
    factual findings and the reasons given  for  reaching  these  findings.
    The issue was the legal reasoning.

29. Mr Ahmed's final position was that the appropriate  disposal  was  that
    the appeal be allowed under Article 3.  He invited me to set aside  the
    decision and remake it accordingly.

30. Mr Shilliday's final position was that he left it to me.

31. In considering this matter the factual findings are not challenged.  As
    indicated they are laid out at [39] and amount to a real risk that  the
    Appellant would be destitute on return because she  would  struggle  to
    get work despite her education, and the obligation of  childcare  would
    fall on her.  She has no long term financial means to  support  herself
    even if her UK brother offered some  financial  support.   She  has  no
    family network in Pakistan being not in contact  with  relatives  there
    and they could not offer support.   She  would  have  no  male  support
    there.

32. Such findings, the judge considered,  could  not  bring  the  Appellant
    within the ambit of the Refugee Convention.  Such is not challenged.

33. The judge also  considered  that  her  findings  could  not  bring  the
    Appellant within the ambit of  Article  3.   Yet  she  found  that  the
    Appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection.  Paragraph  339C  of
    the Immigration Rules states that a person will be granted humanitarian
    protection if the Respondent is satisfied that she does not qualify  as
    a refugee, and (iii) 'substantial grounds have been shown for believing
    that the person concerned, if she returned to the  country  of  return,
    would face a real risk of suffering serious harm  and  is  unable,  or,
    owing to such risk, unwilling to avail herself  of  the  protection  of
    that country.' 'Serious harm' is defined at  paragraph  339C  as  (iii)
    '...inhuman or degrading treatment...of a  person  in  the  country  of
    return'; or (iv) 'serious and individual threat to a civilian's life or
    person  by  reason  of  indiscriminate  violence   in   situations   of
    international  or  internal  armed  conflict'.   The  wording  reflects
    Article 15 (b) and (c) of Council Directive 2004/83/ EC.

34. In the absence of any reference  to  international  or  internal  armed
    conflict it is clearly the case that the judge did  not  have  in  mind
    paragraph 339C (iv)/Article 15 (c). The only other  option  before  her
    was paragraph 339C (iii)/Article 15(b) 'serious harm  consists  of  ...
    inhuman or degrading treatment ...  of  a  person  in  the  country  of
    return'.

35. That wording reflects Article 3 ECHR which she had earlier rejected  as
    having no application to the findings.

36. In failing to give adequate reasons for concluding on the  facts  found
    that the Appellant, apparently on the grounds of destitution, succeeded
    on humanitarian protection grounds the judge materially erred  in  law.
    The decision is set aside to be remade. The findings stand.

37. The crucial issue is where do findings of a real  risk  of  destitution
    for a widowed woman with two children and no male protection  take  the
    Appellant.

38.  I  was  not  referred  to  any  case  law  on   destitution   by   the
    representatives. However,  I note MB, YT, GA and TK v SSHD [2013]  EWHC
    123 where Mitting J held (at [29]) that 'Article 3 imposes  no  general
    obligation on a contracting state to refrain from removing a person  to
    another state in which he would be destitute'.  It was not the function
    of Article 3 to impose a minimum standard of social support  for  those
    in need.  A breach of Article 3 only  occurred  when  deliberate  state
    action was taken to prohibit a person from sustaining himself  by  work
    and when accommodation and the barest of necessities were removed. In a
    'foreign  case'  'wholly  exceptional  circumstances  such   as   those
    obtaining in D v UK 30240/96 15 October 1996 may engage Article  3  and
    prohibit removal by a contracting state. Otherwise [noting  comment  by
    the House of Lords in Limbuela v SSHD [2006] 1 AC 396], "the fact  that
    the applicant's circumstances, including his life expectancy  would  be
    significantly reduced if he were to be  removed  from  the  contracting
    state is not sufficient in itself to give rise  to  breach  of  Article
    3"'.

39.  I see nothing exceptional in the Appellant's situation. I  cannot  see
    that the fact that she would return with two children and without  male
    support there advances her claim.

40. In that regard among the extensive background  material  noted  by  the
    judge (at [37]) it was stated that while  there  are  difficulties  for
    single  women  throughout  Pakistan,   factors   such   as   education,
    geographical location and socio-economic  position  all  influence  the
    situation of women. Consequently, the life chances of a poorly educated
    woman from the rural provinces is likely to be  markedly  different  to
    that of a well educated living in one of the more cosmopolitan  centres
    such as Lahore, the capital city of  Punjab,  where  the  Appellant  is
    from. As the judge found she is a woman of degree level  education  and
    she would continue to get financial support from her brother in the UK.
    I note that she speaks English and, it appears, is in  good  health  as
    are her children.

41. I conclude on the unchallenged facts that the Appellant's circumstances
    do  not  engage  Article  3.   Nor  does  it  succeed  on  humanitarian
    protection grounds. The appeal fails.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law.   The
decision is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeal is dismissed on asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights
grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


