
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA065532015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 April 2016                              |On 17 June 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           FRANCISCA ONSHOGHIE ODE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Francisca Onshoghie Ode, was born on 16 July 1978 and is
    a female citizen of Nigeria.   The  appellant  arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in October 2010 and her leave was subsequently  extended.   She
    applied for asylum on 11 October 2014.  She has two dependants  in  her
    appeal (her children, born respectively in 2007 and 2011).  On 30 March
    2015, a decision was taken to refuse her claim for asylum, to refuse to
    vary her leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  remove  the
    appellant by way of directions.  The appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Birkby) which, in a decision
    promulgated on 27 July 2015, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Ms Khan, for the appellant, explained to me that  there  was  only  one
    ground in this appeal, namely  the  failure  of  the  judge  to  assess
    material which had been before the First-tier Tribunal.  In consequence
    of the error, she submitted that the  judge's  findings  at  [30]  were
    vitiated.

 3. I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   I  have  reached  that
    finding for the following reasons.  First, the appellant challenges the
    judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  had   given   evasive,   vague,
    implausible and inconsistent evidence.  At [30(i)] the judge noted that
    the appellant gave evidence in Yoruba assisted by an interpreter.   The
    appellant had no difficulty reading the record of her asylum  interview
    in English and the judge also noted that she had obtained a BSc  degree
    in computing whilst living in the United Kingdom.  The  judge  recorded
    that "the appellant in my judgment was particularly evasive with regard
    to her lack of knowledge of English".  The ground  of  appeal  does  no
    more than to assert that the appellant was not  evasive,  pointing  out
    that the appellant did not claim that  she  could  not  read  or  speak
    English, only that she could not do so as well  "as  a  white  person";
    she used Google Translate "when  she  got  stuck".   I  find  that  the
    grounds offer  no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  findings  clearly
    available to the  judge  on  the  evidence.   Another  judge  may  have
    accepted that the appellant was not acting  in  an  evasive  manner  as
    regards her use of English, possibly citing the reasons referred to  in
    the grounds (see above).  However, that is not the point.  There was no
    perversity or irrationality in the judge's assessment that an appellant
    who used an interpreter to give oral evidence but who had undertaken an
    undergraduate degree in the United Kingdom wholly taught in the English
    language was behaving "evasively".

 4. The grounds raise the finding of the judge at [30(ii)]  to  the  effect
    that the appellant had not been truthful regarding the divorce petition
    sent to her by her husband.  It appears that  this  petition  had  been
    served by substituted service.  The divorce petition also contained  an
    inaccurate statement of the appellant's husband's age  (43  years,  not
    42).  The judge decided not to rely upon the divorce document  pursuant
    to the decision in Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439.  I  acknowledge  that  the
    judge's reasoning at [30(ii)] is rather cryptic  although  the  grounds
    [8] appear to accept  that  the  appellant  gave  inconsistent  answers
    regarding the service of the divorce petition and the presence  of  her
    husband in the United Kingdom.  In her witness statement, the appellant
    had explained that her husband was a barrister and could have  prepared
    the papers before he left Nigeria asking a colleague to file the papers
    whilst he was in the United Kingdom.   [Witness  statement,  30].   The
    grounds complain that the judge did not deal with this explanation.   I
    am satisfied that the judge has looked at all the evidence; he was  not
    obliged to refer to each and every item of evidence or to every part of
    the appellant's witness  statement.   Ultimately,  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had given consistent and reliable evidence
    regarding the divorce proceedings.  That was  a  finding  open  to  the
    judge.  The judge was not bound to accept  explanations  given  by  the
    appellant for inconsistencies in the evidence.

 5.  The  judge  also  considered  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was
    diminished by the fact that she had delayed in  claiming  asylum.   She
    claimed asylum some months after her visa had expired.  The judge noted
    that "part of her reason for not claiming earlier was that she did  not
    know that the visa  had  expired".   The  judge  did  not  accept  that
    evidence.  He also did not accept the appellant's claim that she had no
    knowledge of asylum  given  her  stated  educational  history  and  her
    history of applying for visas in the past.  The appellant's explanation
    is that her husband (a lawyer) had  applied  for  visas  and  that  the
    appellant herself had never  claimed  that  she  had  no  knowledge  of
    asylum, only that she did not know asylum was available for the sort of
    problem (domestic violence) which she  had  encountered.   Once  again,
    these are explanations offered by the appellant which the judge was not
    obliged to accept.  The judge was entitled  to  attach  weight  to  the
    significant level of education achieved by the appellant  and  to  have
    regard also to the fact that, notwithstanding the fact that her husband
    may have applied for visas, applications had been made in her name  and
    that she was responsible for the contents of  those  applications.  The
    judge's general finding  (that  the  appellant  had  been  evasive  and
    untruthful about her knowledge of  the  English  language  and  the  UK
    asylum system) was available on the evidence  and  notwithstanding  the
    explanations provided by the appellant.  The grounds, therefore, amount
    to no more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.

 6. The judge also considered in detail the appellant's evidence  regarding
    the reporting of domestic violence to the police in or about  2014-2015
    [30(vii)].   Considering  the  discrepancies  in  her  evidence  as  to
    reporting (detailed in the sub-paragraph), the judge was  led,  on  his
    assessment of all the evidence, to a finding that the appellant had not
    been the victim of domestic violence as she claimed.  An examination of
    the interview record bears out the judge's findings.  The discrepancies
    are significant and clearly go to the core of the  appellant's  account
    and her claim for asylum.  The grounds of appeal are largely silent  as
    regards sub-paragraph (vii) stating no more than  that  "we  are  aware
    that this would not be a matter for an application  for  permission  to
    appeal but we would note that we are due to  submit  a  subject  access
    request on behalf of the appellant for records relating to her from the
    police".  In essence, therefore, the grounds of appeal make no  serious
    challenge to the findings of the judge.  I am satisfied that the  judge
    was entitled to  reach  the  findings  which  he  did  as  regards  the
    credibility of the appellant's account and, in particular,  as  regards
    the appellant's evidence concerning the alleged domestic violence.  The
    judge has provided a clear  and  cogent  decision  fully  supported  by
    adequate reasoning.  I find that he  has  not  erred  in  law  for  the
    reasons asserted in the grounds of appeal or at all.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
