
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06400/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th September 2016                         |On 14th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                               Amalajelan [G]
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Patel
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on [ ] is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  The Appellant had
    applied for asylum in the United Kingdom and the Respondent had refused
    that application on 14th August 2014.  The Appellant had appealed  that
    decision and his appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Brunnen at Manchester on 27th July and 26th October 2015.   The  judge
    had allowed the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

 2. The Respondent had made application to appeal that decision.

 3. Permission was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pedro  on
    11th December 2015 in which the judge stated that the grounds disclosed
    an arguable error of law.  The Appellant  issued  a  Rule  24  response
    dated 23rd December 2015.

 4. Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal to firstly decide whether
    an error of law had been  made  and  the  matter  comes  before  me  in
    accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Harrison referred me to the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal  and  did
    not seek to expand upon them and conceded this was not the strongest of
    cases.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 6. Miss Patel referred me to the detailed  Rule  24  response  by  way  of
    submissions on behalf of the Appellant.

 7. I now provide my decision with reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 8. The judge in this  case  had  provided  a  detailed  and  comprehensive
    decision and had clearly considered both the documentary  evidence  and
    the oral evidence of the witnesses.

 9. This was a decision by a  very  experienced  judge  who  had  carefully
    considered the evidence and provided clear reasons  for  findings  that
    were made.  He had concluded at paragraph 46  that  the  Appellant  had
    provided a broadly consistent account that led to his claim for  asylum
    and the account was supported by very powerful medical  evidence.   The
    judge had also made further clear findings at paragraphs 47 and 48.

10. At paragraph 50 the judge specifically made reference  to  the  country
    guidance case of GJ Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319.  At paragraph 50  the
    judge summarised accurately the main thrust of GJ namely  that  persons
    who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single
    state because they have or are perceived to have a significant role  in
    post-conflict Tamil separation within the diaspora are considered to be
    at risk.  Set against that accurate reading of GJ and the  judge's  own
    findings in respect of the Appellant's activities and history the judge
    found at paragraph 51 that he found no reason to expect that the  views
    of the authorities or their behaviour towards him  would  be  different
    from their previous view and behaviour and was not satisfied that there
    was good reason to consider that such persecution or serious harm would
    not be repeated. That was a finding based on  a  detailed  and  careful
    analysis of the evidence,  findings  on  consistency  and  credibility,
    consideration of persuasive corroborative material and  thereafter  the
    placing  of  those  findings  within   a   proper   understanding   and
    interpretation of the case  of  GJ.   In  distinction  to  the  judge's
    consideration of this case the Respondent's application does not appear
    to have carefully considered the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  as  a
    whole.  Secondly it is less than accurate.  For example it states  that
    at paragraph 48 the Tribunal relied on the Appellant's submissions that
    he the Appellant had been involved with Tamil solidarity.   Firstly  of
    course the Tribunal could have relied  upon  the  Appellant's  evidence
    alone in this respect.  However the Respondent clearly paid  little  or
    no attention to paragraphs 18 and 19 of the decision  where  the  judge
    noted that he heard oral evidence from a witness who was  a  biomedical
    scientist in the UK who confirmed that  the  Appellant  had  become  an
    active member of that organisation.  Further at paragraph 19 there  was
    documentary evidence in the form of photographs and articles indicating
    the Appellant's connection to that organisation.  Finally of course the
    permission granting appeal simply states that the grounds are  arguable
    which is a less than satisfactory filter that should  be  in  place  to
    weed out applications without merit.

11. The judge in this case was entitled to  reach  findings  based  on  his
    careful analysis of the totality of  the  evidence  presented  and  his
    proper implementation of the current country guidance case.   The  fact
    the Respondent may disagree with the judge's conclusion is not a  basis
    for an appeal.

Notice of Decision

12. There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

13. Anonymity not retained.


Signed   Date 14th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 14th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

