

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06209/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Date Sent                    |
|On 15th January 2014                          |On 5th February 2014         |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     AA
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, counsel, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
      dismissed his appeal against a decision of the  respondent  to  remove
      him from the UK pursuant  to  s10  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
      subsequent to the refusal to recognise him as a refugee.


   2. The Court of Appeal, by way of a consent order dated 16th August 2013,
      directed that the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  for
      "reconsideration", it having been found by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Juss
      that there was no arguable error of law in the  determination  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal decision. Before me Mr  Smart  conceded  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to  make  a  finding  as  to  the
      impact on the appellant's claim of his acknowledged illegal exit  from
      Iran and that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to consider and
      take account of the totality of the oral evidence. It was not accepted
      by Mr Smart that having a brother as a refugee in Canada was  material
      to the conclusions reached by the First-tier Tribunal but that overall
      he could not defend the determination.

   3. Mr Vokes confirmed that the appellant had no free standing  Article  8
      claim, that his claim for protection on Article  3  grounds  stood  or
      fell with the asylum claim and that there was no claim that he  should
      be granted protection under Article 15 (c) Qualification Directive.

   4. It was accepted:

   a. The appellant is a practising Christian, having converted from  Islam,
      and has been baptised;
   b. His brother was  recognised  as  a  refugee  in  Canada  on  political
      grounds; he is now a Canadian citizen
   c. He left Iran illegally
   d. He attends an evangelical church in the UK.


     5. I heard oral evidence from the appellant and  three  witnesses  and
        submissions from both representatives. I reserved my decision.

     6. The burden of proof is upon the appellant  to  the  lower  standard
        namely that there is a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  if
        returned to Iran he will be at  risk  of  being  persecuted  for  a
        Convention reason.


     7. Although it was  accepted  that  the  appellant  had  converted  to
        Christianity,  the  respondent  does  not  accept  that  he  either
        evangelises or proselytises his faith  or  that  he  has  converted
        others to his faith in the UK or that he would seek  to  do  so  if
        returned to Iran. The respondent does not accept that the appellant
        was arrested, as he claims, for drinking alcohol at a party in 2006
        or 2007, or if he was that it would have an adverse impact upon him
        now. Nor does she accept that friends of the appellant with whom he
        worshiped in Iran have been arrested and remained detained  at  the
        time he left Iran.

     8. The witnesses' evidence was that in varying degrees they  had  been
        introduced  to  Christianity  through  the  appellant.  There   was
        detailed cross examination in relation to the  church  attended  by
        them and the appellant, routes to the church, contact  between  the
        appellant and the witnesses and  the  extent  to  which  they  have
        converted or still adhere to the  Muslim  faith.  The  respondent's
        submission was, in essence, that their evidence was insufficient to
        show they attended the same church: they didn't know  the  name  of
        the road it was on or what area of Birmingham it was in;  that  the
        route taken by some to get there was so round about as  not  to  be
        believable. In contrast Mr Vokes submitted that for individuals who
        did not know their way around and for whom English was  not  either
        fluent or their first language, the arrangements made  to  meet  in
        the centre of Birmingham and the bus routes taken were credible and
        consistent. Having been introduced to Christianity they  no  longer
        regularly  attended  the  appellant's  church  but  attended  other
        churches closer to where they lived or where there was not the same
        language barrier. There was no challenge to their asserted faith.

     9. The appellant gave oral evidence as to the nature of his church and
        his Christianity. He described his  faith  as  something  from  his
        heart and set in his heart. He said that his English was  not  good
        enough to preach in the street but that he has Iranian friends  and
        he "evangelises  through  his  friends"  at  his  college,  at  his
        accommodation. He was asked whether  his  church  has  evangelising
        activities and he referred to the meetings on a  Tuesday  with  the
        priest and that last year he attended celebrations in  Wales  which
        involved praying and leafleting about the activities to  people  in
        the streets. He did not personally speak to  people  there  but  if
        they were interested he introduced them to those  who  could  speak
        English. He went to church once a week and to the meetings  once  a
        week on a Tuesday at the priest's house. In response to a  question
        from me the appellant said there were no specific arrangements with
        his church about evangelising; it was something  individuals  chose
        to do.

    10. The appellant's evidence was that if returned to Iran he would find
        a church and attend church and he would also talk  to  friends  and
        family, people who were looking to find the truth. In response to a
        question whether he would "openly preach the  gospel"  he  said  he
        would. He said he would  do  more  in  his  own  country  with  his
        friends. Mr Smart submitted that the evidence the  appellant  would
        proselytise if returned to Iran was weak; he had not done  so  when
        he was previously in Iran and although he was now baptised  he  did
        not seek to proselytise now. Mr Vokes asserted that on the basis of
        the witnesses' evidence the appellant would indeed seek to  convert
        others in Iran if returned and that this placed him at even greater
        risk than he was at if he were a mere convert.

    11. The appellant claimed that in February 2012 (in Shiraz) the  "house
        church" ("Reza's house") where he and others had met to worship had
        been raided. His evidence (set out in his  witness  statement,  his
        SEF and oral evidence) was that he had been told about this on 12th
        February 2012 and that a summons had been delivered to his  parents
        in connection with this a week after he arrived in the UK. He  does
        not have a copy of the summons. His uncle, he said,  had  told  him
        about it and had arranged to have it cancelled (by  what  means  he
        did not know) but that he didn't know whether his  uncle  had  been
        able to influence events  so  that  he  was  no  longer  liable  to
        prosecution. He said he did not know whether  there  had  been  any
        court hearings but the last news he had  was  that  some  of  those
        arrested  remained  in  prison.  The  respondent   challenged   his
        evidence. Although accepting that a  summons  can  be  served  upon
        family members, he submitted that the appellant would know  whether
        he was still at risk because papers would have been  delivered.  He
        submitted that there were no indications that he was wanted for any
        offence in Iran and that this went to risk on return:  if  he  were
        wanted then he would be more likely to be singled out on return. Mr
        Vokes accepted that there was no  copy  of  the  summons.  He  drew
        attention to the US Commission on International  Religious  Freedom
        Annual Report 2013  (p122 of the appellant's bundle) which states:


             "Christian converts  face  severe  restrictions  on  religious
             practise and association, arbitrary arrests and detentions for
             practising their faith, and violations of the  right  to  life
             through  state  execution  for  apostasy   and   extrajudicial
             killings....Iranian authorities  typically  release  prisoners
             but leave the charges against them  or  their  convictions  in
             place to threaten them wither-imprisonment at any future time.
             At the end of the reporting period at least a dozen Christians
             remain in prison.


             ........


             .......In February 2012, Iranian authorities  raided  a  house
             church gathering in Shiraz, confiscated  religious  materials,
             and  arrested  10  Christian  converts.  At  the  end  of  the
             reporting period, four remain in detention without  charges  -
             Mojtaba  Hosseini,  Homayoon  Shokoohi,  Vahid   Hakkani   and
             Mohammad-Reza Paroei."


         Mr Vokes submitted that this report provides corroboration to  the
        appellant's claim, it having been  published  after  the  appellant
        arrived in the UK, is consistent with the appellant's claim  as  to
        when and where it took place, included a name that was similar  and
        the appellant could not have provided the  detail  he  did  without
        having had this knowledge prior to his arrival in the UK.

    12.  In so far as the claimed offence of possession of alcohol in  2006
        or 2007,  the  appellant's  account  was  inconsistent  as  to  the
        punishment received. I note that the First-tier Tribunal judge  has
        however made a finding (paragraph 14  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        determination) that it is unlikely that the appellant was  detained
        following the break up of the party. No attempt was made by  either
        of the representatives to dislodge that finding  and  it  therefore
        stands. It was not  argued  that  this  potential  offence  was  an
        additional risk factor in any event.


    13. In [141] of SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed)  Iran  CG  [2008]
        UKAIT 00082 the Tribunal held


             "There is no doubt that the general human rights situation  in
             Iran is deteriorating rather than  improving.  All  concerned,
             including the Foreign and Commonwealth Office as expressed  in
             letters in evidence, accept that the Iranian  authorities  act
             in an arbitrary and unpredictable manner."


         But nevertheless, on considering all the evidence before them  held
         that the conditions for Christians in  Iran  had  not  deteriorated
         sufficiently to necessitate a change in the guidance in FS Iran  CG
         [2004] UKAIT 00303 although there is a proviso to that namely  that
         "It remains to be seen whether the proposed inclusion  of  apostasy
         in the amended criminal code will make a material  difference".  FS
         held:

           187. For the ordinary convert, who is neither a  leader,  lay  or
                ordained, nor a Pastor, nor a  proselytiser  or  evangelist,
                the actual  degree  of  risk  of  persecution  or  treatment
                breaching  Article  3  is  not  sufficient  to  warrant  the
                protection of either Convention.   The  reality  is  that  a
                social and economic life can be maintained; Christianity can
                be practised, if necessary, cautiously at times,  by  Church
                attendance, association with  Christians  and  Bible  study.
                There may  well  be  monitoring  of  services  and  identity
                checks.  They would be able to practise,  however,  as  most
                Iranian converts do.  It is realistic to expect  that  there
                may sometimes be  questioning,  disruption,  orders  not  to
                attend Church, which may require the convert  to  stay  away
                for a while.  But there is no evidence of a real risk of ill-
                treatment during such questioning or of anything more than a
                short period of detention at worst.  There  is  evidence  of
                random or sporadic violence by the likes of the Basiji,  but
                at too infrequent a level to constitute a real risk  to  the
                ordinary  convert.    The   longer   official   questioning,
                detentions, and the greater risk of charges, trumped  up  or
                menacingly vague or simply threatened are not  a  real  risk
                for the ordinary convert.


           188. We would, on the present evidence, regard them as not  at  a
                real risk of persecution or treatment breaching  Article  3.
                We allow in that assessment for some recent worsening in the
                current climate.


           189. We would regard the  more  active  convert,  Pastor,  church
                leader, proselytiser or evangelist as being at a real  risk.
                Their higher profile  and  role  would  be  more  likely  to
                attract the malevolence  of  the  licensed  zealot  and  the
                serious adverse attention of the theocratic  state  when  it
                sought,  as  it  will  do  on  some  occasions,  to  repress
                conversions from Islam which it sees  as  a  menace  and  an
                affront to the state and God.


           190. Where an ordinary individual  convert  has  additional  risk
                factors, they too may well be  at  a  real  risk.   We  have
                already said that  we  accept  that  the  conversions  would
                become known to the authorities, but that is not  of  itself
                an additional factor because it is the very assumption  upon
                which we are assessing risk.  These  risk  factors  may  not
                relate to religious views at all.   It  is  the  combination
                which may provoke persecutory attentions where,  by  itself,
                the individual conversion would have been  allowed  to  pass
                without undue hindrance.......The role of family as a source
                of protection should be  examined  carefully  in  individual
                cases.  Similar support might  also  be  provided  by  close
                friends or colleagues in employment.


    14.  The  headnote  SZ  &   JM   states   that   "'proselytising'   and
        'evangelising' are not terms of art and distinctions should not  be
        drawn between them." SZ and JM consider the distinctions between an
        "ordinary convert" and  who  "proselytises";  the  discussion  with
        regard to this appears at [138 - 140]:

             "138.    We start by looking at whether the Tribunal in FS and
                  Others  was  justified  in  drawing  a   distinction   (at
                  paragraph 173) "between the ordinary convert and those who
                  proselytise".  We readily accept the points made by  Canon
                  Coulton that all Christians for whom he  could  speak  are
                  required to spread the word and  to  evangelise.   He  was
                  speaking from  the  standpoint  of  the  Anglican  Church,
                  across which there is a broad spectrum of adherence.  Some
                  members are more evangelical than others.   Father  Basdon
                  also referred to  the  extent  that  Roman  Catholics  are
                  required to spread the gospel.  It is  self  evident  that
                  some  are  more  enthusiastic  or  serious   about   their
                  obligations than others,  and  the  point  has  been  made
                  throughout the evidence that the Iranian  authorities  are
                  particularly concerned with those who  do  proselytise  or
                  evangelise and attempt to convert  Muslims.   The  Canon's
                  view was essentially a theoretical, and aspirational, view
                  of the way Christians behave and he acknowledged that  not
                  everybody lived up to the ideal.  The empirical reality is
                  that not all come anywhere  near  to  the  ideal.   As  Mr
                  Desborough said "it is between an individual and God as to
                  whether to risk martyrdom".  The observations  in  FS  and
                  Others were, in our judgment,  sound  in  that  there  are
                  distinctions  between  the  ordinary   convert   and   the
                  proselytiser.  What needs to be looked at is not only  the
                  church to which an individual is an adherent, but the  way
                  in which that individual returnee  is  likely  to  behave.
                  When assessing that, it is right that it should  be  borne
                  in mind that the evidence of  Canon  Coulton  was  that  a
                  person who has come for himself, and by choice, to  a  new
                  religion is more likely to want to spread  the  word  than
                  someone who is second or later generation  and  born  into
                  it.  That is not a new concept, the zeal  of  the  convert
                  has been recognised in many different  contexts  over  the
                  years.  But that is not true of all  converts;  references
                  to generalisations of that kind are no substitute for case-
                  by-case assessment of the particular facts.


             139. We had hoped that we would be able  to  include  in  this
                  determination clarification  of  the  precise  distinction
                  between evangelising and proselytising.......On the  basis
                  of the evidence and submissions that we have heard, we are
                  not  able  to  do  that.   It  is  perhaps  arguable  that
                  proselytising is a more robust form  of  evangelising  but
                  the terms should not be  used  as  terms  of  art  and  no
                  conclusion can  be  drawn  by  the  use  of  one  word  in
                  preference to the other.  The  Iranians  are  unlikely  to
                  draw any distinction - the word they  use  being  Tabligh,
                  the word for propaganda.  Subject to our view  that  there
                  are not only two distinct  grades  of  convert,  rather  a
                  spectrum of adherence, we have  concluded  that  the  more
                  accurate description of the distinction  is  that  between
                  the ordinary  convert  and  those  who  undertake  'active
                  evangelising'.   Canon  Coulton  counselled   caution   in
                  distinguishing between  evangelical  and  evangelistic  as
                  mistakes have been made in the past.   evangelical  is  an
                  adjective meaning "a calling to the teaching of the gospel
                  or the Christian religion"  whereas  an  evangelist  is  a
                  person who seeks to convert others to the faith especially
                  by public preaching (Concise Oxford Dictionary).


             140. In conclusion, the question  of  whether  someone  is  an
                  "ordinary convert" in each case will  depend  on  its  own
                  facts.  There should not be findings based solely  on  the
                  denomination of the church  which  a  person  has  joined.
                  They must also be based on the  evidence  as  to  his  own
                  conduct as it will manifest itself in Iran.  When deciding
                  whether a convert is genuine, it is important to take care
                  because, as we set out earlier in this determination,  one
                  individual's view as to how another person  may  perceive,
                  or  practice,  or  understand  Christianity  may  be  very
                  different  from  the  reality  in  another   denomination,
                  country or community....."


       Discussion


    15. Although it appears on its face unusual for individuals  to  travel
        into a city centre and away from the church in order to attend  the
        church, the explanation offered by the witnesses as to why they did
        this was credible for individuals who wished to travel to a  church
        together, in an area and a country with which they were  unfamiliar
        and to which the initial suggestion had  come  from  amongst  their
        number. I have taken careful account of the challenges by Mr  Smart
        to the credibility of the witnesses in their accounts of  attending
        church  and  meetings  with  the  appellant  and  particularly  the
        arguments raised in  connection  with  what  could  be  called  the
        geography of the areas concerned. Taking account of  the  whole  of
        the evidence I am satisfied that these individuals  did  travel  as
        claimed and that the appellant has  encouraged  discussion  of  his
        faith and initiated conversion amongst these friends.


    16. The appellant's description of his church  (in  the  UK)  does  not
        indicate that the church is actively spreading the word of  God  or
        that the members of the church are specifically called upon  to  do
        this as part of their obligations to this church. Nevertheless I am
        satisfied that within the church and within his faith he feels  the
        need, and acts upon that, to encourage conversion to and  adherence
        to his faith. In terms of the spectrum described in SZ and JM I  am
        satisfied that he is more than a "mere convert" and  that  although
        he does not zealously seek to convert others, he is  not  a  person
        who does not take advantage of opportunities to speak of his faith.



    17. Although the appellant's claimed attendance at the house church was
        challenged in the reasons for refusal letter dated 14th June  2012,
        I am satisfied on the evidence before me which included  a  broadly
        consistent account of the means by which he  found  out  about  the
        arrest of Reza; the reporting of  a  raid  in  February  2012,  the
        reporting of the raid after  he  came  to  the  UK;  his  continued
        attendance at church  whilst  in  the  UK;  his  baptism   and  his
        knowledge of  faith  which  has  increased  as  time  has  gone  by
        illustrating continued participation and involvement in his  faith;
        that he did attend a house church in  Iran  prior  to  leaving,  as
        claimed. I am satisfied that he will undertake  similar  activities
        in Iran as he has undertaken here in the UK if removed to Iran; the
        depth of his knowledge and belief is greater now than when he  left
        and his active involvement in such activities has, I  am  satisfied
        from the evidence before me, increased with that level of knowledge
        and belief.

    18. The appellant's brother left Iran some 15 years ago and,  according
        to unchallenged evidence, was recognised as  a  refugee  in  Canada
        because of his political activities. The appellant and  his  family
        have not sustained any problems as a result of that but I do accept
        that it  is  possible  that  the  Iranian  authorities  would  have
        knowledge of such recognition.

    19. The appellant left Iran illegally. Although insufficient on its own
        to result in adverse attention amounting to persecution, this is  a
        risk factor if in addition to other factors.

    20. Although there was evidence put in connection with the delivery  of
        a summons and although it was accepted by  the  respondent  that  a
        summons could be delivered to the appellant's family home I am  not
        satisfied that there has, in this case, been such  a  summons.  The
        appellant's  evidence  was  that  it   would   have   referred   to
        'advertising against Muslims and  spreading  Christianity'  yet  he
        says that his father does not know of his conversion and thinks  he
        has fled because of 'political problems' as his brother did. Whilst
        acknowledging that the appellant says the summons was given to  his
        mother I do not accept that had there been a summons  the  fact  of
        the summons and its contents would not have  become  known  to  the
        appellant's father. The appellant said that his uncle had lost  the
        actual summons and therefore it could not be sent to him.  Although
        he says he is in touch with his family once or twice a week he knew
        nothing more about the progress of the summons. I am not satisfied,
        given  the  seriousness  of  such  a  charge  and   the   potential
        consequences, that the appellant would  not  have  known  what  had
        happened  to  the  summons  and  the  progress  of   the   criminal
        proceedings if they existed. It was not his case  that  he  had  no
        contact with family members and he had contact with the uncle  who,
        on his evidence had resolved  problems  with  the  authorities  for
        other family members.

    21. Although therefore  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  is
        actively wanted by the authorities for activities in Iran prior  to
        leaving Iran I do accept that he will be questioned on  arrival  in
        Iran; that he will be discovered to be a Christian convert and that
        he will be asked about his beliefs and activities.  Although  I  am
        not satisfied that  he  is  subject  to  an  arrest  warrant  I  am
        satisfied that he was attending a house church in Iran and there is
        a significant possibility that he  will  be  linked  with  churches
        where other members have been arrested and charged. I am  satisfied
        that although in the  past  the  status  of  his  brother  and  his
        brother's  activities  have  not  had  an  adverse  effect  on  the
        appellant's family, I accept that this may have  a  slight  adverse
        effect as one of a cumulative number of additional risk factors.  I
        also take account of the appellant's evidence that his uncle has in
        the past assisted other family members  where  they  have  problems
        with the authorities. This is of course relevant in considering the
        extent to which protection would be available  but  in  this  case,
        where the appellant will seek to actively display  his  faith,  his
        conversion and seek to convert others (or would not do  so  because
        of fear of reprisals) I am satisfied that there would be a lack  of
        protection long term. I note the background evidence indicates that
        in many cases individuals are released after  some  time  but  that
        some remain in detention  and  that  charges  remain  hanging  over
        individuals as a means of control.

    22. Taking all the evidence before me  into  account  and  particularly
        bearing in mind the appellant's adherence to his faith and  beliefs
        and his introduction of and encouragement of others to  convert,  I
        am satisfied that this appellant will  be  perceived  as  a  person
        intent on actively spreading his Christian beliefs and  seeking  to
        convert others.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



                                    Date 30th January 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
