
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06070/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                          |      Decision & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                      |
|On 10 February 2016                          |      On 16 February 2016        |
|                                             |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     MH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Lay, Counsel instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birk promulgated on 3 August 2014 in which he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    grant asylum, and to remove him from the United Kingdom.




 2. I have made an anonymity direction, following that made in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:
    "Whilst I find nothing of arguable merit in  the  grounds  relating  to
    risk on return, it is arguable, in relation  to  Article  8,  that  the
    judge failed to take account of the  appellant's  wife's  pregnancy  in
    concluding that he did not have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with her and the children.  Arguably his conclusions on the genuineness
    of the family relationships are flawed owing to an arguable absence  of
    any consideration and findings in that regard."


 4. The grant of permission is clear that there  was  nothing  of  arguable
    merit in the  grounds  in  relation  to  asylum,  and  the  Appellant's
    representative did not seek to advance these grounds, focussing only on
    Article 8.

Submissions

 5. Mr. Lay relied on his skeleton  argument.   Additionally  he  submitted
    that it was not clear from the decision that  the  judge  had  accepted
    that the unborn child was the Appellant's.  The judge was aware of  the
    pregnancy, but had made no finding as to whether or not  the  Appellant
    was the father.  It was submitted that it would have been open  to  the
    judge to say that there was not enough evidence  before  him  that  the
    Appellant was the father, or to find that he was the father,  but  find
    that this showed only  that  the  Appellant  had  been  in  a  physical
    relationship with M at a certain point in time but that  there  was  no
    subsisting relationship.  However the judge had made no findings at all
    in relation to the pregnancy.


 6. He submitted that the error of law  was  either  the  failure  to  have
    regard to a relevant matter, or the failing to  make  a  finding  on  a
    critical issue.  It was not possible to tell from the decision  whether
    the judge considered M's unborn child to be the  Appellant's  child  or
    not.


 7. I was referred to paragraph [7] of the decision where the judge  refers
    to a document issued by the midwife which has the incorrect name of the
    father on it, and the appointment which had been  arranged  to  correct
    this.  Despite this, no finding had been  made  as  to  parentage.   In
    paragraph [41] the judge does not  state  that  the  Appellant  is  the
    father.


 8. Mr. Mills accepted that there was no clear statement as to  whether  or
    not the pregnancy was as a result of the Appellant and  M  reconciling,
    whether there had been a casual physical relationship, or  whether  the
    Appellant was not the father of M's unborn child.  He submitted that it
    could be inferred from the judge's credibility  findings  that  he  had
    found that the Appellant was not the father of M's  unborn  child.   In
    relation to the document which  did  not  name  the  Appellant  it  was
    submitted that the Respondent's case was that the Appellant and M  were
    not back together, and the Appellant was not the father.   The  judge's
    findings were clear and complete when he rejected the Appellant's claim
    to have reconciled with M.  From this it could  be  inferred  that  the
    child was not the Appellant's - this was a reasonable conclusion on the
    part of the judge.  The failure to state this point explicitly did  not
    undermine the decision as a whole.


 9. In response Mr. Lay referred me to paragraphs [14] and [15]  where  the
    Respondent's case and submissions are set out.  It did not  state  that
    the Respondent's case was that the Appellant was not the  father.   The
    submissions referred to the family unit, not  the  paternity.   If  the
    Tribunal was trying to divine a finding through inference, the decision
    involved the making of an error of law.  The fact of the  unborn  child
    was relevant as to whether or not the relationship was subsisting.


Error of law


10. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
    law.


11. The judge refers to M's pregnancy  in  paragraphs  [7]  and  [10]  when
    setting out the Appellant's case.  In paragraph [7] it states:


    "He said that the baby is  expected  in  October.   He  said  that  the
    midwife had made a mistake about his name at  p.22  as  the  father  is
    recorded as "MAB" and there is  an  appointment  with  the  midwife  to
    correct it on the 30th of this month."


12. There is no reference in the Respondent's representative's  submissions
    to the pregnancy, and no reference to any submission that the Appellant
    was not the father of M's child [15].


13. The next mention of the pregnancy comes  at  the  end  of  the  judge's
    consideration of Article 8.  In paragraph [41] it states:


    "As for the forthcoming pregnancy, I find that [M] has shown  that  she
    is able and fit and was prepared to look after all  three  children  on
    her own until March 2015 and as I do not find her credible that she has
    resumed her relationship  with  the  Appellant  I  find  that  she  can
    continue to do so."


14. It is clear from paragraph [7] that the evidence provided was not clear
    as to whether the  Appellant  was  the  father  of  M's  unborn  child.
    However, the judge does not make any finding on this issue.   Therefore
    there is no consideration of whether the  pregnancy  is  evidence  that
    they have reconciled and that they are  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.  The fact of the pregnancy does not figure at all in  the
    judge's consideration.


15. Given that there was evidence before the judge that M was pregnant, and
    given that the Appellant claimed to be  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with M, the pregnancy was clearly a relevant  matter.   It
    is not enough to have to infer from the decision  that  the  judge  had
    rejected the Appellant's claim to be the father of the child  based  on
    his credibility findings.  It is simply not  clear  from  the  decision
    that the judge has considered it at all.  His credibility findings were
    made without considering a relevant matter which goes to the  issue  of
    the nature of the relationship between the Appellant and M.


16. The failure to consider the pregnancy  in  the  round  with  the  other
    evidence, and to make findings on this matter, is an error of law.

Notice of decision

The decision involves the making of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.   The
findings and the decision in relation to the Appellant's asylum  claim,  his
claim to humanitarian protection, and his claim under Articles 2 and 3,  are
preserved (paragraphs [21] to [28]).  The findings and decision in  relation
to his claim under Article 8 are set aside (paragraphs [29] to [42]).

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  re-hearing  of  the
Appellant's Article 8 claim.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 12 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

