
[pic]


 Upper Tribunal

       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06772/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


 Heard at Field House
 Decision and Reasons Promulgated
 On 11 December 2015
 On 22 December 2015




                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between



                                    MR MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


             Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr A Chohan, counsel, Marks & Marks Solicitors
 For the Respondent:   Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer



                         DECISION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Carlin, promulgated on  6
     August 2015.

  2.  Permission to appeal was granted on 7 September 2015 by FTTJ Keane.




     Background


  3. The appellant made two unsuccessful applications  for  United  Kingdom
     family visit visas in 2007 and 2009. His  appeal  against  the  latter
     decision was successful and he left Pakistan for the United Kingdom on
     8 August 2010. The appellant remained in the United Kingdom after  his
     visa expired on 1 January 2011. On 24 August 2012 he  was  encountered
     by immigration enforcement officers, whereupon he was  served  with  a
     notice of liability to removal as an overstayer. The appellant applied
     for asylum on 12 September 2012.

  4. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that he was a  journalist
     who was an editor of  a  weekly  newspaper  and  monthly  magazine  in
     Pakistan which published articles he wrote under a pen-name  regarding
     Pakistani-Israeli relations. In addition, the appellant belonged to an
     association,  which  supported  cordial  relations  between  the  said
     countries. The appellant believes that his activities resulted  in  an
     attack on the newspaper's offices, which caused him to go into  hiding
     from 2006 onwards. The appellant's family  home  was  attacked  and  a
     number of threats made, including against his wife and child.

  5. During the course of the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
     appellant unsuccessfully sought an adjournment in order  to  obtain  a
     supporting letter from a contact in Pakistan who could confirm aspects
     of his account. The FTTJ accepted that the appellant had  written  two
     articles  in  2006,  which  promoted  Pakistani-Israeli  unity.   That
     acceptance was based on the opinion of the  appellant's  witness,  who
     gave oral evidence at the hearing. The FTTJ rejected the remainder  of
     the appellant's account, finding it, variously, vague, implausible and
     inconsistent. The  appellant's  delay  in  applying  for  asylum  also
     adversely affected the credibility of his claim.


      Error of law


    6. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that, given he accepted that the appellant had written  two  articles
       in 2006 which promoted Pakistani-Israeli unity,  the  FTTJ's  reasons
       were inadequate and he reached findings, which were not open  to  him
       on the evidence. It was argued that the FTTJ had failed  to  consider
       the appellant's explanation regarding a matter the FTTJ considered to
       be implausible. Furthermore, there was said to be no inconsistency as
       to when the appellant's family left Jhelum  and  in  any  event  this
       issue had not been put to the appellant at the hearing.

    7. The FTTJ granting permission considered that the  grounds  showed  an
       arguable error of law but for which the outcome of the  appeal  might
       have been different. He stated that the FTTJ's findings were arguably
       irrational "if the appellant was acknowledged to  be  the  author  of
       articles which inflamed Muslim opinion," then it was  "arguable  that
       he would be exposed to a risk of persecutory harm."

    8. The Secretary of State's response of 8 October 2015 stated  that  the
       respondent opposed the appeal as it  was  considered  that  the  FTTJ
       appropriately directed himself.  In  the  alternative,  reliance  was
       placed on Rule 24(3)(f), in that the respondent considered  that  the
       FTTJ, in relying entirely on the evidence of the appellant's  friend,
       gave inadequate reasons for accepting  that  the  appellant  was  the
       author of the articles relied on. Reference was also made to  a  note
       made by the presenting officer at the hearing, which  questioned  the
       value of the witness' evidence.








 The hearing


  9. Mr Chohan adopted the grounds and argued that it  was  irrational  for
     the FTTJ to dismiss the appeal as he had accepted that  the  appellant
     had written the articles. He stated that the appellant  had  a  future
     intention to repeat such views and had said as much  at  [10]  of  his
     witness statement. In response to my query as to whether the FTTJ  had
     accepted that the appellant was  an  editor  of  the  publications  in
     question, Mr Chohan referred me to an extract from the newspaper which
     showed that one of the five  editors  had  a  name  similar,  but  not
     identical, to that of the appellant. He also referred me to  a  number
     of translations of articles, none of which contained an  interpreter's
     certification. Mr Chohan was unable to refer  me  to  any  documentary
     evidence to support the appellant's claim that there was an attack  on
     the premises of the newspaper. With regard to  the  appellant's  claim
     that he was the only editor singled out, Mr Chohan explained that  the
     appellant was known as a local reporter. He argued  that  the  reasons
     were not open to the FTTJ. In response  to  the  Rule  24  letter,  Mr
     Chohan submitted that the appellant was known to be  a  journalist  to
     the public at large throughout Pakistan. He suggested that  the  chief
     editor of the publication might have been able  to  confirm  that  the
     premises were attacked. At this point, I reminded Mr Chohan  that  the
     application had not included a ground regarding the FTTJ's decision to
     refuse to adjourn the appeal.

 10. Mr Walker argued that the FTTJ made  clear  credibility  findings,  in
     addition to noting the two-  year  delay  in  the  appellant  claiming
     asylum. That claim had only been made after the appellant had come  to
     the attention of the Secretary of State. He referred to  the  note  of
     the presenting officer before the FTTJ,  who  had  recorded  that  the
     witness only  knew  what  the  appellant  had  told  him.   Mr  Walker
     submitted that the FTTJ made clear findings on the evidence before him
     and found the appellant not to be credible.  In  the  alternative,  Mr
     Walker argued that the appellant could relocate in  the  same  way  as
     proselytising Christians could.

 11. In response, Mr Chohan stressed that the  appellant,  as  a  published
     journalist, would be known  throughout  Pakistan  to  those  who  were
     literate. He would be seen as one corrupting Muslims.

 12. I decided to uphold the decision  of  the  FTTJ  as  I  found  he  was
     entitled to conclude that the appellant's account  was  not  credible.
     The FTTJ's alternative findings, that the appellant  could  internally
     relocate, as he claimed to have done for an extensive period of  time,
     were sound.

 13. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that had the FTTJ  found
     that the appellant was "the author of articles which  inflamed  Muslim
     opinion it was at least arguable that he would be exposed to a risk of
     persecutory harm." The positive findings of the FTTJ did not  go  that
     far. At [10] he said "I was satisfied to the appropriate  standard  as
     set out in paragraph 7 above that the appellant had  written  the  two
     articles in around 2006 promoting  Pakistan-Israel  and  Muslim-Jewish
     unity. In coming to this conclusion, I was influenced by the  comments
     of the appellant's witness..."

 14. Furthermore at  [23],  the  FTTJ  acknowledged  as  follows;  "anybody
     promoting relations between the states of Pakistan and Israel may be a
     target for retribution." Nonetheless, the  FTTJ  considered  that  the
     appellant had not shown that  he  had  in  fact  been  the  target  of
     retribution or would be should he return to Pakistan.








 15. The  Rule  24  response  raises  the  suggestion  that  the  appellant
     "deliberately cultivated" views before the witness in order to  obtain
     support for his asylum claim.

 16. What that witness said, at [3] of his own statement (to which the FTTJ
     referred) was as follows;

      "I first met (MS) in 2013. He lives in Edgware which is  a  2-3  miles
from where I live. I was introduced     to him by my nephew. We  had  common
ground in that we were both writers. I invited him to my      house, and  we
have become close friends since then. He showed me  his  work  in  Pakistan,
particularly     his article  promoting  Pakistan-Israel  and  Muslim-Jewish
unity. I was inspired by his work, particularly    owing to his  courage  in
taking such a stance in Pakistan and promoting this unity.  His  ideas  were
similar to those I have always sought to propagate, in that  humanity  ought
to be the overriding   consideration. I am fully aware of the issues he  has
faced in Pakistan as a result of his  articles,  and  it  is       for  this
reason he seeks protection in the UK."

 17. It is apparent from the  above  paragraph  that  the  witness  had  no
     independent knowledge of the events the appellant claims took place in
     Pakistan, given that they first met after the appellant arrived in the
     United Kingdom. What swayed the FTTJ to make the  favourable  findings
     was that the  views  the  appellant  expressed  to  the  witness  were
     consistent with  the  views  expressed  in  the  articles.  While  the
     respondent argues that the appellant may have deliberately  cultivated
     this friendship, this issue does not appear to have been  put  to  the
     appellant or witness for comment during the hearing. Therefore,  while
     the FTTJ's acceptance that the appellant wrote  the  two  articles  in
     question appears somewhat generous given  the  difficulties  with  the
     remainder of the appellant's case, I accept that it was a  finding  he
     was entitled to make.

 18. However, the FTTJ did not make a positive finding that  the  appellant
     was the editor of the publications in question.  As  indicated  above,
     the appellant's name, as stated in his passport, does  not  appear  on
     that publication among the list  of  newspaper  staff.  There  was  no
     evidence before me linking  the  appellant  to  the  identity  of  the
     editor. Furthermore, even if the appellant's articles were  published,
     by his own account, his name did not appear on the articles and  there
     was no  credible  evidence  before  the  FTTJ  to  indicate  that  the
     appellant had been linked  to  the  articles.  Indeed,  there  was  no
     documentary  evidence  to  support  the  appellant's  claim  that  the
     premises had been attacked by protestors. Nor did Mr Chohan  refer  me
     to any evidence to support his submission that the appellant was known
     throughout Pakistan as a journalist.

 19. Mr Chohan's submissions did not seek to  challenge  the  many  reasons
     provided by the FTTJ for rejecting the remainder  of  the  appellant's
     claim.  The FTTJ noted that the appellant  could  not  state  when  he
     wrote the articles or when the offices were attacked. Given that these
     claimed events were said to have forced the appellant and  his  family
     to go into hiding, I find that the FTTJ did not err in placing  weight
     on the vagueness of the appellant's account.

 20. The FTTJ also considered  it  implausible  that  the  appellant  would
     remain living with his family at the same location if his life were in
     danger, particularly when it became apparent that there was no  police
     protection available to him. In  addition,  the  FTTJ  considered  the
     appellant's claim that the chief editor of the publication  was  never
     targeted to be implausible.  Mr Chohan argued that only the  appellant
     was attacked because he was well known locally. I was referred  to  no
     evidence to show that the appellant had a  high  profile  at  a  local
     level. In any event, this explanation was considered by the  FTTJ  and
     rejected for sound reasons at [17] of the decision.

 21. The FTTJ did not err in concluding that the appellant had provided  an
     inconsistent account as to  the  whereabouts  of  his  family.  It  is
     apparent from a reading  of  the  asylum  interview  record  that  the
     appellant was unable to provide a coherent and consistent  account  of
     when and why his family relocated from Jhelum to Karachi.



 22. The FTTJ noted that the appellant lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
     approximately two years, most of which  as  an  overstayer,  prior  to
     making an asylum application. He  further  noted  that  the  appellant
     delayed making an application until  after  he  was  notified  of  his
     liability to removal. The FTTJ considered  and  rightly  rejected  the
     appellant's explanation for the delay, which  was  that  he  hoped  to
     avoid being removed to Pakistan earlier. The FTTJ considered that this
     showed a lack of confidence in the strength of the appellant's  claim.
     Consequently, the FTTJ was entitled to conclude that  the  appellant's
     claim for asylum was damaged by its timing.

 23. In conclusion, the FTTJ fully accepted that there could be a  risk  to
     those seen as promoting relations between the states of  Pakistan  and
     Israel, but did not accept that the appellant had  been  targeted  for
     this reason for a series of adequate reasons set out between  [11]  to
     [23] of the decision and reasons.

 24. No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ, albeit it was at the case
     management hearing stage. I  consider  it  appropriate  that  this  be
     continued and therefore make the following anonymity direction:

        "Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. "


Conclusions


     The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
     the making of an error on a point of law.

     I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.



 Signed     Date: 13 December 2015


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara






 -----------------------


5



