
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06995/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 November 2016                  |On 23 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     H S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Hena, Counsel, instructed by Virgo solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. It is appropriate to  continue  the  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Background

      1. The Appellant appeals against the Respondent's  decision  dated  31
         March 2015 refusing his protection claim.  His appeal against  that
         decision was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence in
         a decision promulgated on 10 May 2015.   The  Judge  was  satisfied
         that the Appellant's account of past detention and ill-treatment as
         a Kurd in his home area in southeast Turkey was credible.   He  was
         therefore found to be at real risk of future  persecution  and  his
         appeal was  allowed  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection
         grounds and under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

      2. The Respondent appealed against the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
         on the basis that the Judge had failed to  consider  whether  there
         was a possibility of internal relocation outside south-east Turkey.
          She relied on the Tribunal's decision  in  IK  (Returnees-Records-
         IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 ("IK").  I pause to observe  that
         no challenge was made by the Respondent to  the  finding  that  the
         Appellant is at real risk in his home area.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted to the  Respondent  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge J M Holmes by decision dated  9  June  2016.   By  a
         decision promulgated on 2 August 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
         found that there was an error of law on the  basis  raised  by  the
         Respondent and set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision of  Judge
         N M K Lawrence.  She expressly reserved at [10] of her decision the
         finding that the Appellant is credible as to the  past  persecution
         suffered in and real risk to him on return to his home  area.   She
         listed the appeal for a resumed hearing with directions as  to  the
         further conduct of the appeal.

      4. The Appellant's solicitors were directed to inform the Tribunal  in
         writing by 10 August 2016 whether they  intended  to  call  further
         evidence from the Appellant in relation to the  issue  of  internal
         relocation and  whether  an  interpreter  would  be  required.  The
         Appellant's solicitors were also directed to serve a  comprehensive
         bundle of up to date background material and any  further  evidence
         was directed to be served at least fourteen days before the resumed
         hearing.

      5. In spite of those directions, the Appellant's solicitors failed  to
         notify the Tribunal whether the Appellant would be  called.   As  a
         result, at the first hearing before me on  26  September  2016,  no
         interpreter was booked.

      6. In addition, on 20 September (i.e. six days before the hearing  and
         not fourteen), the Appellant's solicitors served an  expert  report
         of Ms  Sheri  Laizer  which  bundle  also  included  two  documents
         relating to the Appellant's liability to perform military  service.
         The Respondent  objected  to  the  Appellant's  reliance  on  these
         documents.  I however indicated that I would permit  the  Appellant
         to rely on them but that I would adjourn to  allow  the  Respondent
         time to consider them.  I also directed a further witness statement
         from the  Appellant  dealing  with  the  documents  and  any  other
         evidence on which  he  wished  to  rely  in  support  of  his  case
         regarding internal relocation.  I  also  directed  an  exchange  of
         skeleton arguments.

      7. At the hearing on 14 November, the  Appellant  gave  oral  evidence
         further to his witness statement dated  4  October  2016.   I  also
         heard submissions from both representatives supplemented  by  their
         skeleton arguments dated  13  October  2016  and  28  October  2016
         respectively.  Ms  Hena  also  produced  the  Home  Office  Country
         Information and Guidance in relation to military service in  Turkey
         dated March 2016. I also had before  me  Ms  Laizer's  report,  the
         documents relating to the Appellant's  military  service  (see  [6]
         above),  the  Home  Office  Country  Information  and  Guidance  in
         relation to Kurdish ethnicity in Turkey dated February 2016 and the
         Tribunal's decision in "IK".

The Appellant's evidence

    The Appellant's evidence

      8. The Appellant gave  oral  evidence  before  me  through  a  Turkish
         interpreter.   It  was  confirmed  that  he  and  the   interpreter
         understood each other.  The oral evidence was supplemented  by  the
         Appellant's written statement.  In  that  statement,  he  indicated
         that he would not have a fear of military service were it  not  for
         his background both as someone with imputed links to the PKK and as
         a draft evader.  He stated that he had an exemption  from  military
         service until 31 December 2015 which is confirmed by the  documents
         which he produced and this is why he said he did not claim to be at
         risk on return initially for this reason.  He also  relied  in  his
         statement on the risk to him from registration elsewhere in Turkey.

      9. The Respondent challenged the  documents  on  which  the  Appellant
         relied as not genuine.  Mr Staunton  pointed  to  the  lateness  of
         production of those documents and the fact that the  Appellant  had
         not claimed  asylum  on  this  basis  at  an  earlier  stage.   The
         Appellant says that he obtained  the  documents  from  his  mother.
         There was an inconsistency in the Appellant's answers as to when he
         obtained the documents.  In examination in chief he  said  that  he
         obtained them "this summer".  In cross-examination, he said that he
         obtained them before his First-tier appeal hearing.  However, in re-
         examination he said that he received  them  in  June  or  July  but
         definitely after the First-tier appeal hearing. That  inconsistency
         was not satisfactorily explained.  However, I have  considered  the
         reliability of those documents against the  other  evidence  in  my
         findings below.

     10. I note also on this topic that it is not entirely accurate  to  say
         that the Appellant did not raise the  issue  of  his  liability  to
         perform military service at the appropriate stage.  He did  mention
         in answer to Q160 at  interview  that  he  had  not  performed  his
         military service because he was in education and at  Q161  that  he
         went to the military service bureau with his education  papers  and
         they postponed it until 2016.  At the time, he was preparing to  go
         to university. He says in answer to Q162 that he postponed in  2012
         and went to university in 2013.  He states at Q165 that if returned
         to Turkey he would perform military service.

     11. The Appellant said that, on  return  to  Turkey,  he  feared  that,
         because  he  would  be  identified  as  a  draft  evader,   further
         investigations would reveal his imputed links to the PKK.  He would
         face mistreatment by officers in the higher ranks if he was obliged
         to do military service as his past imputed political links would be
         discovered. He would be forced to carry out military  service.   He
         would be taken directly into the army.  He could  object  but  that
         would be "only verbal" and he would be forced into the army.

     12. The Appellant also relied on what would happen to him if he had  to
         register elsewhere in Turkey.  He would have to register  with  the
         Mukhtar who would look into his past records and would discover his
         imputed links. He explained that, before he fled Turkey, the police
         had put him on  reporting  conditions.   Those  would  emerge  when
         registration checks were made. In order to obtain an identity card,
         he would be obliged to provide details of his place of birth, name,
         surname, parents' name and identification number.  It would not  be
         possible to live elsewhere without being registered.

    Military Service Documents

     13. The Appellant has produced two documents.  The first  is  dated  15
         October 2012 and states  that  the  Appellant's  "military  service
         situation is clear until 31.12.2015".  That  is  clarified  by  the
         statement that the end date of postponement is  31  December  2015.
         The reason for his postponement is stated to be "Article 36" and it
         appears from what  is  there  said  that  this  is  linked  to  his
         graduation date of 8 June 2012.

     14. The second document is headed "Roll Call Notification".   According
         to the translation at least the document  appears  to  be  undated.
         However, as the Respondent  noted  in  her  skeleton  argument,  it
         refers to postponement ending in the future and it  must  therefore
         pre-date 31 December 2015.  It further states  that  the  Appellant
         must apply to the Military Recruitment Branch to  comply  with  the
         call-up procedure between 31 January 2015 and 31 December 2015.  It
         goes on to note that if the Appellant applies for roll  call  after
         the first referral date, a punitive  procedure  will  be  launched.
         That does not appear to make sense although may be due to an  error
         in translation as paragraph six indicates that the  Appellant  will
         be subject to a punishment if he fails to comply with roll call  or
         submit relevant documents.  Paragraph five of  the  document  notes
         that if the Appellant falls within certain groups, documents should
         be sent to the Recruitment Branch before 7 July 2015.

    Report of Ms Sheri Laizer

     15. Ms Laizer is an expert specialist, writer and broadcast  journalist
         in relation to a number of countries  including  Turkey.   She  has
         produced  a  number  of  expert  reports  in  appeals  and  further
         submissions in relation to Kurdish nationals and has experience  of
         working with various Kurdish organisations.  Her expertise was  not
         challenged by Mr Staunton.

     16. Ms Laizer notes at [3(ii)] of her report that the Appellant has not
         reported for military service and will be entered as a draft evader
         in the Turkish records  system.   As  a  result,  she  opines,  his
         imputed PKK links and draft evasion will be identified anywhere  in
         Turkey.  She further opines at [3(vi)] that given  the  Appellants'
         imputed pro-PKK profile, internal relocation is impossible for  the
         Appellant.

     17. Ms Laizer refers to recent developments in Turkey  which  she  says
         either have led or are likely to lead to a hardening  of  attitudes
         to the Kurds in Turkey.  She points at [2(xvi)] to  the  fact  that
         HDP Mayors have lost their positions and HDP MPs have been stripped
         of their immunity, in spite of the HDP's public condemnation of the
         coup.   Two  Kurdish  MPS  have  been   charged   with   "terrorist
         propaganda".  She notes that the Appellant  said  in  his  original
         witness statement that he attended meetings led  by  one  of  those
         MPs. She notes that the Appellant might have been  photographed  or
         filmed by undercover Turkish police during those meetings  although
         that opinion appears speculative.  She also notes reports of Turkey
         waging an  offensive  against  PKK  militants  in  the  south-east,
         following the collapse of a nearly two-year ceasefire in mid-2015.

     18. Ms Laizer next considers how the Appellant might fare if forced  to
         do military service.  She suggests  at  [4(i)]  that  the  army  is
         divided and Kurdish soldiers are at  risk  of  being  sent  to  the
         frontline to fight fellow Kurds.  The reports on which  she  relies
         however do not appear to contain any supporting evidence  for  that
         claim.  They appear to focus on the round-up of  those  serving  in
         the army following  the  coup  on  the  basis  of  their  suspected
         involvement in that coup. However, there is some  support  for  her
         opinion in the Rudaw report of 4 February 2016  (footnote  23)  and
         the Rudaw report of 3 February 2016  (footnote  24)  which  reports
         note the move by the Turkish army to send Kurdish  conscripts  into
         the Kurdish areas, a move which the local people "believe" to be  a
         deliberate move by the Turkish authorities to  discredit  the  PKK.
         She notes in that regard at [4(iv)] the risk to the Appellant  from
         the PKK itself if sent to fight in the  Kurdish  area.   She  notes
         that the PKK does not check whether  a  person  is  Kurdish  before
         targeting them.

     19. Ms Laizer also says that the Appellant would risk identification of
         his past imputed PKK links as a result of  conscription.   This  is
         the nub of the Appellant's argument in relation to the risk arising
         to him from military service.  Ms Laizer points at [4(vi)]  to  the
         fact that the record keeping system in  Turkey  has  improved  even
         since "IK" and that the Appellant will therefore be identified from
         those records and identity checks as  a  draft  evader.  This  will
         lead, she says, to identification of his links and the other  risks
         to him which she identifies elsewhere in her report.



Country guidance case of "IK"

     20. My attention was drawn to the following parts  of  the  summary  in
         "IK" which have or may have relevance to the Appellant's case:-

             "[133]  1.      The  evidence  of  Mr  Aydin  (paragraph   32)
             accurately describes the defined  and  limited  ambit  of  the
             computerised  GBT  system.    It  comprises  only  outstanding
             arrest warrants,  previous  arrests,  restrictions  on  travel
             abroad, possible draft evasion, refusal  to  perform  military
             service and tax arrears.  "Arrests" as comprised in  the  GBTS
             require some court intervention,  and  must  be  distinguished
             from "detentions" by the security forces followed  by  release
             without charge.  The GBTS is fairly widely accessible  and  is
             in particular available to the  border  police  at  booths  in
             Istanbul airport, and elsewhere  in  Turkey  to  the  security
             forces.

             ...

             4.   The Nufus registration system comprises details  of  age,
             residence, marriage, death, parents' and  children's  details,
             and religious status.  It may also include arrest warrants ...

             5.   If a person is held for questioning either in the airport
             police station after  arrival  or  subsequently  elsewhere  in
             Turkey and the situation justifies it,  then  some  additional
             inquiry could be made of the authorities  in  his  local  area
             about him, where more extensive records  may  be  kept  either
             manually or on computer ...

             ...

             8.   The escalation of the violence following  the  ending  of
             the PKK ceasefire reinforces our  view  that  the  risk  to  a
             Kurdish returnee of ill treatment by the  authorities  may  be
             greater if his home area is in an area of conflict  in  Turkey
             than it would be  elsewhere,  for  the  reasons  described  in
             paragraph 90 and 116.

             ...

             11.  A young, fit, unmarried person, leaving his home area and
             seeking unofficial employment in a big city, may not feel  the
             need to register with the  local  Mukhtar,  at  least  at  the
             outset.  Many do not.   However,  given  the  range  of  basic
             activities for which a certificate of residence is needed, and
             which depend upon such registration, we conclude that it would
             in must normal circumstances  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  a
             person  to  live  without  appropriate  registration  for  any
             material time, as  a  requirement  for  avoiding  persecution.
             This does not necessarily preclude the viability  of  internal
             relocation for  the  reasons  described  in  paragraph  133.13
             below.

             12.  The proper course in assessing the risk for a returnee is
             normally to decide first whether he has a well-founded fear of
             persecution in his home  area  based  upon  a  case  sensitive
             assessment of the facts in the context of an analysis  of  the
             risk factors described in A (Turkey).  If he does not then  he
             is unlikely to be at any real risk anywhere in Turkey.

             13.  The risk to a specific individual in  most  circumstances
             will be at its highest in his  home  area  for  a  variety  of
             reasons, and particularly if it is located  in  the  areas  of
             conflict in the south and  east  of  Turkey.   Conversely  the
             differential nature of the  risk  outside  that  area  may  be
             sufficient to mean that the individual would not  be  at  real
             risk of persecution by the state or its agencies elsewhere  in
             Turkey, even if they were made aware  of  the  thrust  of  the
             information maintained in his home area by  telephone  or  fax
             enquiry from the airport police station or elsewhere, or by  a
             transfer of at least some of the information  to  a  new  home
             area on registration with the local Mukhtar  there.   Internal
             relocation may well therefore be viable,  notwithstanding  the
             need for registration in the new area.  The issue  is  whether
             any individual's material history would be  reasonably  likely
             to lead to persecution outside his home area."

     21. The summary at sub-paragraph thirteen above finds  its  genesis  in
         [116] onwards of the Tribunal's decision.  Mr  Staunton  relies  in
         particular on part of [119] which I cite in full:-

             "[119]  We  have  already  identified  some  examples  of  the
             circumstances in which a person may have  experienced  serious
             ill-treatment in the past in areas of Turkey where the PKK was
             or now is active, but would not necessarily be at similar risk
             of such treatment elsewhere in Turkey where  it  is  not,  and
             where a different view of his history could  be  taken.   They
             include examples of general intimidation by the authorities of
             the Kurdish population to discourage support for the  PKK,  or
             to clear  whole  villages.   The  evidence  is  that  anything
             between some hundreds of thousands to some millions (depending
             on whose figures one uses)  may  have  been  displaced  within
             Turkey as a consequence of this.  However, outside  the  areas
             of PKK activity there will not be the same perceived  need  to
             undertake such intimidation or clearances and the  authorities
             within the receiving areas will be aware of the  tactics  that
             led to this mass migration, and will  be  able  to  assess  an
             individual's record in the light of it.  Similarly,  a  person
             who was included on Mr Dil's list of  local  "ne'er-do'wells",
             against whom there was no evidence of PKK involvement, but who
             ran the risk of being detained for questioning whenever a  PKK
             incident occurred in his vicinity, would not be at  a  similar
             risk in another area where the PKK was not  active  and  where
             such incidents were much less likely to occur.  These are just
             some examples of why differential risk can arise in  different
             areas of Turkey."

     22. Ms Hena for her part relies on the citation of the  UNHCR  guidance
         set out at [120] as follows:-

             "Kurds and members of Christian minorities from the  southeast
             Turkey do have an  internal  flight  alternative  outside  the
             region... unless the case in question is of a prominent nature
             or is perceived by the authorities to  have  real  or  alleged
             links with the PKK  or  other  main  Kurdish  parties.   UNHCR
             considers  that  the  group  most  likely  to  be  exposed  to
             harassment/prosecution/persecution  are  Kurds  suspected   of
             being connected with or sympathisers of the PKK...

             In the context of internal flights "it is  essential  to  find
             out if Turkish asylum seekers if returned would  be  suspected
             of connection to or sympathy with the PKK.  In this case  they
             should  not  be  considered  as  having  been  able  to  avail
             themselves of an internal flight alternative"..in the  UNHCR's
             perspective, if persecution emanates  from  state  authorities
             then there is no internal flight  alternative  or  relocation.
             The situation may look different with regard to village guards
             or people persecuted by non-state agents."

Submissions

     23. Ms Hena summarised the Appellant's case as relating to  what  would
         happen to him on the basis of  draft  evasion  and  if  he  had  to
         register in another part of Turkey.  In  either  event,  she  said,
         checks would be made about his past and his previous detentions and
         the fact he was on reporting conditions when he left  Turkey  would
         be discovered.  Since those  detentions  and  reporting  conditions
         were based on the authorities' suspicion of the Appellant's support
         for and links to the PKK, the discovery  of  his  background  would
         lead to a real risk of persecution in any other area of Turkey.

     24. Ms Hena submitted that, although the case of "IK" is  now  of  some
         vintage, the situation in  the  period  under  consideration  there
         (2003) and the situation now bear some similarities.  As such,  the
         UNHCR guidance which the Tribunal considered in "IK"  continues  to
         have relevance (see [22] above).  Here,  the  Appellant  fears  the
         authorities in his home area and there  is  therefore  no  internal
         flight alternative. The risk is from the State.

     25. Ms Hena also submitted that, even without the risk arising from the
         Appellant's position as a draft evader, it would be unduly harsh to
         expect the Appellant to live in  another  part  of  Turkey  without
         registering with the authorities in that other area.   She  pointed
         to what is said at [133.11] of "IK" ([20] above).

     26. The fact that the Appellant has not completed his military  service
         would also give rise to the risk of discovery of his  past  imputed
         links to the PKK.  He would be mistreated by the  higher  ranks  in
         the army and would be forced to fight on  the  front  line  against
         other Kurds.

     27. In relation to military service, Ms Hena pointed  to  the  case  of
         Savda v Turkey (Application No 42730/05 - judgment  12  June  2012)
         ("Savda")  summarised  at  2.5.6  of  the   Home   Office   Country
         Information and Guidance Turkey: Military  Service.   She  accepted
         that the Appellant's evidence was that, but for  his  past  imputed
         links, he would be prepared to  carry  out  his  military  service.
         However, because he would object  to  performing  military  service
         based on the risk arising from his personal situation, there  would
         be an Article 3 breach.

     28. In response to criticism  by  the  Respondent  of  the  Appellant's
         failure to provide a comprehensive bundle of background material in
         relation to the internal relocation position, Ms Hena  pointed  out
         that Ms Laizer's report contains extracts from  and  references  in
         footnotes to the background material on which  she  relied.   There
         would be little point in the Appellant replicating that exercise.

     29. Mr Staunton invited me to find that the documents produced  by  the
         Appellant in relation to military service were not  genuine  and/or
         to place little weight on them.  He pointed in  particular  to  the
         inconsistencies in the Appellant's evidence in relation to  how  he
         had come by those documents (see [9] above).   The  issue  of  risk
         based on draft evasion was also raised  at  a  late  stage  of  the
         appeal and no satisfactory explanation had been given for this.

     30. Mr Staunton invited me to find in  any  event  that,  even  if  the
         Appellant were liable to perform military service,  this  does  not
         give rise to any real risk to him.   The  latest  country  guidance
         case relating to military service in Turkey is SD (military service
         - sexual identity) [2013] UKUT  612  which  case  concerns  a  risk
         arising from an individual being homosexual. That does not apply to
         this Appellant.  Neither  does  he  claim  to  be  a  conscientious
         objector.  Savda is therefore of no relevance.

     31. In relation to military service, the Respondent relies on R (on the
         application of) Sepet & another v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2003] UKHL 15  ("Sepet").   A  refusal  or  failure  to
         perform military service leads to a risk  of  prosecution  and  not
         persecution.   If  the  Appellant  faced  punishment  for   evading
         military service, that would be because he evaded the draft and not
         because he is a Kurd with  perceived  PKK  affiliation.   In  Sepet
         there was an express concession that the penalty for draft  evasion
         was not disproportionate.  The penalty for draft evasion now  is  a
         maximum of three years' imprisonment which is the same as  that  in
         force at the time of the judgment in Sepet.  Mr Staunton invited me
         to conclude that the mere punishment of draft evasion is  not  such
         as to give rise to a real risk  of  persecution  or  in  breach  of
         Article 3 ECHR.

     32. Mr Staunton invited me to disregard Ms Laizer's  opinion  that  the
         Appellant is at risk of being sent  to  fight  on  the  front  line
         against other Kurds.  He pointed  out  that  this  section  of  her
         report is unsourced.  I should therefore give it little weight.

     33. Mr Staunton invited me to find that it would not be unduly harsh to
         expect the Appellant to internally relocate within Turkey.  It is a
         vast and populous country.  The  Appellant  is  a  single,  healthy
         adult male who has spent the majority of his life in Turkey.

     34. In relation to the risk that by reason of registration or having to
         enlist for military service his background in his home  area  would
         become known, the Respondent invites me to note that the  issue  is
         not  whether  the  Appellant's  past  would  become  known  to  the
         authorities in the area to which  he  relocates  but  whether  that
         knowledge would put the Appellant at real risk  of  persecution  in
         the relocation area.  The Respondent notes that the fact finding at
         [10] to [14] of the First-tier Tribunal  decision  shows  that  the
         Appellant was involved in and arrested for very low level  activity
         or scuffles with various allegations  made  against  him.   He  was
         never actually charged with any offence involving  links  with  the
         PKK. Mr Staunton placed the Appellant in  the  category  of  "local
         'ne'er-do-wells'" identified at [119] of "IK".

Discussion and conclusions

     35. I deal first with the Respondent's  challenge  to  the  Appellant's
         late reliance on draft evasion as  being  a  reason  why  he  fears
         return to another part of Turkey, both  on  the  basis  that  as  a
         result of checks, his background would be  discovered  and  on  the
         basis that, as a result of that discovery, he  would  face  a  real
         risk of persecution.

     36. I share the Respondent's concerns about the Appellant's evidence in
         relation to how and when he came  by  the  documents  on  which  he
         relies as showing that he was obliged to enrol for military service
         by December 2015.  I have noted at [9] above,  the  inconsistencies
         in that evidence which were not explained.  I have also noted  that
         at least part of one of the documents does  not  make  any  logical
         sense.

     37. However, I am prepared to accept on the  lower  standard  that  the
         Appellant's military service was deferred until  31  December  2015
         and he was obliged to perform military  service  after  that  date.
         That is consistent with what he said at his asylum interview and is
         also consistent with the background evidence as to when a person is
         obliged to carry out military service and how it can be deferred.

     38. The Appellant does not claim that he is a  conscientious  objector.
         As such, the case of Savda is of little or no relevance.  Nor do  I
         accept, based on what is said in  Sepet  that  the  punishment  for
         refusing to perform military service is  of  itself  sufficient  to
         give rise to a real risk of persecution  or  breach  of  Article  3
         ECHR.

     39. However, if I have properly understood the Appellant's  case,  this
         is based on what would be discovered about his background if he  is
         identified as being a draft evader and/or if he has to register  in
         another area of Turkey.  I accept what is said  by  the  Respondent
         about  the  distinction  to  be  drawn  between  discovery  of  his
         background and that background  giving  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
         persecution in another part of Turkey.

     40. I turn then to consider what the authorities  in  another  part  of
         Turkey would discover if they made checks about  the  Appellant  in
         his home area. My summary is based on [10] to [14]  of  the  First-
         tier Tribunal decision. The authorities  would  discover  that  the
         Appellant was arrested and detained on no less than six  occasions.
         The detentions in 2010 and  December  2013  would  be  unlikely  to
         excite adverse interest based as  they  were  on  a  skirmish  with
         another pupil at school and a fight with another man all  based  on
         the Appellant's ethnicity.  However, there was an  arrest  in  July
         2013  followed by a series of three  arrests  within  a  six  month
         period in 2014, just  before  the  Appellant  left  Turkey.   Those
         incidents appear to have been unrelated to any particular incident.
         Although  those  arrests  were  provoked  by  complaints  from  one
         individual who the Appellant later discovered was his neighbour, it
         is nonetheless the case that the authorities targeted the Appellant
         specifically because of suspected assistance  to  the  PKK.   Those
         incidents are in an altogether different category  from  the  other
         two.  They led to arrests and although the Appellant  was  released
         without charge he was, on the last  occasion,  made  subject  to  a
         monthly reporting condition.

     41. I am quite unable to accept the Respondent's contention that  those
         show the Appellant only as a "local  'ne-er-do-well'"  who  is  not
         specifically targeted by the authorities but simply one of a number
         of other people who are detained whenever there is an  incident  in
         the local area.   The  arrests  in  this  case  show  a  deliberate
         targeting of the Appellant by the local  authorities  in  his  home
         area, albeit based on complaints from one individual.

     42. Nor can it  be  suggested  that  these  were  other  than  official
         arrests, particularly in light of the reporting conditions  imposed
         on the last occasion.  This  is  not  therefore  a  case  of  rogue
         officers acting with impunity in the local area which pattern would
         be unlikely to be replicated in another part of Turkey.  Bearing in
         mind what was said by the UNHCR in "IK" about  the  position  where
         the persecution feared emanates from the authorities, I  accept  on
         the lower standard that discovery of the Appellant's  past  imputed
         links gives rise to a real risk of persecution elsewhere in Turkey.
          The risk of that discovery might arise in one of two ways - either
         because of the identification of the Appellant as a draft evader or
         because the Appellant would need to register  in  another  area  of
         Turkey. I note in relation to the latter the guidance in "IK"  that
         to require a person to live  in  another  part  of  Turkey  without
         registration for an extended period would itself be unduly harsh.

     43. In light of that finding, it is unnecessary for me to deal with any
         risk said to arise to the Appellant as a Kurd  if  he  were  forced
         into military service, absent his background.

     44. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant is  at  real
         risk of persecution in his home area.  That finding  was  expressly
         preserved  before  me.  That  risk  would  not  be  alleviated   by
         relocation to another part of Turkey because of the risk  that  his
         past imputed links would be discovered.  That discovery  would,  on
         the lower standard, give rise to a real risk of persecution by  the
         authorities in the area of relocation.  Internal relocation is  not
         therefore an option.  The Appellant  has  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in Turkey.  I therefore allow his appeal.




    Decision

    The Appellant's asylum appeal is allowed

Signed        [pic]Date         22 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
