
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06086/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 November 2014                         |On 20 November 2014        |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                     AAT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     MR S Chevlan of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Neville Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appealed against the decision of the respondent to remove
    him as an illegal entrant after refusing him  asylum  in  the  decision
    dated 7 June 2013. First-tier Tribunal Judge Brenells (hereinafter "the
    Judge") dismissed the appellant's appeal for  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection in a determination promulgated on 24 February 2014.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    Landes who said that it was arguable that the Judge materially erred in
    law in his treatment of the evidence Post OO (gay men at risk)  Algeria
    [2013] 00063 case and that third party persecution must in itself  come
    within the definition of persecution.

    The appellant's case

 3. The appellant's case is as follows.

 4. The appellant's claim is based on his membership of a particular social
    group in that he is a homosexual.  He claims that he cannot  return  to
    Algeria because he will not be able to lead the life he wants and would
    be forced to conform by the community in Algeria to what is expected of
    him. He claims that his partner was murdered in Algeria because he  was
    a bisexual. The appellant fears that he will suffer the  same  fate  as
    his partner if people find out that he is a bisexual.

    The respondent's reasons for refusal

 5. The respondent in their reasons for refusal letter  stated  in  summary
    the following.

 6. The appellant claims that he is bisexual and in his substantive  asylum
    interview gave  consistent  and  detailed  account  of  his  homosexual
    relationships in Algeria.  Although  the  appellant  gave  inconsistent
    evidence it is accepted that the appellant is a bisexual.

 7. The appellant claims that he had a relationship with a man called Karim
    Chelli for a significant period of time. Chelli was  killed,  in  part,
    because he was  a  homosexual.  The  appellant  acknowledged  that  the
    robbery may have been for money  as  well.  Therefore  the  appellant's
    account that his partner's murder is  homosexuality  motivated  is  the
    appellant's own assessment. This is not supported  by  the  appellant's
    assertion that they stole his car and his telephone at the time of  the
    murder. The people who killed the  appellant's  partner  was  convicted
    which leads to the conclusion that he was not  killed  because  of  his
    sexuality as it goes against the appellant's assertion that  killing  a
    homosexual is condoned in Algeria.

 8. It is accepted that the appellant is a bisexual Algerian male  and  his
    return to that country will be assessed  in  line  with  that  profile.
    Taking into account the Country Guidance Case of OO 00063 which  states
    that on the evidence in general, Algerian gay men do not express  their
    sexual identity openly because of  societal  disapproval,  not  because
    they fear persecution or other serious  harm.  The  appellant  did  not
    leave the country for a year after his partner was killed  although  he
    claims his murder was the catalyst for him to leave  the  country.  The
    appellant's  fear  of  persecution  due  to  his   sexuality   may   be
    subjectively genuine but in the case of OO it was held that it  is  not
    objectively well-founded.

    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge gave the following reasons for dismissing the
    appellant's appeal.

       i. The respondent accepts that the appellant is bisexual and wants to
          continue that  lifestyle  on  his  return  to  Algeria.  Dr  David
          Seddon's long and detailed report has  been  considered  which  is
          largely  irrelevant  because  the  respondent  accepts  that   the
          appellant is bisexual. Part of the report reviews the stance taken
          in other jurisdictions with regard to  the  position  of  Algerian
          homosexuals which the Judge has borne  in  mind  when  considering
          whether or not the facts of this particular case are such that the
          case falls outside the general  guidelines  in  OO  or  there  are
          proper reasons which permit me to depart from these guidelines.




      ii. The appellant's evidence is that when he  was  15  and  from  2004
          until 2006 he had a clandestine relationship  with  a  man  called
          Chelle who was  murdered  because  he  was  a  homosexual.  It  is
          possible that there are other motives for the murder  because  his
          car and telephone were also  stolen  and  the  police  managed  to
          apprehend the  killers.  The  appellant  himself  has  never  been
          attacked or discriminated against in Algeria despite having  lived
          there for two years after Chelle was killed in 2006. The appellant
          was issued  with  a  family  visit  visa  on  23  April  2008  and
          overstayed his visit in this  country  and  made  no  attempts  to
          regularise his status until arrested on  28  February  2013  after
          which he claimed asylum.



     iii. There is no evidence which permits the Judge to  depart  from  the
          Country Guidance Case of OO. Following the guidance in that  case,
          there is no evidence which shows that the  appellant  cannot  live
          openly as a homosexual in Algeria or that his particular facts are
          such that he falls  outside  OO  and  can  establish  a  need  for
          international protection. Since the  appellant  is  able  to  live
          openly as a homosexual in Algeria, the case of HJ  Iran  does  not
          assist him.



      iv. The appellant has not discharged the burden of proof of  having  a
          well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason  and  his
          removal would not cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of  its
          obligations under the 1951 Convention.

    The appellant's grounds of appeal

10. The grounds of appeal in summary are the following. The respondent  has
    conceded that the appellant is bisexual and therefore  he  successfully
    overcomes the first limb of the HJ Iran test.

11. The first ground is that the Judge ignored the case as put  before  the
    Tribunal. The appellant put his case on the basis that he was  at  risk
    on return on the basis of  sexual  identity  pursuant  to  the  Refugee
    Convention and Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    grounds alone. There was no freestanding Article 3 claim in respect  of
    his medical condition or Article 8 claim.  The  Tribunal  ignored  this
    submission and made negative  findings  in  respect  of  an  Article  3
    medical treatment claim and the Judge stated  at  question  29  of  the
    determination "in any event Mr Chevlan conceded the Article 8 claim  at
    the hearing and maintained the Article 3 claim". The  Article  3  claim
    was maintained only as being connected to  his  asylum  claim  and  the
    appellant did not make a medical treatment claim. This is indicative of
    the lack of care and attention by the  Tribunal  in  these  proceedings
    where it makes negative findings on claims not advanced  before  it  by
    the appellant.

12. The second ground of appeal states that the Tribunal record states that
    no application has been made from an anonymity direction.  This  matter
    was not raised before the Tribunal as the court listing for the hearing
    room which was posted in the reception area at Taylor house and outside
    the hearing room at Taylor House hearing centre, clearly indicated that
    anonymity direction was made and anonymity had already been granted.

13. The  third  round  of  appeal  states  that  the  Judge  described  the
    appellant's sexual identity as "a lifestyle". This displays a level  of
    ignorance about the innate and  immutable  characteristic  of  being  a
    bisexual. Furthermore the Judge at paragraph 20 states "whether in fact
    (the appellant) adopted that  lifestyle  or  heterosexual  or  celibate
    lifestyle" is also highly ignorant of what bisexuality entails.

14. The fourth ground is about the treatment of the Country  Guidance  Case
    of OO by  the  Judge.  The  case  of  OO  has  been  challenged  as  it
    incorrectly applied the Supreme Court's guidance in HJ  and  HT.  There
    was  evidence  before  the  Tribunal  which  post-dated  OO.   Practice
    direction 12.4 supplants the findings of the Tribunal in OO. The  Court
    of Appeal granted permission to appeal OO and the appellant applied for
    an adjournment pending the outcome. Even in  the  case  of  OO  it  was
    conceded that there will be certain cases which will be  able  to  show
    individual risk. The appellant specific narrative was  supported  by  a
    detail psychiatrist evaluation by Prof Katona who  concluded  that  the
    appellant has PTSD and depressive disorder which links to his traumatic
    experiences to his sexual identity which includes  the  murder  of  his
    former lover by Islamists in Algeria.

15. Past persecution can also be the basis of future persecution.  Applying
    paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules and according to  paragraph  85
    (e) of OO, the appellant is a refugee.

16. The Tribunal ignored the report of Dr Seddon drafted in 2014 which post-
    dates OO. The  Tribunal  in  OO  heard  evidence  in  August  2012  and
    therefore it does  not  cover  the  recent  situation  in  Algeria  for
    homosexuals. The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada's report of  8
    August 2013 and the National Post  article  on  the  Algerian  national
    ballet dancers dated 4 September 2013 refers to "some LGBT  individuals
    received violent threats and felt compelled to leave the country".  The
    male ballet dancers were granted refugee status in Canada.

    The Rule 24 Response

17. The respondent in her Rule 24 response argued that the  Judge  directed
    herself appropriately. Ground 1, 2 and 3  do  not  reflect  a  material
    error of law. It is submitted that there is a public interest that  all
    hearings, insofar as possible, are heard in public so that  justice  is
    transparent. They should be good reason for an anonymity  direction  to
    be given. There is no good reason for why it should be granted  to  the
    appellant who is an asylum seeker.

18. In relation to ground four and the consideration of the case of OO, the
    grounds provide several reasons why OO  should  not  be  followed.  The
    First-tier Tribunal is obliged to  follow  the  country  guidance  case
    until such time it is overturned by a superior court, or that there are
    reasons to depart from  OO  or  there  is  further  background  country
    material which has not been taken into account in the country  guidance
    case which would warrant a different conclusion.

19. The Judge provided reasons why he considered he should not depart  from
    OO. Reliance is placed by the appellant upon the expert's report  as  a
    reason for departing from OO. The appellant will have to show that  the
    expert considered properly the country guidance case  insofar  for  the
    expert to come to a different  conclusion  and  the  reasons  for  that
    opinion. The Judge give adequate reasons on the material before him not
    to depart from the Country Guidance Case.

    The hearing

20. At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the determination which I will not set  out
    because the full notes of the hearing are in my Record of Proceedings.

    Findings as to whether there is an error of law

21. The issue for me at this stage of the hearing is whether  the  tribunal
    erred in law such that his decision should be set aside. When  granting
    permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge stated that  aspects
    of ground four are arguable, in particular as to the Judge's  treatment
    of the post OO background  material  namely  that  the  Judge  did  not
    consider under this head, the experts report as  to  the  treatment  of
    those in Algeria who do not fit societal norms. It was also  stated  by
    the permission Judge that the Judge erred in his consideration  of  the
    Canadian report which was stated OO. It also states  that  there  is  a
    good argument that the Judge did not give adequate consideration to the
    appellant's reasons for believing  that  the  motivation  for  his  ex-
    partner's murder was  his  sexual  identity.  The  Judge's  finding  at
    paragraph 18 of the determination was inadequately reasoned. The  other
    grounds of appeal do not add  to  the  case  and  the  Judge's  use  of
    terminology is not material because the  Judge  did  not  make  adverse
    credibility findings against the appellant.

22. There is no dispute  between  the  parties  that  the  appellant  is  a
    bisexual. Therefore the Judge correctly found that  the  appellant  met
    the first hurdle in HJ (Iran) v SSHD and HT (Cameroon)  v  SSHD  [2010]
    UKSC 31. The only issue which remain is  whether  the  appellant  would
    suffer persecution on his return to Algeria on the basis that he  is  a
    bisexual.

23. The Judge materially erred in law  when  he  said  that  "there  is  no
    evidence before me which permits me to depart from the Country Guidance
    Case of OO". This was  not  accurate  because  the  appellant  provided
    background evidence which post-dated OO. The Judge failed to take  into
    account the official report of the Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  of
    Canada dated 8 August  2013  and  the  National  Post  article  on  the
    Algerian national ballet dancers dated 4 September 2013. The Judge also
    did not take into account Dr Seddon's report drafted in  2014  and  the
    fact that Prof Katona's report was unchallenged by the respondent.

24. Essentially the Judge's findings are in two short paragraphs, 24 and 25
    of the determination. The reasoning in these two  paragraphs  is  brief
    and does not take into account all the evidence in the appeal.

25. I am ultimately satisfied  that  there  is  a  material  error  in  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge, in that  he  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for finding  the  appellant's  can  safely  return  to
    Algeria given that he is a bisexual.

26. Consequential to my finding that there is a material error  of  law,  I
    set aside the determination of the Judge in its entirety and remake the
    decision.



    Remaking of the decision




  27. Mr Chevlan urged me in the event that I was to find that  there  is  a
      material error of law in the determination that I should either  allow
      the appeal or that it should be linked to the outcome of the appeal of
      OO. He said that the appeal can remain in the Upper Tribunal.



28. I have considered all the evidence in this appeal. I have looked at the
    appellant's evidence in its entirety including the  objective  evidence
    on Algeria.  I  have  attempted  to  decide  whether  the  evidence  is
    consistent and coherent and whether it establishes that the appellant's
    claims is genuine to the low  standard  of  proof  required  in  asylum
    cases.

29. I have considered the case of HJ where it was stated that  a  judge  is
    required to conduct an individual and  fact-specific  inquiry.   It  is
    stated at paragraph 35 of that case that: "The first stage, of  course,
    is to consider whether the applicant  is  indeed  gay.  Unless  he  can
    establish that he is of that orientation he will not be entitled to  be
    treated as a member of the particular social group. But I would  regard
    this part of the test as having been satisfied if the applicant's  case
    is that he is at risk of persecution because he is suspected  of  being
    gay, if his past history shows that this is in fact the case."



30. There is no dispute that the appellant is a bisexual as this  has  been
    accepted  by  the  respondent.  I  therefore  treat  the  appellant  as
    belonging to a particular social group. The appellant  therefore  meets
    the first requirement in HJ Iran.

31. Having found that the appellant is a bisexual, I go to  the  next  test
    set out in HJ Iran which is that I have to  ask  myself  whether  I  am
    satisfied on the available evidence that gay people who live openly  in
    Algeria would be liable to persecution.

32. I have considered the background evidence which postdates  the  Country
    Guidance Case of OO which was submitted by the appellant. I  also  take
    into account the expert report of both Dr Seddon's drafted in  2014.  I
    also take into account Prof Katona's report. What these  reports  state
    is that the appellant would be at risk on  his  return  to  Algeria  on
    account of him being a homosexual. The Canadian  report  addresses  the
    arrest and pre-trial detention of an Algerian gay couple  in  May  2013
    and reports that "homophobic violence and rape against LGBT people  are
    not reported for fear of Algerian laws". The Canadian Report refers  to
    the 2012 US State Department report published in  the  spring  of  2013
    which states "some LGBT individuals received violent threats  and  felt
    compelled to leave the country". I also take into account the  Algerian
    male ballet dancers who were granted refugee status in  Canada  because
    they were perceived to be gay due to their profession. The point  which
    I note here is that they were perceived to be gay and not because  they
    are ballet dancers.

33. The next inquiry is whether the appellant would live openly and thereby
    be exposed to a real risk of persecution. The test for whether  gay  or
    lesbian asylum seekers are entitled to  refugee  status  is  no  longer
    whether they can reasonably be  expected  to  tolerate  being  discreet
    about their sexual identity - or, as  Lord  Hope  puts  it,  concealing
    their sexual identity - in order to avoid persecution.  Rather, as Lord
    Rodger said:


           "The underlying rationale of the Convention is that  they  should
          be able to live freely and openly as gay men  and  lesbian  women,
          without fearing  that  they  may  suffer  harm  of  the  requisite
          intensity or duration because they are gay or lesbian."


34. I take into account that the appellant  had  a  homosexual  partner  in
    Algeria who was murdered. The appellant believes that he  was  murdered
    because he was a homosexual although the respondent suggests  that  the
    motivation for murder could have been financial. I take into account in
    that regard the report of Dr  Seddon  who  states  that  the  appellant
    suffers from PTSD because of the murder of his partner in  Algeria  and
    this has had an effect on him. I put weight on this report  to  support
    the appellant's claim that his partner was murdered in Algeria  due  to
    his sexuality.


35. I therefore find that if the appellant lives discreetly in Algeria,  it
    would be out of a fear of persecution and if he was to live openly as a
    bisexual man there is a likelihood that he will be persecuted and  come
    to harm. Therefore his asylum claim based on his  bisexuality  must  be
    accepted to the low standard of proof required in asylum cases.


36. Under both the Refugee Convention and Human Rights Convention  appeals,
    and with  regard  to  Humanitarian  Protection,  the  onus  is  on  the
    appellant to prove that the claim  is  well  founded.  With  regard  to
    asylum claims, I have to assess whether the claim is  well  founded  on
    the evidence as a whole, in relation to the past, present  and  future.
    I have to assess the degree of risk facing the appellant  now,  at  the
    date of the making of this determination.  The  test  that  I  have  to
    apply at all  stages,  including  that  at  which  I  assess  both  the
    appellant's evidence and his fears, is whether there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that he is telling the truth and whether he has  established
    a real risk of persecution.


37.  Given my conclusions above, and considering all of the evidence  as  a
    whole, I find that the appellant  does  have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason in Algeria.  I  conclude  therefore
    that the appellants' removal would cause the United Kingdom  to  be  in
    breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention.



    Decision



  38. The determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside. I
      substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum
      grounds.




    Appeal allowed









Signed by


Mrs S Chana Date 18th day of November 2014

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Judge

