
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06136/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 15th January 2014                          |On 21st  March 2014          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                         VIJAYARASA KANAPATHEPILLAI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Shilbi instructed by Nag Law Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Lister - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination of  Designated  Judge  of
        the First-tier Tribunal Coates, promulgated following a hearing  at
        Stoke on 13th September 2013, in which he dismissed the Appellant's
        appeal on asylum, humanity protection and human rights grounds.


     2. Having considered the evidence  he  was  asked  to  consider  Judge
        Coates set out his findings, the key  elements  of  which,  may  be
        summarised as follows


      i.    There  are  many  discrepancies  and  inconsistencies   in   the
   account which go to the core of the claim [51].


      ii.   The  claim  that  having  evaded  arrest  on  3rd  February  the
   Appellant  spent   two   months   at   the   home   of   an   agent   and
   another two months at an address in Colombo before being        taken  to
   the airport on  20th  April  indicates  a  chronology  which           is
   clearly   impossible   and   that   the   Appellant   was    unable    to
   explain  when  the  inconsistency  was   put   to   him   in   his   oral
   evidence [52].


     iii. The Appellant's claim that he was required to report  to  the  Sri
   Lankan   Army   camp   for   21   years   is   implausible.   A   further
   discrepancy   in   his   evidence   arose   regarding   when    he    was
   required to sign on and the period he was held at the camp       when  he
   attended [53].


     iv.  The Appellant asserted in his grounds of appeal that he  lived  in
   an  area  controlled  by  the  LTTE  yet  in   his   oral   evidence   he
   denied living in such an area and claimed both the army and          LTTE
   went there from time to time [54].


     v.   The Appellant's claim to have received assistance  from  a  lawyer
   in relation  to  his  dealings  with  the  Sri  Lankan  Army  was  raised
   very late in the  day.   He  also  claims  he  was  of  interest  to  the
   authorities  even  though   they   failed   to   arrest   him   when   he
   claims he  attended  to  report  on  the  morning  of  3rd  February  yet
   allegedly went  looking  for  him  at  his  home  address  later  in  the
   same day. This element of the account was  not  accepted  as        being
   plausible [55].


     vi.  The Appellant's  account  of  escaping  from  his  home  when  the
   army attempted to arrest him on 3rd February is implausible           and
   it found highly improbable that the army would not have          searched
   for the Appellant if they were genuinely looking for        him [56].


      vii.  The  Appellant's  account  of   his   departure   from   Colombo
   Airport was also found to be implausible [57].


     viii. His claim that on arrival at Heathrow  airport  he  was  able  to
   deal with immigration procedures without having  to  present       travel
   documents in person to an immigration official was not          believed,
   especially as he arrived on a  flight  from  Sri  Lanka          using  a
   German passport but cannot speak the German            language [58].


      ix.   Having  examined  all  of  the  documents  relied  upon  by  the
   Appellant  with  care  the   Judge   found   them   to   be   "manifestly
   unreliable". The Appellant is not  a  witness  of  truth,  his  claim  to
   have  been  arrested  by  the  authorities  is  not  believed   nor   his
   claim  to  have  any  political  profile  in  Sri  Lanka.  The  claim   a
   warrant  has  been  issued  for  his  arrest  is  not  believed  or   the
   claim  he  would  be  of  interest  to   the   Sri   Lankan   authorities
   when he left his country  and  will  be  of  no  interest  to  them  now.
   The Judge was not satisfied the Appellant had a profile which        will
   cause  him  to  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the  authorities  on   his
   return to Sri  Lanka  and  he  has  not  engaged  in  any  activities  in
   the United Kingdom so as to create such an adverse profile. He       will
   be returned as no more than a failed asylum seeker who           has  not
   established a real risk on the basis of the country              guidance
   case law.  The Judge noted that the Appellant's wife        and  children
   remain in Sri Lanka, apparently without problems,      and  there  is  no
   reason why the Appellant could not be reunited          with  them  [59].






Discussion



     3. The first challenge to the determination relates to the Judges
        treatment of four documents included in the appeal bundle which are
        said to be of fundamental importance to the Appellant's claim,
        namely a Magistrates Court record setting out details of
        proceedings issued against him in the Sri Lankan courts for 24th
        May 2002 to 25th March 2013, a Magistrates Court summons dated 24th
        May 2002, an arrest warrant dated 18th February 2013 and an open
        arrest warrant dated 25th March 2013, which are said to largely
        corroborate each other and the Appellant's account.


     4. It is accepted in the grounds that the Judge referred to documents
        submitted in support of the claim but asserted that the phraseology
        used by the Judge cannot be relied upon to establish that he did
        so.  It is submitted that there was nothing in the determination to
        show the documents were probably considered as there is no
        reference to the same and so it is impossible to say that if they
        were considered, they were considered properly, as there is a
        failure to give adequate reasons.  It is submitted the Judge should
        have done more than he did with regard to the documents especially
        as they corroborate the Appellant's account.


     5. Mr Shibli also claimed that there is a structural failure in the
        way the Judge considered.


     6. It was conceded at the hearing that paragraphs 8, 9, and 10 of the
        grounds providing an alternative explanation and alleging the Judge
        erred by not considering an alternative explanation was not the
        Appellant's strongest point.


     7. The Judge's findings regarding use of the German passport are also
        criticised but in relation to the passport issue the Judge
        correctly noted that the Appellant had used a German passport to
        which he was not entitled.  The Judge did not find the Appellant's
        account plausible as he did not accept a 48-year-old male arriving
        from Sri Lanka will be able to pass through immigration control in
        the United Kingdom without having to provide proper documentation.
        No legal error is proved in the Judge's finding that a false
        document was used which damages the Appellant's credibility
        pursuant to section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
        Claimants etc) Act 2004.


     8. The claim the Judge erred in failing to give specific reasons in
        relation to each and every element of the evidence he was asked to
        consider has no legal merit. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
        aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC) Blake J) the Tribunal held that (i)
        Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the
        conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is determined,
        those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a whole
        makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge;
        (ii) Although a decision may contain an error of law where the
        requirements to give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper
        Tribunal would not normally set aside a decision of the First-tier
        Tribunal where there has been no misdirection of law, the fact-
        finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant Country
        Guidance has been taken into account, unless the conclusions the
        judge draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him
        or her.


     9. The need to give adequate reasons enabling an individual to
        understand why a judge had come to a particular conclusion has been
        repeated by the Upper Tribunal in the recent decision of MK (duty
        to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), in which it was
        held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination disclosed
        clearly the reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal
        found oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or
        a document to be worth no weight whatsoever, it was necessary to
        say so in the determination and for such findings to be supported
        by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not believed or
        that a document was afforded no weight was unlikely to satisfy the
        requirement to give reasons.


    10. I have considered the documents the Appellant sought to rely upon
        and had the four documents specifically mentioned in the grounds
        been all the evidence that was available to the First-tier Tribunal
        it is arguable that the Appellant may have succeeded with his
        appeal. They were, however, not the only evidence Designated Judge
        Coates had available as he had the opportunity of not only
        considering all the documentary evidence but also seeing and
        hearing the Appellant give oral evidence. Having done so the Judge
        clearly undertook his analysis of the merits of the case by
        applying the most anxious scrutiny to all the evidence he was asked
        to consider. It is clear from the determination that the Judge did
        not find that the documents were forged, as there was insufficient
        evidence to support such conclusion, but he found that he could not
        attach the weight to those documents that he was being invited to
        by Mr Shibli.


    11. I indicated during the course of the hearing that I will be finding
        that Designated Judge Coates applied the most anxious scrutiny to
        the evidence and I repeat that finding here.  The Judge also gave
        adequate reasons explaining why he came to the conclusions that he
        did regarding the lack of credibility in the claim. This is not a
        Judge who has made bare statements he did not find the Appellant to
        be credible as he set out reasons why this was so, based upon
        material discrepancies in relation to elements that go to the core
        of the claim.  As the most anxious scrutiny has been applied and
        adequate reasons given the weight to be attached to the evidence
        was a matter for the Judge - see SS (Sri Lanka) [2012] EWCA Civ
        155.


    12. When one analyses the grounds of challenge carefully it can be seen
        that, in reality, this is a challenge to the weight the Judge gave
        to the documentary evidence relied upon by the Appellant. It is
        said that such documentary evidence should, in effect, have been
        determinative and that based upon the nature and quality of those
        documents (which it is asserted corroborate not only themselves but
        also the Appellants account) the appeal should have been allowed.


    13. Designated Judge Coates considered the weight he could give to
        those documents and correctly applied the principles arising from
        the case of Tanveer Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318.  Such principles
        include [38]:


              1.  In asylum and human rights cases it is for  an  individual
             claimant to       show that a document on which  he  seeks  to
             rely on can be relied on.


              2.  The decision maker should consider whether a  document  is
   one on                  which reliance should properly  be  placed  after
   looking at all the               evidence in the round.


              3.  Only very rarely  will  there  be  the  need  to  make  an
   allegation of                    forgery, or evidence  strong  enough  to
   support it.  The allegation               should not be made without such
   evidence.  Failure to  establish  the                 allegation  on  the
   balance of probabilities to the higher civil standard                does
   not  show  that  a  document  is  reliable.   The  decision  maker  still
     needs to apply principles 1 and 2.


    14. Judge Coates clearly found that he could not attach the weight to
        the documents that he was being invited to following a correct
        legal self-direction and way of proceeding in accordance with
        paragraph (2) above. I find no legal error established in relation
        to Judge Coates approach in relation to the documentary evidence.


    15. The findings Judge Coates made which were found to damage the
        Appellant's credibility have not been shown to be perverse,
        irrational, or contrary to the evidence, and are findings that are
        clearly within the range of findings the Judge was entitled to make
        on that evidence. Assertions that the Judge took into account
        irrelevant factors when assessing the account of travel to the
        United Kingdom and alleging that it was entirely inappropriate for
        him to assess documents of "fundamental importance" to the
        Appellant's claim in the way he did have no arguable merit. The law
        does not distinguish between documents that are fundamental to a
        claim and those that may be of less importance, as the principles
        regarding the burden of proof and the way in which documentary
        evidence needs to be assessed applies to all such evidence.  Any
        implication that as the documents from Sri Lanka were of a more
        fundamental nature the Judge should have applied a lesser burden
        upon the Appellant or given less weight to material discrepancies
        which could impact upon the weight given to such documents, is not
        supported by any legal authority.


    16. I have considered whether there is any evidence of a structural
        failure in the determination such as may occur if the Judge makes
        adverse credibility findings having only considered a limited
        aspect of the evidence and then uses those adverse findings to
        reject expert or other evidence, without considering such evidence
        as part of the overall assessment of the credibility of the account
        relied upon.  Having looked at all the evidence in this case and
        having considered the determination in detail I do not find it made
        out that there is any arguable merit in a claim that such a
        structural failure exists, such as to render the adverse
        credibility findings unsustainable.


    17. In an appeal of this nature when a Judge has approached the
        evidence as he was required to do, applied the appropriate degree
        of anxious scrutiny to that evidence, given adequate reasons for
        findings made which themselves have not been shown to be
        susceptible to challenge on any basis, mere disagreement with the
        weight attached to that evidence by the Judge or a desire for a
        more favourable outcome does not establish any legal error material
        to the decision to dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    18. There is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as no request for anonymity
        was made and no basis for making such an order is established on
        the facts.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 12th March 2014












