

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06245/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts, Belfast            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 October 2014                            |On 7 November 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                             IKE ERNEST EMEZINA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

Appellant:    Mr E Dornan (of Counsel) instructed by McQuoid Solicitors
Respondent:   Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  made  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of  State"),
    dated 17 June 2013, whereby  the  Appellant's  claims  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection were refused.  The ensuing appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal (the "FtT") was dismissed.

 2. At the conclusion of the hearing, I gave judgment allowing the  appeal,
    for the following reasons, in summary.

 3. As recorded in [12] of the FtT's determination, an application was made
    on behalf of the Appellant,  one  week  in  advance  of  the  scheduled
    hearing date, for an adjournment.  The determination records  that  the
    purpose of the adjournment requested was:

         "... to obtain a specialist medical report dealing with  an  injury
         to [the Appellant's] left ear which he  said  was  sustained  as  a
         result of physical abuse relating to his claim."

     The Judge continued, in [13]:

         "I was informed  that  the  additional  evidence  was  directed  to
         addressing  adverse  credibility  findings  and   his   claim   for
         discretionary leave based on his medical condition.  After  hearing
         submissions as a preliminary  issue,  I  declined  to  adjourn  the
         appeal on the basis of the time that had elapsed and that I was not
         persuaded, given  the  medical  evidence  already  available,  that
         further specialist medical evidence was going to add materially  to
         what was before the Tribunal."

 4. The hearing proceeded.  In [42], the Judge recorded:

         "In evidence he said his ear problems occurred after  being  struck
         by a gun to his left ear."

    This was one of the factual ingredients of the  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum ab initio (see, for example, question/answer number  80  in  the
    asylum interview) which was disbelieved by the Secretary  of  State  on
    the grounds that it was not credible.  The Judge continued:

         "In cross examination he said he had no ear problems prior to  this
         incident.  When confronted with Dr Irwin's report of 31  July  2012
         in which he is recorded as saying he had been deaf since childhood,
          he said this was a misunderstanding by the doctor.  I do not  find
         that credible."

         The following omnibus conclusion is contained in [44]:

         "In summary, I find the Appellant's claim is not, at  its  core,  a
         reliable one.  His propensity to be untruthful on issues which  are
         verifiably untrue casts serious doubt on his overall story."

 5. The relevance of the further medical  evidence  which  the  Appellant's
    legal representatives wished to obtain, and which formed the  basis  of
    the  adjournment  application,  was  not   confined   solely   to   the
    sustainability of the Appellant's asylum claim.  It also had a  bearing
    on  his  claim  under  Article  8  ECHR.   Initially,  the  Appellant's
    application for permission to appeal  to  this  Tribunal  was  refused.
    When the renewed application was made, the further medical evidence had
    been obtained.  Its author is a  Consultant  Otolaryngologist  and  the
    following extract is provided in the renewed permission grounds:

         "It would be unusual for cholesteatoma to develop as a result of an
         assault and the vast majority of these arise spontaneously .......


         [However] it is  entirely  possible  that  his  symptoms  from  his
         underlying cholesteatoma could have been  worsened  by  an  alleged
         assault."

         The Consultant further opined that the Appellant is:

         "....  at imminent  risk of losing his hearing and balance function
         in the left inner ear without urgent surgical intervention.  I feel
         that it is very likely that if he is deported  that  the  delay  in
         obtaining surgery in his left ear in his home country  will  result
         in progressing of his cholesteatoma to the point where he will lose
         hearing and balance function in this ear."

 6. In refusing the adjournment application, the Judge did not refer to any
    of the relevant provisions  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005 or the governing legal principles.  All of  this
    is rehearsed in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), at [4] -  [8].   As  a
    result, the Judge failed to apply the correct test, namely whether  the
    refusal of the adjournment application would deprive the  Appellant  of
    his right to  a  fair  hearing.   Furthermore,  the  Judge  assumed  an
    expertise of a medical nature to which he could not properly lay claim.
     In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb stated:

         "The medical evidence had arguable  relevance  to  the  Appellant's
         credibility and also to his Article 8 claim.  Even if that evidence
         might not have been compelling, it cannot be said  with  confidence
         that the Judge would have made the same findings and decision."

    I consider that the grant of permission to appeal has been  vindicated.
    Without reference to the new medical evidence,  which  I  disregard  in
    this context, I consider that the  adjournment  refusal  infringed  the
    Appellant's  right  to  a  fair  hearing,  which  is  inalienable   and
    indefeasible.

 7. I conclude that there is also merit in  the  free  standing  ground  of
    appeal which complains that whereas the Appellant's human rights  claim
    was  advanced  under  Article  8  ECHR,  the  Judge  erred  in  law  by
    determining  it  by  reference  to  Article  3  ECHR  and  the  related
    principles and jurisprudence.  The leading authority, which  the  Judge
    failed to consider, is Bensaid - v - United Kingdom [2001] 33 EHRR 205.

 8. Finally, upon the rehearing of this appeal, one may reasonably  predict
    that, in addition to the above, there  will  be  a  reasonably  intense
    focus on the Judge's findings in [41] and [42] of the determination.


DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 9. I decide and direct as follows:

    (a)  The decision of the FtT is set aside.


    (b)  I remit the case to a differently constituted  FtT  for  rehearing
         and remaking.


    (c)  The FtT should conduct a CMR hearing before 20 December 2014.


    (d)  The target relisting is the first available date thereafter.



                                                 [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                       Date: 30 October 2014
