
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06271/2015
                                                               AA/06270/2015
                                                               AA/06269/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2016                  |On 3 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     NP
                                     VN
                                     YN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION  MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent







Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, counsel instructed by Solidum
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ Mozolowski, promulgated on
    12 November 2015.  Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Allen on 8 January 2016.

Background


 2. The principal appellant, NP (hereinafter referred to as the  appellant)
    was granted entry clearance as a Tier 4 migrant  from  17  August  2012
    until 5 January 2014. An earlier application, made on 13 January  2012,
    had been refused. The second and third appellants joined the  appellant
    in the United Kingdom  on  23  April  2013.  He  claimed  asylum  on  6
    September 2013.

 3. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that he went to Russia  in
    1993  for  studies,  where  he  remained  until  2001.  Thereafter  the
    appellant worked as an electrical engineer in Sri Lanka from 2002 until
    2009. His brother SP left Sri Lankan during 2009 in order to travel  to
    India with his wife who was studying there. The appellant and his  wife
    were arrested on 24 August  2009  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  in
    connection with SP's alleged links to the LTTE.  SP's mother-in-law was
    also arrested.  The Sri Lankan authorities told the appellant that SP's
    friend was arrested for transporting bombs and he  had  implicated  SP;
    stating that he had given SP a motorbike and a jacket with  explosives.
    SP was not involved with the LTTE and nor were any other members of the
    appellant's family. The appellant's wife and  SP's  mother-in-law  were
    released, however the appellant remained at the police station and  was
    later transferred to Welikade Prison, in  December  2009.  After  being
    taken to court three times, the appellant was officially released  from
    detention in January 2010. A bribe was also paid for his  release.  The
    appellant travelled between Abu Dhabi  and  Sri  Lanka  twice  or  more
    between 2010 and 2011. He experienced no further problems with the  Sri
    Lankan authorities since his release from detention. However, in August
    or September 2013, the appellant heard that unknown people went to  his
    wife's family home, making enquiries about his whereabouts.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the appellant's asylum  claim  owing  to
    what were considered to  be  significant  inconsistencies  between  the
    accounts provided by the appellant and his wife (the  third  appellant)
    at  their  screening  interviews  when  compared  with   their   asylum
    interviews. Inconsistencies in the supporting evidence provided by  the
    appellant were also subject to adverse comment.

 5. During the course of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant and his wife gave  evidence.  The  FTTJ  concluded  that  the
    appellants had not provided a credible account and that they would  not
    be at risk of persecution or serious harm if returned to Sri Lanka.

Error of law


 6. Permission to appeal was sought on the basis  that  the  FTTJ  had  not
    considered the evidence before her in the round and the grounds proceed
    to criticise individual credibility findings as well as  her  treatment
    of the medical evidence.

 7. FTTJ Ford refused permission to appeal on 7 December  2015,  commenting
    that the grounds amounted to no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    outcome of the appeal. The UTJ granting  permission  said  as  follows;
    "The grounds identify arguable flaws in the Judge's adverse credibility
    findings. As a consequence all the matters raised in the grounds may be
    argued."

 8. The Secretary of State's response argued that  the  respondent  opposed
    the appeal as it was considered that the  FTTJ  appropriately  directed
    herself. In addition it was noted that the  appellant  had  never  been
    involved in the LTTE and his claim was based on his fear of persecution
    owing to his brother's links to the LTTE, however  the  FTTJ  concluded
    that the appellant had no links to the person who was the subject of an
    Interpol Warrant.

The hearing


 9. Mr Martin relied on the two sets of  grounds  of  appeal.   He  further
    argued that the Secretary of State had failed to verify the appellant's
    documents, namely those he described as the court  documents,  applying
    PJ (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ. Accordingly, the FTTJ's  reasons
    for failing to place weight on these documents were not sustainable.

10. Mr Martin submitted that the medical report on the  appellant  was  not
    considered in the round and warranted a more substantial assessment. It
    was said that the  FTTJ  erred  in  dismissing  the  third  appellant's
    written and oral evidence as self-serving, without  more.  Lastly,  the
    FTTJ had erred in concluding that the appellant  would  not  have  been
    released, a finding which was not based on objective evidence.

11. Mr Avery argued that there was nothing  to  warrant  the  Secretary  of
    State verifying the court documents given that the relationship between
    the appellant and his alleged brother was not  accepted.  He  submitted
    that the instant case could be distinguished from PJ,  which  concerned
    lawyers' letters and a chain of evidence. That case did not disturb the
    judgment in Tanveer Ahmed. He further argued that the FTTJ  had  looked
    at all the evidence in the round before reaching overall conclusions as
    to credibility.

12. With regard to the third appellant's evidence, Mr Avery agreed that the
    FTTJ had not said much, but argued that the same reasons for  rejecting
    the appellant's evidence applied to her,  in  that  the  FTTJ  did  not
    believe it. On the plausibility of  the  appellant  being  released  by
    payment of a  bribe  following  a  major  incident  with  international
    aspects to it, he argued that the FTTJ's reasoning was sound  and  that
    the grounds amounted to no more than mere disagreement.

13. In response, Mr Martin restated his reliance on PJ, arguing that  there
    were occasions when the authorities should undertake verification, that
    is, when the documents were at the centre of the protection  claim,  as
    in this case. Even if the relationship between the appellant and SP was
    doubted, there were the court documents which related to the appellant.
    The third appellant was also arrested and it was not enough to say  her
    evidence could be rejected for the same reasons as the husband.  As  to
    the plausibility of the appellant's release,  there  were  no  concrete
    allegations against the appellants, who  were  removed  from  the  real
    subject of the Sri Lankan authorities interest.

Decision on error of law

14. I upheld the decision of the FTTJ but reserved my reasons, which I give
    below.

15. I will firstly  address  the  issue  of  the  alleged  failure  of  the
    Secretary of State to verify what Mr Martin referred to  as  the  court
    documents, some of which he said were submitted  with  the  application
    and others for the hearing. The grounds state that the  FTTJ  erred  in
    that  she  did  not  prevent  the  respondent  from  challenging  those
    documents.  It is the case that none of the court  documents  submitted
    with the application contained the name of the appellant, but  that  of
    some other person. In addition, the dates therein  did  not  correspond
    with those provided by the appellant. In relation to  those  documents,
    given the lack of any link to the appellant's case,  I  do  not  accept
    that the respondent had any obligation to verify them. It  follows  the
    FTTJ did not err in failing to prevent the respondent from  challenging
    them.

16. It appears from [39] of the decision that the appellant also relied  on
    an arrest warrant at the hearing. In relation  to  this  document,  the
    FTTJ did not err in placing reliance  on  the  COI  report  as  to  the
    difficulty for an accused to be issued with a copy of  his  own  arrest
    warrant.

17. It is argued on the appellant's behalf that the FTTJ failed to consider
    the medical and  other  evidence  in  the  round  before  reaching  her
    conclusions. This is manifestly not the case. The FTTJ  considered  the
    evidence and set out her detailed findings, from [6]  to  [60]  of  the
    decision and reasons. It is only at [60] that she reaches a  conclusion
    as to the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  claim.  Furthermore,  she
    records that some scars are described variously as consistent or highly
    consistent, but provides adequate reasons for finding that the  medical
    report did not assist "very much" in supporting the  appellant's  claim
    of ill-treatment.

18. I accept that the  FTTJ's  treatment  of  the  evidence  of  the  third
    appellant  was  particularly  brief,  nonetheless,  it  was   adequate.
    Contrary to Mr Martin's submissions that the FTTJ merely  rejected  the
    third appellant's evidence as self-serving, the  FTTJ  took  also  into
    account a highly significant discrepancy between the accounts given  by
    the first and second appellants as to the basis for their claim.

19. The FTTJ records that when the appellant was screened, he  stated  that
    his claim was based on his younger brother's  actual  involvement  with
    the LTTE whereas at  his  substantive  interview  he  stated  that  his
    brother was not involved with the LTTE.

20. By contrast, the third appellant, during her screening interview, based
    her claim on the first appellant's actual  involvement  with  the  LTTE
    rather than his brother. Yet, it was never the first appellant's  claim
    that he  had  ever  had  any  involvement  with  the  LTTE.   When  the
    unreliable documentation is also  taken  into  account  which  includes
    birth certificates (said to show the relationship between the appellant
    and SP) which were riddled with discrepancies, court documents  in  the
    name of another and an arrest warrant in the appellant's possession,  I
    consider that the FTTJ did not need to say anything more regarding  the
    third appellant's evidence.

21. The FTTJ notes at [32] that the incident,  which  led  to  the  adverse
    interest of the Sri Lankan authorities  in  SP,  was  a  "bomb  attempt
    against the Pakistani Ambassador."  She  found  at  [34]  that  it  was
    implausible that the appellant would have been released  from  custody,
    even with a substantial bribe  given  the  gravity  of  the  diplomatic
    incident. I consider this to be a finding she  was  entitled  to  make.
    Furthermore, this finding does not stand in isolation and  has  minimal
    importance given the serious concerns as  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's overall case.

22. In conclusion, this was a careful and detailed decision and the  FTTJ's
    overall conclusions were open to her on the evidence.

23. I dismiss the appeal.

24. An anonymity  direction  was  made  by  the  FTTJ  and  I  consider  it
    appropriate that this be continued and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings."

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.


Signed      Date: 28 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
