
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06412/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Sent           |
|On 18th March 2014                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                                     BG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a male citizen of Turkey born 27  October  1990.   He
      originally appealed against the decision of the  respondent  dated  13
      October 2010 (with an extension of time for the filing of  his  appeal
      having been granted) to  refuse  to  grant  him  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection or leave to remain under Article 8 ECHR.

   2. The appellant's appeal came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Jackson sitting at Hatton Cross on 19 November  2013.   The  appellant
      attended and gave evidence.  Both parties were  represented.   In  the
      appellants case he was again represented by Mr Collins.

   3. In a Determination dated 2 December 2013 Judge Jackson  dismissed  the
      appellant's appeal on all grounds finding that the appellant would not
      be at risk upon return in  respect  of  anything  covered  by  Refugee
      Convention.  In respect of the Article 8 appeal the  Judge  noted  the
      appellants marriage but concluded that as  his  wife  was  of  Turkish
      origin and the marriage took place at a time when both he and his wife
      knew his status was precarious would not be unreasonable to expect the
      appellant's wife to either accompany him back to Turkey or support him
      in an application to re-enter for settlement.

   4. The appellant sought  leave  to  appeal  via  grounds  settled  by  Mr
      Collins.  Paragraph 4 of the grounds  make  it  perfectly  clear  that
      leave was not sought in respect of Asylum/Article 3  ECHR/Humanitarian
      Protection.  Leave was sought  in  respect  of  Article  8  alone  and
      paragraphs 5 through to 14 set out the basis of the request.

   5. It was suggested that the judges findings that  the  appellant's  wife
      could "relocate if she so chose" was irrational bearing in  mind  that
      she is a British citizen, has her own business and is pregnant.  It is
      suggested that the judge failed to come to a balanced judgment in  the
      light of "all the material facts" pursuant to the guidance set out buy
      the Court of Appeal in VW & AB v The Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department [2009] EWCA Civ 9.

   6. Paragraph 9 of the grounds states "the Determination (paragraph 49) as
      recording that the appellant's wife did not think she  could  readjust
      to living in Turkey which made it "plainly wrong and  irrational"  for
      the judge to then find that there were no reasons why the  appellant's
      wife could not re-establish herself in Turkey.

   7. The appellant's application for leave then came before  another  Judge
      of the First-Tier Tribunal who, on 30 January 2014, granted leave  and
      in his reasons stated the following:

         "3.  The grounds assert that the judge erred in law and in fact  in
             reaching the decision that he did in  relation  to  Article  8
             ECHR.  The judge found that it would  be  reasonable  for  the
             appellant's wife to relocate to Turkey if she so chose but she
             is a British citizen (although born in Turkey) who  has  lived
             in the UK since the age  of  7  so  that  the  notion  of  her
             relocating  is  irrational.   All   the   appellant's   wife's
             immediate family are in the UK; she has returned to Turkey  on
             only some three or four occasions.  She is an established self-
             employed hairdresser and she is pregnant.  It  is  a  material
             error for the judge to properly take into  account  all  those
             factors.


         4.   In an otherwise careful and well-reasoned determination it  is
             arguable that the  judge's  approach  to  Article  8  and  the
             appellant's British citizen wife amounts to an error  of  law.
             Additionally, it is arguable that the failed to properly  rake
             into account the reasonable foreseeability of the birth of the
             child who will also be a British  citizen.   It  is  arguable,
             following the case of Sanade [2011] UKUT 00048, that it  would
             be unreasonable to expect the appellant's wife  as  a  British
             citizen and the yet to  be  born  but  reasonably  foreseeable
             child who will be a British citizen to leave the UK for a life
             in a different country.


         5.   As this arguable error of law  has  been  identified  all  the
             issues in the grounds are arguable".

   8. Hence the matter comes before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   9. Mr Whitwell indicated that there was no  Rule  24  response  from  the
      respondent save for a very brief "holding" letter  dated  11  February
      2014.

  10. Mr Collins relied upon his grounds  seeking  leave.   The  appellant's
      wife is now 7 months pregnant.  There  is  challenge  to  the  judge's
      conclusions in respect of Article 8 on the  particular  facts  of  the
      case, being that the wife is a UK citizen with  an  expected  delivery
      date of 1 May 2014.   The  correct  analysis  should  not  be  on  the
      question of relocation.  There are ramifications  to  the  appellant's
      wife moving to Turkey.  It has been accepted by  the  judge  that  the
      appellant is a draft evader and at paragraph 91 noted that the parties
      would be  apart  for  "several  years".   Mr  Collins  submitted  that
      paragraph 91 of the Determination evidenced a wrong  approach  by  the
      judge.

  11. Mr Whitwell  in  response  submitted  that  the  judge  had  correctly
      directed himself.  The judge was looking at a family of two people  as
      is the situation as  at  the  date  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  hearing.
      Paragraphs 89, 90 and 91 show that the judge  properly  considered  VW
      (Uganda).  The appellant's wife spoke Turkish and  had  been  to  that
      country  on  visits,  and  they  had  married  not  caring  about  the
      appellant's status.  They had had a family life despite the  appellant
      not having leave to remain.   There  is  no  error  of  law.   It  was
      accepted there would be disruption but  the  appellant  could  make  a
      "spouse application" after he had served any sentence of  imprisonment
      in Turkey.

  12. Mr Collins in reply accepted on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the
      appellant's wife was British but of  Turkish  heritage.   He  accepted
      also that the appellant and his wife formed a relationship and married
      during a time when the appellant's position  was  precarious.   It  is
      accepted that the appellant is a draft evader who faces  imprisonment.
      That could well therefore be years of separation between the appellant
      and his wife (and child).  This was an extremely  intrusive  situation
      from the point of view of assessing proportionality.

  13. At this stage I indicated I was planning to reserve my  determination.
      I canvassed views on the question of  how  the  matter  would  proceed
      should I find an error of law to the extent that the Determination  of
      Judge Jackson should be set aside.   Mr  Whitwell  chose  to  make  no
      comment, whereas Mr Collins indicated that his preferred outcome would
      be for me to remit the case back to  the  First-Tier  to  examine  the
      facts relating to the Article 8 claim.

  14. I have spent a considerable amount  of  time  considering  the  issues
      before me.  I have  noted  in  great  detail  the  contents  of  Judge
      Jackson's Determination, the grounds seeking  leave,  the  submissions
      made at the hearing and to the authorities presented to me  especially
      that of VW.  In addition I have noted the reasons given by  the  judge
      in granting leave to appeal.

  15. The Determination Judge Jackson is challenged solely on  the  question
      of Article 8 ECHR.  His findings and  conclusion  in  respect  of  the
      asylum appeal are not challenged.

  16. I am of the view  that  Judge  Jackson's  Determination  is  indeed  a
      careful and well reasoned judgment. I do feel that his conclusions  as
      to the outcome of the Article 8 appeal are based more on  the  Turkish
      heritage of the appellant's wife and the precarious  position  of  the
      appellant at the time of  their  relationship  than  on  the  specific
      circumstances of the case.
  17. In addition and perhaps the deciding factor is the  pregnancy  of  the
      appellant's wife.  I do not consider that Judge Jackson properly  took
      into account the pregnancy.  In reaching this  conclusion  I  note  Mr
      Whitwell's comments regarding the family of two  but  I  consider  the
      reasonable foreseeability of a family of three must  not  be  ignored.
      To quote from VF "it is a balanced judgment of what can reasonably  be
      expected in the light of all the material facts".  I find that not all
      material facts were adequately covered and for that reason an error of
      law occurred in Judge Jackson's Determination.

  18. I consider this to  be  a  material  error  to  the  extent  that  the
      determination with regard to Article 8 ECHR must be  set  aside.   All
      other aspects of that determination (including the  dismissal  of  the
      asylum and humanitarian protection appeals)  are  preserved  including
      the fact that the appellant is a draft evader  and  potentially  faces
      imprisonment upon return to Turkey.

  19. I must now turn my mind to how to dispose of the outstanding Article 8
      appeal.  I have reached a conclusion that a degree of fact finding  is
      appropriate and that the nature of such judicial fact finding which is
      necessary in order for the decision to be remade is such  that  it  is
      appropriate to remit the case to the First-Tier Tribunal to  be  heard
      by a judge other than Judge Jackson.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


