

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06041/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th APRIL 2016                           |On  11th May 2016             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                 MS GA BLACK

                                   Between

                            MR ABU NACHER AHAMMAD
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala (Home officer presenting officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, whose date of birth  is  01.01.1983,  is  a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh.  He appeals against a decision and reasons  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Robinson) ("FTT") promulgated on 8th January 2016,
    in which he dismissed the appeals on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds.

FTT decision

2.     The appellant's claim was that he faced a real  risk  of  persecution
    as an atheist blogger.  Whilst accepting that the  background  material
    was externally corroborative of the risk on return, the FTT found  that
    the appellant was not credible. The FTT concluded that his evidence  of
    recent internet activity or blogging had  been  produced  in  order  to
    bolster his weak asylum claim.  In any event the FTT concluded that the
    evidence failed to show that he was  or  would  be  identifiable  as  a
    blogger and/or as a person who had distributed anti  Islamic  material.
    The FTT found that the appellant would not express views  offensive  to
    Muslims in Bangladesh as he did not do so in the UK and  where  he  was
    not offensive to Muslims.

Grounds for permission

3.    The grounds renewing the application for permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal were undated.  The grounds refer  to  the  decision  and
    reasons by FTTJ Robinson and to a refusal of permission by  FTTJ  Ford,
    but the paragraphs cited in the grounds do not correlate with those  in
    FTTJ Robinson's decision.  It appears that the cited paragraphs related
    to a previous decision and reasons before FTTJ Hembrough promulgated on
    14th May 2015 and which was set aside.

4.    The grounds of appeal to the FTT (also undated) which were  considered
    by FTTJ Ford and do relate to the FTT decision, contend  that  the  FTT
    erred by failing to consider that the appellant's  profile  was  public
    and that he identified himself as an atheist.  Reliance was  placed  on
    articles showing that persons who killed  atheists  had  not  seen  any
    blogs.  The FTT ignored an extract from Wikipedia listing the appellant
    as an atheist in Bangladesh.  FTTJ  Ford  concluded  that  no  material
    error of law arose.  On  renewal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  relying  on
    grounds of appeal relating to the  previous  decision,  permission  was
    granted by UTJ Finch.

Error of law hearing

5.    The appellant was not represented  at  the  hearing  and  he  did  not
    attend in person.  There were no representations made on his behalf. Ms
    Fijiwala submitted that the appeal should  be  dismissed.  The  grounds
    renewing the application for permission to the UT did not relate to the
    relevant decision and reasons.

6.     Having considered the submission made by Ms Fijiwala I dismissed  the
    appeal.  The renewed grounds of application  failed  to  challenge  the
    correct decision and reasons made by the FTT.  The  appellant  made  no
    attempt to argue any grounds before  me.   The  grounds  could  not  be
    sustained.

7.     In  dismissing  the  appeal  I  have  also  taken  into  account  the
    overriding objective under Rule  2  (2)(b)  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. In so doing I have considered whether or not  the
    grounds submitted to the First-tier Tribunal show any material error of
    law by the FTT. I am satisfied that the FTT  made  no  error.   In  its
    decision the FTT clearly considered all  of  the  evidence  as  to  the
    appellant's atheism including his Facebook profile  and  the  Wikipedia
    entry [ 47 -52, 54,58 and 59].  Further  although  the  FTT  took  into
    account the appellant's failure to refer to the blogging issue  in  his
    screening interview, there was in addition ample  evidence  before  the
    FTT to support  the  finding  that  the  appellant's  account  was  not
    credible.  There was  no  material error of law.  The FTT gave adequate
    reasons for concluding  that  the  appellant  would  not  express  anti
    Islamic views on  return  to  Bangladesh.   The  grounds  amount  to  a
    disagreement with the findings made and reasons given by the FTT.

Decision

8.      There is no material error of law.
     The decision and reasons shall stand.
     The appeal is dismissed.






                               Signed                          Date
                                   6.5.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               No anonymity order
                               No fee award




                               Signed                          Date
                                   6.5.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


