
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06866/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd February 2015                          |On 11th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               ZOHAIB KHURSHID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tettey, Counsel, instructed by Parker Rhodes
Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Miss R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Upson made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 14 October 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 9th December 1984.   He
    married on 1st May 2010.  He moved to Muscat in November  2010  seeking
    work but his wife could not get a visa and they went  to  Lahore  where
    they stayed for a month.  There they arranged to  leave  Pakistan  with
    the help of an agent.  He entered the UK on  25th  June  2011  and,  in
    April 2012, travelled in a lorry to Belgium.  He said that  he  claimed
    asylum in Belgium but returned to the UK on 13th September 2013.

 3. The basis of his claim is that he married  a  woman  from  a  different
    caste and whose family seeks to do him harm.  He says that an  FIR  has
    been issued against  him  asserting  that   he  kidnapped  a  girl  and
    accusing him of rape.  His wife's family have made threats against  his
    friend and have shot his cousin.

 4. The judge did not believe the Appellant's account of the  events  which
    led him to claim asylum in the UK and dismissed the appeal.   He  noted
    that there was no independent evidence to support it and said  that  he
    had had regard to the fact that although he claimed to have come to the
    UK  as  a  place  of  safety  he  did  not  seek  asylum  on   arrival.
    Notwithstanding his claimed  lack  of  education  the  judge  found  it
    difficult to accept that he would not have sought protection on arrival
    in the United Kingdom and his  position  was  damaged  further  by  his
    leaving  to  go  to  Belgium.   He  said  that  these  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's account were against him when considering credibility.

 5. The judge said that he found it difficult to accept the  Appellant  had
    not kept his Nikka Nama with  him  because  it  was  a  very  important
    document and he would have wanted to keep it close.

 6. He did not accept the Appellant's explanation for not  having  reported
    problems with his wife's family to the police because he did  not  want
    to give his wife a bad name.  So far as  the  FIR  was  concerned,  the
    judge could not understand how the Appellant would not know whether the
    police had been looking for him, which was his evidence, and if an  FIR
    was issued against him it was  inconceivable  that  his  wife's  family
    would search for him but not the police.  He could not accept that  his
    wife's family, who did come looking for him, would not have  passed  on
    their knowledge of his whereabouts to the police.

 7. So far as the copies of the  death  certificates  were  concerned,  the
    judge rejected the Appellant's explanation that his brother had  to  go
    behind the wishes of his mother in obtaining copies because his  family
    blame him for their predicament. The judge also observed  that  if  the
    Appellant was wanted by the police for serious offences  he  would  not
    have been able to  travel  in  and  out  of  Pakistan  in  the  way  he
    described.

 8. Finally, even if the Appellant had problems with his wife's  family  he
    could have reported his difficulties to the police and in any event  it
    remained open to him to relocate within Pakistan.

The Grounds of Application

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had misapplied Section 8 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants etc)  Act  2004  by  making  a  general  adverse  credibility
    findings  against  the  Appellant  and  concluding  that  he  had  been
    untruthful  without  taking  into   account   all   of   the   relevant
    circumstances.  The judge had also erred in  placing  weight  upon  the
    fact that the Appellant could not produce his Nikka Nama when it  could
    not have contributed in any way to supporting the claim of having  been
    attacked by members of  his wife's family.  The conclusions in  respect
    of the FIR  were  reached  without  taking  into  account  the  country
    background material which confirms that there are serious  shortcomings
    within  the  Pakistani  police.   The  Appellant  had  given  a  proper
    explanation for the production  of  a  photocopied  death  certificate.
    Finally the judge did not  consider  the  Appellant's  claim  that  his
    wife's family could use the application process for an ID card in order
    to find him against the background material and was wrong  to  made  an
    adverse finding by linking the issue of the ID card to the FIR.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Simpson  on  17th  November
    2014.

11. On 5th December 2014  the  Respondent  served  a  Reply  defending  the
    determination.

Submissions

12. Mr Tettey relied on his detailed grounds and submitted that  the  judge
    had failed to consider the Appellant's case in the round  and  had  not
    engaged with the  country  background  material.   He  had  engaged  in
    speculation and his reasoning was inadequate.

13. Mrs Petterson defended the determination and submitted that the grounds
    amount to a disagreement with the decision.  In any event, no challenge
    had been made to the judge's conclusions  that  the  Appellant  had  an
    internal flight option available to  him.

Findings and Conclusions

14. There is no error of law in this determination.

15. Section 8 of the 2004 Act states that:

         "In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on behalf
         of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human  rights  claim,  a
         deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  the  claimant's
         credibility, of any behaviour to which this Section applies."

16.  The  judge  did  not  conclude  that  the  delay  in  the  claim   was
    determinative of credibility.   There  is  no  error  in  starting  his
    consideration with the fact of the delay in the claim,  which  he  then
    properly considered in detail before concluding, at paragraph 35,  that
    Section 8 should be applied against the Appellant in this case.

17. The judge did not base his findings upon the lack of a Nikka Nama,  but
    that would at the least have confirmed  that  the  marriage  had  taken
    place.  The judge was plainly entitled  to  consider  that  there  were
    inconsistencies in the Appellant's explanation for not having  reported
    matters to the police and to conclude that the family would have  given
    the police whatever knowledge they had of his whereabouts.  It was open
    to the judge to reject the Appellant's explanation for  the  fact  that
    the death certificates were only copies. He was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the Appellant's account  of  being  the  subject  of  an  FIR  was
    inconsistent with his being wanted by the police for serious offences.

18. In any event, no attempt is made in the grounds  to  grapple  with  the
    judge's unchallenged and wholly sustainable conclusion  that,  even  if
    the Appellant had difficulties with  his wife' family, he  plainly  had
    an internal flight option open to him.

Decision

19. The original judge did not err in law and  his  decision  stands.   The
    Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 3rd February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

