

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06670/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Manchester Crown Court     |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On : 17 March 2016                    |On : 12 April 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [a b]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood of Rochdale Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant claims to be a national of  Somalia  born  on  [  ]  1996.  He
travelled to the  United  Kingdom  by  aeroplane  using  a  false  passport,
arriving in March 2014. On 12 March 2014 he claimed asylum.  His  claim  was
refused on 22 August 2014 and  the  following  day  the  respondent  made  a
decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.

The appellant appealed against  that  decision  and  his  appeal  was  heard
before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  20  November  2014   and   dismissed.
Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 12 January 2015.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claimed to belong to the Bajuni tribe and  to  have  lived  in
Chula, part of the Bajuni islands off the coast of Somalia.  He  claimed  to
speak Kibajuni and a little Arabic but to speak no Somali other than  a  few
words. His father was a fisherman.  In  2004  his  family  moved  to  Koyama
because they were attacked many times in Chula by  the  majority  clans.  In
2004 his mother and sister were raped in front of him. They lived in  Koyama
from 2004 until 2010, during which time they experienced a lot  of  violence
from majority clans. In 2010 he went fishing with his  father  and  returned
to find the village deserted after being  attacked  by  Dawood  militia.  He
believed that his mother and siblings fled to avoid that attack and  he  had
no news of them since that incident. He and his  father  were  abducted  and
detained in a camp in Koyama and the people  who  detained  them  told  them
that they were Al Shabab and that his father was  considered  to  be  a  spy
working for the government.  He  and  his  father  were  ill-treated  whilst
detained and managed to escape after a week. A man detained  with  them  was
killed as a suspected government spy. The appellant claimed that he and  his
father returned to Chula and went to stay with his father's brother and  his
family. They remained in Chula until 2013. His uncle was killed in  2013  by
majority clan members and Al Shabab and his body was brought  to  them.  The
appellant claimed that he left Somalia a few months  later.  They  travelled
to Yemen by ship. His father paid for the journey with some  gold  or  money
he had managed to keep safe. They stayed in  a  mosque  in  Yemen,  but  his
father passed away after two months.  After three months he was assisted  by
an agent in leaving Yemen. He travelled to  unknown  countries,  staying  in
one for three months, and then flew  to  the  UK  using  a  travel  document
containing someone else's photograph. He would be persecuted if  he  had  to
return to Somalia because he was a member of a minority clan  and  a  minor.
He feared the majority clans and Al Shabab.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was Somali from the Bajuni islands. It was noted that he  was  no  longer  a
minor. It was not accepted that he was at risk of persecution  as  a  Bajuni
clan member and it was noted that his  account  of  the  situation  for  the
Bajunis was inconsistent with the country information.  The  respondent  did
not accept that the appellant and his father were  detained  by  Al  Shabab.
The respondent considered that the appellant could  safely  be  returned  to
Mogadishu and that his removal would not breach his human rights.

The appellant appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  his
appeal was heard before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lever  on  20  November
2014. Judge Lever considered that the appellant's inability to name  all  of
the Bajuni islands carried little  evidential  weight,  but  likewise  found
that the fact that he spoke Kibajuni was also not  determinative,  since  it
was  spoken  in  other  bordering  countries.  The  judge  found  that   the
appellant's account of his journey to the UK undermined the  credibility  of
his account  of  his  circumstances  in  Somalia.  He  did  not  accept  the
appellant's account of his detention and escape, nor  any  other  aspect  of
his claim, and was satisfied that he did not come from Chula or  Kayama.  He
did not consider the appellant to be at  risk  on  the  basis  of  his  clan
membership or on any other basis and considered that his removal  would  not
breach his  human  rights.  Accordingly  he  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
grounds, commenting that there had been no  submissions  on  Article  8  and
that it did not, in any event, arise.


Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge had erred by failing to take account of the  country  guidance  in  KS
(Minority Clans, Bajuni, ability to speak Kibajuni) Somalia CG [2004]  UKIAT
00271 and by failing to make a finding on the appellant's nationality;  that
the judge had misapplied the standard of  proof;  that  the  judge  had  not
particularised the evidential basis upon which he made his adverse  findings
in relation to the appellant's journey to the UK; and  that  the  judge  had
erred by failing to make an assessment under Article 8 when  that  had  been
relied upon by the appellant.

Permission to appeal was granted on 12 January 2015.

Hearing and submissions

Mr Wood relied upon, and expanded upon, the grounds of appeal. He  submitted
that the judge's decision should be set aside and re-made  by  allowing  the
appeal on the basis of the  appellant's  clan  membership  and  the  country
guidance in KS and on  the  basis  that  he  had  no  means  of  support  in
Mogadishu. The judge had applied the wrong standard of proof  and  had  made
assumptions using western logic when making  his  adverse  findings  on  the
appellant's journey. He had erred by failing to consider Article 8.

Mr McVeety submitted that the judge's rejection of the  appellant's  account
of his clan membership was consistent with the guidance in [43(ii)]  of  KS,
that the judge had not misapplied the standard of  proof  and  that  he  had
speculated appropriately in regard to relevant aspects  of  the  appellant's
journey. Mr McVeety conceded, however that the judge had  erred  by  failing
to consider Article 8 when it had been relied upon.


Mr Wood reiterated his submissions in response and asked that the appeal  be
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the appellant's Article 8  claim  to
be assessed. There was some discussion as to what purpose  would  be  served
by remitting the case on that basis when the  evidence  was  already  before
me. Mr Wood submitted that the appellant was  entitled  to  have  his  claim
considered in full and that his foster  parents  would  wish  to  give  oral
evidence. I pointed out to him that they  had  not  provided  oral  evidence
previously or even adduced statements when they had the  opportunity  to  do
so before Judge Lever and asked him whether  the  appellant's  circumstances
had changed since  that  hearing.  Mr  Wood  was  unable  to  assist  and  I
concluded that no purpose would be served by remitting the case to  consider
Article 8 if no error of law were otherwise found in  the  judge's  decision
(having  reserved  my  decision  in  that  regard),  but  I  gave  him   the
opportunity to present oral evidence before me, given that  the  appellant's
foster father was present. I did not consider the absence of an  interpreter
to be a reason  not  to  proceed  when  it  was  clear  that  the  appellant
conversed in English with his foster family.


The appellant's foster father,  Mr  Khan,  then  gave  evidence  before  me,
confirming that the appellant had been living with  his  family  since  2014
and was very close to them, particularly to his son who was 15 years of  age
and whom he considered as a brother. Mr Khan confirmed  that  the  appellant
was financially supported by Leeds social services and would continue to  be
so supported until the age of 21, as was the usual practice. He  was  trying
to  help  the  appellant  develop  some  independence  but  his  desire  was
currently to remain living with his family.   The  appellant  did  not  give
evidence.

Both parties made further submissions in regard to the  appellant's  Article
8 claim.

Consideration and findings.

It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that Judge Lever failed to  apply
the  principles  set  out  at  [43]  of  KS  in  assessing  the  appellant's
nationality and clan membership and that he failed to make  proper  findings
in that regard.  However  I  would  agree  with  Mr  McVeety  that,  on  the
contrary, the judge has plainly had regard to, and followed the guidance  in
KS, albeit not specifically  citing  the  case  by  name,  but  nevertheless
confirming at [30] that he had had regard to the relevant country  guidance.
His findings followed the guidance in [43] of KS, commencing initially  with
his finding at [21] that the fact that the appellant spoke Kibajuni was  not
a determinative factor. In  line  with  [43(ii)]  of  KS,  he  conducted  an
overall assessment of credibility, giving  full  and  detailed  reasons  for
rejecting the appellant's account of having come from the Bajuni islands.

At [38] the judge emphatically rejected the appellant's claim to  have  come
from Chula or Kayama and rejected his account of his  experiences  in  those
places. His adverse credibility  findings  were  based  not  only  upon  the
appellant's account of his journey but also upon his  detailed  findings  at
[32] to [37], which included the lack of  any  proper  explanation  for  his
father  having  been  accused  of  being  a  government  spy,  the  lack  of
credibility of his account of his escape from Al Shabab,  the  lack  of  any
effort  to  locate  the  rest  of  the  family  upon  their   release,   the
contradiction between the account of the loss of  contact  with  his  family
and the reference to siblings in the UK and the lack of previous mention  of
the death of his uncle.


The grounds challenge the judge's findings about the appellant's journey  to
the UK, on the grounds that they were purely  speculative.  However,  as  Mr
McVeety submitted, it was not unreasonable for the judge to  find  that  the
details provided by the  appellant  himself  in  relation  to  his  journey,
including air flights, false passports and agents, suggested  a  significant
financial outlay which was wholly  inconsistent  with  his  account  of  his
family's circumstances and background, in particular on the  basis  of  clan
membership, and with his account  of  his  father's  abduction,  escape  and
flight to Yemen. I would agree with Mr McVeety that  the  conclusions  drawn
by the judge on these matters were open to him.


The grounds also challenge the judge's adverse credibility findings  on  the
basis that he applied the wrong standard of proof, referring  in  particular
to the second to fourth sentences in [39] of his decision.  With  regard  to
the second and third sentences, it seems to me that  the  judge  was  making
clear that, whilst not accepting that the appellant  had  demonstrated  that
he was a Somali national of the Bajuni clan, he was prepared to assess  risk
on return to Mogadishu on that basis. I see no error in  him  proceeding  on
that basis. In any event I agree with  Mr  McVeety  that,  whilst  taken  in
isolation those sentences may not have been expressed  in  the  clearest  of
terms, it  is  nevertheless  plain  from  a  consideration  of  the  judge's
findings as a whole that the correct standard of proof was  applied  to  the
evidence and to the question of risk on return. The judge  directed  himself
appropriately in regard to the burden and standard of proof at [16] to  [18]
and there is no indication in any of his findings and  conclusions  that  he
did not follow that self-direction appropriately.


In assessing risk on return to Mogadishu the judge  had  careful  regard  to
the expert report, in particular paragraphs  36  to  42,  and  gave  careful
consideration to the country guidance in MOJ &  Ors  (Return  to  Mogadishu)
(Rev 1) (CG) [2014] UKUT 442, applying his own findings on  the  appellant's
family circumstances, origins and experiences to the guidance at  paragraphs
(xi) and (xii) of the headnote.  Having,  for  reasons  fully  and  properly
given, rejected the appellant's  account  of  his  family's  background  and
origins and having rejected his account of the lack  of  family  support  in
terms of their presence and financial circumstances, he concluded  that  the
appellant had failed to demonstrate that  he  would  fall  within  the  risk
categories set out in those paragraphs. That was a conclusion  that  he  was
entitled to reach for the reasons fully and cogently given.

For all of those reasons I find that the judge made no errors of law in  his
decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal   on   asylum,   humanitarian
protection and Article 3 human rights grounds.


Turning to Article 8, Mr McVeety conceded that the judge had  erred  in  law
in that respect since it was clear that, contrary to the judge's comment  at
[41], it was a matter that had been pursued before him. As already stated  I
did not consider that it was appropriate to remit the  case  to  the  First-
tier Tribunal. Whilst Article 8 was relied upon  before  the  judge,  it  is
clear from the limited evidence before him, the skeleton  argument  and  the
judge's record of proceedings that it was not  a  matter  pursued  with  any
particular vigour. No oral evidence was called from  the  appellant  or  his
foster parents in relation to Article 8  and  neither  were  any  statements
produced in the appeal bundle in that regard. Paragraphs 19  to  20  of  the
skeleton argument before the judge provided brief arguments.


There has been no change in the appellant's circumstances  since  that  time
to justify a further opportunity to present such evidence before the  First-
tier Tribunal. The appellant had been  put  on  notice,  in  the  directions
served with the grant of permission, that in the event of  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal being set aside, it  was  possible  that  the  Upper
Tribunal would proceed to re-make the  decision  and  that  accordingly  any
further evidence relied  upon  should  be  submitted  for  the  hearing.  No
further evidence had been submitted and in  any  event  there  was  no  such
evidence. I was able to hear oral evidence myself as the appellant's  foster
father was present at the hearing before me. Having heard that evidence  and
Mr Wood's submissions thereon, I make the following findings on Article 8.


The appellant is unable to meet the criteria in Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
276ADE(1) and that much  is  agreed.  As  to  any  compelling  circumstances
existing outside the rules to justify a grant of leave,  there  are  clearly
none. I do not accept that the relationship between the  appellant  and  his
foster family can be described as family life for the  purposes  of  Article
8, as is claimed. Mr Khan could  not  recall  how  long  the  appellant  had
resided with his family and  believed  the  appellant  to  have  joined  his
family when under the age of 16, whereas he was in fact almost 18  years  of
age. Whilst I nevertheless am prepared to accept that a  close  relationship
has developed between the appellant and  his  foster  family  and  that  the
appellant is close to his foster brother, there is no  evidence  that  those
ties are particularly or compellingly strong and it is clear  that  this  is
simply an arrangement which is supported  by  social  services.  Even  if  I
accepted that family life had been established, and on the  basis  that  the
appellant has established a private life in the UK,  the  evidence  is  very
limited and does not in any  way  approach  a  level  which  could  possibly
outweigh  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  an  effective  immigration
control.

Accordingly, any error made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  failing  to
make findings on Article 8 is not material, since the  appellant  could  not
possibly have succeeded before him in any event. Alternatively, even if  the
decision of Judge Lever were set aside  by  reason  of  a  failure  to  make
findings, in re-making the decision I would dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
on Article 8 grounds for the reasons given.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve  an
error on a point of law requiring the decision to be set  aside.  I  do  not
set aside the decision. The decision to dismiss the appeal stands.






                               Signed


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
