
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06137/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AR
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pennington (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  I
make an anonymity order.  Unless the Tribunal or a Court directs  otherwise,
no report of these proceedings or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
directly or indirectly identify  the  original  appellant.   This  direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any failure to  comply  with  this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.



      1. The appellant is  a  citizen  of  Iran.   I  have  anonymised  this
         decision because it refers to a claim for asylum.

Procedural history

      2. In a decision dated  12  January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Mathews dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights
         grounds.  The Judge wholly rejected the appellant's claim  that  he
         converted to Christianity in Iran and for reasons relating to  this
         suffered difficulties  whilst  there.   There  was  another  linked
         aspect to the appellant's claim i.e. that since arriving in the  UK
         on 18 February  2014  he  had  become  baptised  and  was  a  fully
         practising  and  genuine  convert  to  the  Christian  faith.   The
         appellant relied upon  supporting  evidence  from  members  of  his
         Church including two individuals who attended to give  evidence  on
         his behalf.  The Judge rejected this aspect of his  claim  as  well
         and dismissed the appeal.

      3. The appellant appealed against this decision  arguing,  inter  alia
         that the Judge's rejection of the appellant's Christianity  in  the
         UK was not adequately reasoned.  In a decision dated  11  May  2015
         Judge Reeds granted permission to appeal on this basis.

      4. The matter now comes before  me  to  decide  whether  the  decision
         contains an error of law.

Hearing

      5. Ms Pennington repeated the points made in the grounds  but  focused
         upon  the  lack  of  adequate  reasons  provided  for  the  Judge's
         conclusion that the appellant is not a genuine practising Christian
         in the UK.  I then heard from Mr McVeety who asked me to find  that
         the Judge was entitled to reject the genuineness of the appellant's
         activities in the UK because he rejected and gave full reasons  for
         his rejection of the appellant's conversion in Iran.

      6. After hearing Mr McVeety in full I indicated that I  was  satisfied
         that the Judge failed to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting  the
         appellant's claim  to  be  a  genuine  Christian  in  The  UK.   Ms
         Pennington  confirmed  that  it  was  accepted  that  the  findings
         regarding what took place in Iran  were  unchallenged  and  in  the
         premises she did not object  to  these  findings  being  preserved.
         Both representatives then agreed to the directions I set out below.

Findings

      7. As Mr McVeety accepted, the question before me is  whether  or  not
         the Judge provided sufficient reasoning for his conclusion that the
         appellant is not a genuine practicing Christian. I accept that  the
         reasons need not  be  elaborate,  and  need  not  deal  with  every
         argument presented or piece of evidence relied upon.

      8. Judge Mathews provided  comprehensive  reasons  for  rejecting  the
         appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity in Iran [17-25].   I
         accept Mr McVeety's submission that these findings are relevant  to
         the appellant's claim to be a genuine Christian whilst in  the  UK,
         and the Judge was entitled to take this into  account  when  making
         findings regarding Christianity in the UK [29].  I also accept that
         the Judge  was  plainly  aware  of  and  directed  himself  to  the
         supporting evidence from members of the  appellant's  Church  [26].
         This evidence was  not  just  limited  to  the  appellant's  Church
         attendance but also their opinion after observing him  closely  for
         an extended  period  of  time  that  the  appellant  was  genuinely
         committed to Christianity.  The Judge was of course not obliged  to
         accept their views but in my judgment in the circumstances of  this
         particular case the Judge was obliged to provide reasons why he did
         not accept those views to be well-founded.

      9. In these circumstances I invited Mr McVeety to outline where in the
         decision the Judge has given reasons for rejecting the  appellant's
         claim, as supported by witnesses, that he was a genuine  practicing
         Christian in the UK  [29].   Mr  McVeety  accepted  that  the  only
         discernible reason was the Judge's overall rejecting of credibility
         particularly in relation to the events  in  Iran.   The  difficulty
         with this submission is that  the  Judge  was  prepared  to  accept
         certain parts of the appellant's evidence as supported by witnesses
         including his claim to have attended Church and to have undergone a
         service of baptism [26].  In addition it was entirely possible  for
         the Judge to reject what happened in Iran  but  nonetheless  accept
         that  the  appellant  is  nonetheless  a  genuine  Christian.   The
         findings  as  to  what  happened  in  Iran  are  relevant  but  not
         determinative.  Where a Judge is prepared to accept  a  significant
         aspect of an appellant's claim, as here, it is incumbent  upon  him
         to explain why he did not accept another significant aspect.  Those
         reasons need not be detailed but reasons must be provided.  It  may
         be that the Judge did not consider that  the  witnesses  had  taken
         into account the appellant's false claim to conversion in  Iran  or
         had not sufficiently tested the appellant's commitment in light  of
         this or were not in a sufficient position of leadership to offer an
         informed view.  There may  be  many  more  possible  reasons.   The
         difficulty is that no reason was provided  for  not  accepting  the
         witnesses' evidence that the appellant was  genuine  yet  accepting
         their evidence that he attended Church.   In  my  view  it  is  not
         sufficient for  the  Judge  to  reject  the  evidence  provided  by
         independent witnesses on the basis of his  rejection  of  what  the
         appellant claimed happened in Iran.  In failing  to  give  adequate
         reasons for this discrete part of the appellant's  case  the  Judge
         has erred in law.

Remittal

     10. In my view the fair and proportionate way in  which  to  deal  with
         this case  having  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior
         President's Practice Statements and given the nature and extent  of
         the factual findings to be made  is  to  remit  the  matter  for  a
         hearing on a limited basis in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge's
         findings regarding the appellant's claim to have converted in  Iran
         and the consequences shall be preserved.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
         shall  however  re-make  a  decision  on  the  genuineness  of  the
         appellant's conversion to Christianity in the UK in  light  of  the
         preserved findings, and the likely consequences  of  this  for  the
         appellant in Iran.

Decision

     11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law
         and is set aside.

     12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision to
         be re-made on the limited basis set out at para 10.

Directions

(1)   The matter shall be listed for the first  available  date  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.  TE: 2 hrs.  Farsi interpreter  required.   The  issues
to be determined are set out in para 10 above.

(2)   The appellant  shall  file  and  serve  a  comprehensive  indexed  and
paginated bundle of all relevant documents to the issue to  be  re-made  and
any witness statements relied upon before 1 October 2015.

(3)   The SSHD shall set out any updated position before 1 November 2015.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 27 August 2015
