

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      AA/06662/2013





                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 25 November 2013                       |On 6 December 2013       |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                                     R S

                                                        Respondent
                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel
For  the  Respondent:             Mr  G  Saunders,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Background

   1.         On 10 September 2013 permission to appeal was  granted  to the
      Secretary of State in respect of her challenge to the determination of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence. To avoid any errors I refer to R S
      as the applicant.
   2.       The applicant is a Sri Lankan national of Tamil  ethnicity  born
      on 17 July 1987. He initially entered the UK as a student and  claimed
      asylum after a recent visit to Colombo during which he claimed to have
      been detained and tortured.  His  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence who found him credible and concluded he  would
      be at risk on return as he would be  perceived  as  a  threat  to  the
      security of the state on account of the  activities  he  confessed  to
      under torture.  The Secretary of State challenged the determination on
      the basis that GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka  CG
      [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) had not been properly applied.

   3.       At the hearing before me on 25 November, Mr  Saunders  submitted
      that the applicant did not fall into one of the  risk  categories  set
      out in GJ although he accepted that the list was not exhaustive.

   4.       In response, Ms Jegarajah pointed to  various  sections  of  the
      interview record where the applicant gave evidence that under  torture
      he had confessed to involvement with the LTTE both in Sri Lanka and in
      the UK and that he had also confessed to the transportation of weapons
      for them. On that basis the judge had found that he would be perceived
      as a security risk and his application of GJ to the findings  of  fact
      was as it should be.

   5.       At the conclusion of the hearing I upheld the  determination  of
      the judge and I now give my reasons for so doing.

   6.       Had the Secretary of State challenged the  credibility  findings
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge then she  may  have  had  a  case  to
      argue. However, as the findings were accepted, it is difficult to  see
      how she could maintain that the applicant, who was recently  arrested,
      detained, tortured and who confessed to all kinds of  accusations  put
      to him, would not be seen as a threat to the security of the state  on
      his return. It was also accepted that release upon payment of a  bribe
      was not  indicative  of  a  lack  of  interest  on  the  part  of  the
      authorities.

   7.       Having reached positive credibility findings, the judge properly
      considered GJ (at paragraphs 26, 29, 32 and 33). In the context of his
      unchallenged factual findings,  he  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
      applicant had been interrogated  in  January  2013  on  the  basis  of
      intelligence received that he had participated in assisting  the  LTTE
      with  transporting  weapons  and  that  he  would  be   suspected   of
      involvement in the resurgence  of  the  LTTE.  His  finding  that  the
      appellant faced a real risk of persecution on return was one  open  to
      him on the evidence and was properly made in accordance  with  country
      guidance.  No error of law has been established.

Decision

   8.        The First-tier Tribunal did not make  any  errors  of  law. The
      appeal of the Secretary of State is  dismissed  and  Judge  Lawrence's
      determination allowing the applicant's appeal is upheld.

            Signed:





      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


           25 November 2013









