
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06252/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 March 2016                         |On 18 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     PG
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. H. Sarwar, Counsel instructed by Biruntha
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N. J. Bennett, promulgated on 30 October 2015, in  which
    he dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision
    to refuse to grant asylum.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

    "In an otherwise careful and well reasoned Decision and Reasons  it  is
    nonetheless arguable that  the  Judge  makes  no  express  findings  in
    respect of the Appellant's claim to have  assisted  [MB]  and  [TR]  by
    collecting and depositing money from 2007  to  2008.   The  Appellant's
    claim for asylum is  based  upon  this  activity;  the  Appellant  gave
    evidence that he had been questioned about allegedly fund  raising  for
    the LTTE on account of these activities.  It is further  arguable  that
    the judge failed to adequately assess what the Sri  Lankan  authorities
    may believe or suspect in relation to the Appellant."

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives, following which I reserved my decision.

Submissions

 4. Mr. Sarwar relied on the grounds of appeal.

 5. Mr. McVeety submitted that the judge did  not  doubt  that  the  events
    which the Appellant said had happened in relation to  collecting  funds
    in 2007/2008 had occurred.  I was  referred  to  paragraph  [28].   The
    judge had proceeded on the basis that he  accepted  this  part  of  the
    Appellant's case.  He had not made any express finding because  he  had
    accepted it.  I was referred to paragraph [32] where  the  judge  cited
    the  country  guidance  which  shows  that  the  government  are   only
    interested in what individuals are doing now.  He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant's case did not fit within the risk  categories  in  GJ.   The
    judge was bound to follow GJ, which he had done, as he had  found  that
    the Appellant did not fit into the risk categories set out  there.   He
    submitted that what the Appellant had  done  in  2007/2008  was  of  no
    relevance now.  The judge had adopted the country guidance case,  which
    itself had been upheld twice in the Court of Appeal.

 6. Mr. Sarwar submitted in response that there was an error of law in  the
    judge's failure to make a direct  finding  on  an  issue  which  was  a
    cornerstone of the Appellant's case.  It was presumptuous to state that
    the judge had accepted it,  as  there  was  no  wording  to  that  end.
    Paragraph [28] merely recorded the Appellant's case,  and  he  disputed
    that the judge had accepted  the  Appellant's  case.   The  Appellant's
    initial activity  was  recorded  in  paragraphs  [3]  and  [5]  of  the
    decision.  The fact that the Appellant had been involved in  collecting
    and depositing money in 2007/2008 had informed his detention  in  2013.
    There was an analysis of the 2013 arrest in paragraph [27].  The  judge
    found that it was difficult to see why the Appellant would have been of
    any interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  2013,  but  this  was
    without reference to the  claimed  events  of  2007/2008,  and  without
    having made a finding that they did or did not take  place.   It  could
    not be assumed that he had accepted the  Appellant's  account  of  what
    happened in 2007/2008.

 7. I was referred to the case of MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013]
    UKUT 00641 (IAC), in particular paragraph [6].   The  Appellant's  case
    was  synonymous.   The  judge  had  failed  to  make  a  finding  on  a
    cornerstone issue.  The Appellant's account of  what  he  had  done  in
    2007/2008 was of great  import.   It  had  not  been  rejected  by  the
    Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter, but had  been  considered
    unsubstantiated.

 8. In relation to materiality, I was referred to paragraphs [4] and [5] of
    the grounds of appeal.  There were wider considerations to the case set
    out at paragraphs 5(a) to (f).  I was referred to paragraph [7] of  the
    grounds.  There was additional objective evidence before the First-tier
    Tribunal which postdated GJ.  This  went  to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account of  his  detention  in  2013,  but  this  had  been
    materially discounted by the judge.

Error of law

 9. Paragraph [27] states:

    "This guidance [GJ] is about the risks faced by Tamils returning to Sri
    Lanka.  However, no evidence was placed before me that would justify me
    in concluding that Tamils who lived  in  Sri  Lanka  were  treated  any
    differently.  On the basis of this guidance, it is  very  difficult  to
    see why the Appellant was of any interest to the Sri Lankan authorities
    in 2013.  He did not fit into any of the risk categories identified  in
    paragraph 7.  The Tribunal said that the Sri  Lankan  authorities  knew
    that everyone in the Northern Province had some  level  of  involvement
    with the LTTE during the civil  war  and  that,  in  post-conflict  Sri
    Lanka, an individual's past history  would  only  be  relevant  to  the
    extent that it was perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities to  indicate
    a present risk to the unitary  Sri  Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
    Government.  I was not referred to any background evidence showing that
    Tamils from the east of Sri Lanka are viewed any differently."

10. I find that the judge rejects the Appellant's account  of  having  been
    detained in 2013 on the basis of the guidance in GJ indicating that  he
    would not have been of any interest to the  authorities  in  2013.   He
    finds that the Appellant does not fit into any of  the  categories  set
    out in paragraph [7] of GJ.  He does this without any reference to what
    the Appellant claims to have done in 2007/2008.   He  quotes  paragraph
    [8] of GJ which states that the Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is
    based on sophisticated intelligence.  He rejects the Appellant's  claim
    to have been detained in 2013 on the basis that those who were  in  Sri
    Lanka should be treated no differently to those who were returning from
    Sri Lanka, to whom the guidance in GJ applies.

11. In the grounds of appeal, paragraph [5], it is submitted that the Upper
    Tribunal recorded evidence in GJ which suggested that  the  authorities
    were still searching for  and  detaining  persons  suspected  of  being
    operatives or sympathisers.  It was submitted that  this  evidence  had
    been before the judge.

12. Having rejected the Appellant's claim to have been  detained  in  2013,
    the judge then turns to the Appellant's account of his  involvement  in
    2007/2008.  Paragraph [28] states:

    "The Appellant's case is that his involvement with the LTTE  in  2007/8
    was indirect, at a very low level and that, by  March  2013,  had  long
    since ended.  It is therefore very difficult to see how it  could  have
    been seen as showing that he was a present risk to the unitary state or
    to the Government of Sri Lanka.  His involvement was  indirect  because
    he was never a member of the LTTE  or  of  any  organisation  that  was
    connected with the LTTE or that he was otherwise  associated  with  any
    such organisation.  His involvement was at such a low level that he did
    not even realise at the time that he was helping the LTTE: he said that
    he thought he was collecting money for those who were  suffering  as  a
    result of the civil war.  His account shows that he did this at a  very
    low level.  He said in paragraph  12  of  his  statement  that  he  was
    sometimes asked to collect money from houses or businesses and  he  was
    sometimes asked to meet someone who would give him money  in  a  public
    place.  He does not claim to have asked anyone for financial support or
    even to have collected money publicly, for example in a collection box.
     He does not claim to have taken the money to any building occupied  by
    the LTTE: he says that he either gave it to friends  or  paid  it  into
    someone's bank  account.   He  does  not  claim  to  have  handled  any
    particularly significant sums."

13. There is no clear finding in this paragraph that the Appellant assisted
    the LTTE in 2007/2008 by collecting money as  he  claims.   It  appears
    that the judge  may  have  accepted  the  Appellant's  account  by  his
    statement that "his account shows that  he  did  this  at  a  very  low
    level."  However, the language of the rest of the paragraph is in terms
    of his "claims" to have carried  out,  or  not  to  have  carried  out,
    certain activities.  I find  that  it  cannot  be  inferred  from  this
    paragraph that the judge accepted the Appellant's account of events  in
    2007/2008.

14. This part of the Appellant's claim was considered in paragraphs [14] to
    [16] of the reasons for refusal letter.  The Respondent considered this
    part of the claim to be unsubstantiated.  The only reason that she  did
    not give the Appellant the benefit of the doubt, finding  that  he  did
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 339L, was because he had  failed
    to claim asylum at the earliest possible opportunity available.  In the
    light of this, I find that it was particularly important for the  judge
    to make findings on this issue, as it was rejected  by  the  Respondent
    not because of inconsistencies in the Appellant's account, nor  because
    it was inconsistent with  the  background  evidence,  but  because  the
    Appellant had delayed in claiming  asylum.   I  find  that  it  remains
    unclear whether the Appellant assisted the LTTE in 2007/2008.   I  find
    that the  failure  to  make  a  clear  finding  on  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim is an error of law.

15. Whether or not this amounts to a material  error  of  law  rests  to  a
    certain  extent  on  whether  the  Appellant  would  fall  within   the
    categories set out in GJ, had the judge found that he had assisted  the
    LTTE in 2007/2008,  and  then  as  a  result  had  found  that  it  was
    reasonably likely that he had been detained as claimed in 2013.  It was
    submitted by Mr. McVeety that the Appellant simply did not  fit  within
    the risk categories set out in GJ.

16. I find that whether or not the Appellant assisted the LTTE in 2007/2008
    is relevant to the finding that he was detained  in  2013.   The  judge
    made a finding that the Appellant had not been detained in 2013 without
    reference to his previous activity.  I was referred to paragraph [7] of
    the grounds of appeal which cites the COIR report on  Tamil  Separatism
    dated 28 August 2014, to which the judge in the First-tier Tribunal was
    referred.   This  postdates  GJ,  and  confirms  that  the  Sri  Lankan
    government continues to  detain  LTTE  sympathisers.   The  Appellant's
    account is consistent with this; he assisted the  LTTE  so  would  have
    been seen as an LTTE sympathiser.  However, the  judge  made  no  clear
    finding as to whether  or  not  the  Appellant  assisted  the  LTTE  as
    claimed. I find that, had he made a finding on this issue, and  had  he
    taken into account the evidence contained in the COIR, it  is  possible
    that he would have come to a different conclusion about the Appellant's
    claim to have been detained in 2013.  I find that this in turn  affects
    consideration of the risk factors set out in GJ.

17. I find that whether the Appellant assisted the  LTTE  in  2007/2008  is
    central to the Appellant's case.  It is the  basis  of  his  claim  for
    asylum.  It is his case that when  he  was  detained  in  2013  he  was
    questioned about fundraising for  the  LTTE  in  2007/2008,  and  about
    fundraising in the UK.  I find that the extent to which he assisted the
    LTTE, and the extent to which he is perceived as  having  assisted  the
    LTTE, is central to a consideration of the extent  to  which  he  falls
    within the risk factors identified in GJ.

18. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
    necessary to enable this appeal to be remade, and having regard to  the
    overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. I have made an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

The decision involves the making of a material error of law  and  I  set  it
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 14 April 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
