
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06546/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th January 2016                 |On 11th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                           miss Madina Malik Khail
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Head (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
    permission, against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Perry
    hereinafter "the judge") promulgated on 10th November 2014, to  dismiss
    her appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  of  15th  August  2014
    refusing to grant  her  asylum  or  any  other  form  of  international
    protection and deciding to remove her from the UK by way of directions.



 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  She was born on 9th August
    1992.  She says that she left that country on 2nd June 2013,  travelled
    to the UK, then went to Holland, then returned to the  UK,  having  had
    the assistance of an agent, and then claimed asylum.   It  is  recorded
    that she made her claim on 8th June 2013  after  being  stopped  whilst
    apparently attempting to board a plane to Canada with a forged  British
    passport.

 3. In claiming asylum the Appellant said that she had incurred  the  wrath
    of certain members of her family, in particular her father and also  an
    uncle whom she claimed was involved with Hezb-e-Islami, as a result  of
    her wishing to continue to pursue her education  in  Afghanistan.   She
    claimed that the uncle had once hit her, burnt her and shot her in  her
    ankle.  She also said that her father and her uncle  planned  to  force
    her to marry against her will.  She feared persecution at the hands  of
    her family members if she were to be returned.

 4. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant is a national of Afghanistan
    as she claims but did not accept that she had given a truthful  account
    of the events which she relied upon as underpinning her  asylum  claim.
    Hence,  her  application  failed.   She  appealed  to  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.   As  noted  above,  her  appeal  also  failed.   The   judge
    identified what were perceived to be inconsistencies in the Appellant's
    account and in aspects of the evidence she was seeking  to  rely  upon.
    The judge highlighted a number of areas where the Appellant had  failed
    to provide corroborative evidence  of  aspects  of  her  account.   The
    Appellant had, in part, relied upon medical evidence in support of  her
    claim, principally, a medical report prepared by Dr  J  Cohen  of  22nd
    October 2014.  In analysing the medical evidence,  in  particular  that
    report, the judge said this;

         "70. I turn now to the evidence of the injuries  sustained  by  the
             Appellant when she says she was shot by the uncle.   Dr  Cohen
             says that the Appellant's scars  are  "highly  consistent  and
             typical of the attributions given ...  it is my view very much
             more likely that the injury was sustained as described [by the
             Appellant] than due to an accidental  cause."   Dr  Cohen  did
             consider a number of points; -whether more scarring  would  be
             expected;  the  fabrication  of  the  physical  evidence;  the
             reported  loss  of  consciousness;  Achilles  tendonitis   and
             psychological  symptoms.   Dr  Cohen  did  also  consider   at
             paragraph 46 "... the possibility of other possible causes for
             her  psychological  condition".   However  Dr  Cohen  did  not
             consider other possible causes  of  the  Appellant's  physical
             condition.   She  does  refer  to  spontaneous  sport  induced
             rupture but to  no  other  accidental  causes.   There  is  no
             professional surmise or conjecture about what other  incidents
             could  have  caused  the  injuries  that  the  Appellant   has
             sustained.

         71.  I also bear in mind the narrative that appears in document D21
             being the ongoing medical narrative of her  treatment  at  the
             Rainbow Health Centre.  On 12th July 2013 the  medical  report
             states  'Patient  requested  procedure;  Pt  requested  to  be
             referred to Helen Bamber.  Though  discussion,  said  she  was
             shot in tr heel by his uncle six/twelve ago, because  of  this
             she has frequent nightmares seeing people following  her  with
             guns; also insomnia; O/euphoric mood,  smiling  appropriately;
             very well-dressed and clean, logical speech.  Said her  friend
             who was referred to Helen Bamber advised her to  ask  Dr/Nurse
             to refer her to Helen Bamber.  CCI.  Although  being  shot  in
             right heel, mobility is not compromised as  she  can  mobilise
             without  walking  aid.   Normal  face  expression   and   body
             language.  Client is NOT vulnerable and is being seen  by  GP.
             Pt  doesn't  fulfil  referral   criteria   to   Helen   Bamber
             Foundation.  Explain to client that she  is  not  happy.   She
             requested to see GP.  Advised rec staff to arrange GP  apptmmt
             as requested by pt.'

         72.  On 17th July 2013 there is reference in the  same  records  to
             the Appellant 'able to weight bear normally and  walk  without
             any discomfort'.

             "There is a considerable difference in  the  medical  evidence
             about  the  Appellant's  mobility.   In  July  2013  'she  can
             mobilise without walking aid ... able to wait  there  normally
             and walk without any discomfort'.  In  September/October  2014
             'she has pain if she walks  for  more  than  twenty  minutes'.
             This inconsistency is coupled together with two other matters;
             - first, the absence of any assessment  as  to  how  else  the
             injuries that she has sustained could have been  caused  leads
             me to reduce the weight that I give to the conclusions  of  Dr
             Cohen.  Second, the Appellant's recorded pressure on 12th July
             2013 on the medical staff at  the  Rainbow  Health  Centre  to
             refer her to the Helen Bamber Foundation.  'Pt doesn't  fulfil
             referral criteria to Helen Bamber Foundation'.  The  notes  go
             on to record that the Appellant  was  'not  happy'  about  the
             decision not to refer her to the Foundation.""

 5. So, it was not accepted that the injury to the Appellant's ankle was as
    a result of her having been shot by her  uncle  and  that  finding  and
    conclusion, of course, was relevant to the judge's  overall  assessment
    as to her credibility.

 6. There followed an application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Ground 1  amounted  to  a  contention  that  the  judge  had
    impermissibly relied upon a lack of independent corroborative  evidence
    regarding key aspects of the Appellant's claim.  Ground 2 amounted to a
    contention  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  properly  consider   the
    Appellant's  account  against  an  appropriate  cultural   and   social
    background.  Ground 3 was a contention that the judge's approach to the
    medical evidence was flawed, in particular, because, contrary  to  what
    was suggested in the determination, Dr Cohen  had,  indeed,  considered
    and fully addressed alternative explanations  for  the  injury  to  the
    ankle before concluding that it had been caused  as  described  by  the
    Appellant.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    who commented;

         "I am satisfied that it is arguable that the  judge  erred  in  the
         assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  which  would  then  have  a
         subsequent  impact  on  the  overall  assessment   of   credibility
         identified in the grounds."

 8. There followed a hearing before  me  for  the  purpose  of  considering
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision
    ought to be set aside.  At that hearing I received helpful  submissions
    from both representatives which I have fully taken into account.

 9. It is apparent that it was felt,  when  permission  was  granted,  that
    ground 3 was the stronger one.  Not surprisingly, in my view, arguments
    at the hearing revolved largely around that ground.

10. In context, the role of the author of the  report  (Dr  Cohen)  was  to
    assess  all  possible  causes  of  the  scarring  and  damage  to   the
    appellant's ankle and to reach a conclusion as to the most likely cause
    on the basis of the expertise possessed.  It is evident from  paragraph
    35 of the report that Dr Cohen did, in fact, consider, in some  detail,
    what other alternative causes of the injury to the  ankle  there  might
    have been.  It is also apparent that, in her view, the  other  possible
    causes  were  unlikely,  indeed  she  described  some  as  being  "very
    unlikely" and, at a later point in the report, she  suggested  that  it
    was "very much more likely that the injury was sustained as described".



11. The judge, in fact, did refer at paragraph 45 of the  determination  to
    the part of the report where other possible causes were canvassed  but,
    when considering it further at paragraph 72, appeared to loose sight of
    it.  It cannot properly be said, in my  judgment,  that  there  was  an
    absence of any assessment in the report as to how else the ankle injury
    might have been sustained.  Thus, what was said at paragraph  72  about
    that was incorrect.  The judge made it clear that what was perceived to
    be an absence of such  an  assessment  had  led  to  the  weight  being
    attached to the content of the  report  being  reduced.   Further,  the
    remaining part of paragraph 72 appears to read  as  if  the  judge  was
    suggesting that the appellant's apparent insistence that medical  staff
    at the Rainbow Health Centre refer her to the Helen  Bamber  Foundation
    also somehow reduced the force of  the  report.   Whilst  her  apparent
    insistence as  to  a  referral  might  or  might  not  be  regarded  as
    suspicious for various reasons, it does not seem to me  that,  whatever
    her motivation for seeking such a referral might have been, that  that,
    in itself, could be relevant to the question of what weight  should  be
    attached to the report itself.

12. I have, therefore, concluded that the judge  did  err  in  law  in  the
    assessment of Dr Cohen's report.  I had wondered briefly  whether  what
    does appear to be something of a skating over of the possibility of the
    wound  having  been  caused  by  shrapnel   damage   might   save   the
    determination but I do not think it does.  The judge did not take  that
    point and had found other reasons, which after hearing  argument  I  do
    consider to be erroneous, for not attaching significant weight  to  the
    report's findings and conclusions.  I agree that the error is  material
    because, had the  judge  attached  more  weight  to  the  findings  and
    conclusions contained within Dr Cohen's report the overall  credibility
    assessment might, I do not say would, have been different.

13. My having identified a material error of law on the basis of  ground  3
    it is not now necessary for me to say very  much,  if  anything,  about
    ground 1 or ground 2.  Certainly, I am of the view that ground  2  does
    not  go  beyond  mere  disagreement  with  the  judge's  findings   and
    conclusions.  I suspect, were it not for Ground  3,  I  would  probably
    have concluded that the  determination  was  sufficiently  safe  though
    there were points at which the judge appeared to  expect  corroboration
    and whilst it is not an error of law to simply acknowledge the lack  of
    corroborative evidence it does always have to be  borne  in  mind  that
    asylum seekers fleeing a country where they are at risk will not always
    be in a position to obtain and subsequently provide such evidence.

14. Finally, I would just like to  comment  that,  although  I  have  found
    reasons to set aside this determination, it is apparent that the  judge
    set  about  what  is  always  a  difficult  task  with  diligence   and
    thoroughness.

15. In view of the fact that I have concluded the credibility assessment is
    unreliable, such that it will be necessary for extensive  fact-finding,
    and bearing in mind the agreement of the representatives that such  was
    the appropriate course, I have  decided  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the decision to be remade.  Accordingly, I have issued the
    following directions.

Directions

      A) The case is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  nothing  is
         preserved from the earlier  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         promulgated on 10th November 2014.

      B) The time estimate for the new hearing shall be  three  hours.   The
         appeal  will  be  heard  at  the  Birmingham  Hearing  Centre.   An
         interpreter who speaks the Dari language is to be provided.

      C) The new hearing shall take place before a judge other than Judge of
         the First-tier Tribunal Perry.

      D) If either party  wishes  to  file  additional  witness  statements,
         background material or other documentary evidence of any sort, that
         should be contained in a paginated and indexed  bundle  and  lodged
         with the First-tier Tribunal and sent to the other party,  so  that
         it is received at least five working days prior to the  date  which
         will be fixed for the next hearing.  The parties should not  assume
         that  any  such  evidence  not  filed  in  compliance  with   these
         directions will be admitted.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an error of law and is  set
aside.  The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision  to
be remade.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not direct anonymity.  I was not asked to do  so
and do not do so either.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee is paid or payable there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

