

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: AA/06835/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgted             |
|On January 23, 2015                  |On February 13, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                             MISS DONIKA SEFERI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Marjus, Counsel, instructed by Turpin & Miller
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania. On February 28,  2012  she  left
    Albania and travelled to Italy,  Belgium  and  then  Holland.  She  was
    arrested in Holland and sentenced to two months imprisonment for  using
    an ID card that did not belong to her. On May 5, 2012 she was  released
    from prison and she  returned  to  Albania  where  she  remained  until
    October 12, 2013 when she left and made her way to the United  Kingdom.
    She entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on October  14,  2013  and
    claimed asylum on November 26, 2013. She was served with Form IS151A as
    an illegal entrant.  The respondent refused her asylum  application  on
    August 28, 2014 under paragraph 336 HC 395 and she also took a decision
    to remove her by way of directions under paragraphs 8-10 of schedule  2
    to the Immigration Act 1971.

 2.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on September 15, 2014. She claimed that
    if returned she would be at risk of being forced back into prostitution
    and being re-trafficked. She maintained that she would be at risk  both
    in her home  area  and  other  parts  of  Albania.  Alternatively,  the
    appellant claimed  she  was  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  or
    protection under articles 2 and 3 of ECHR.

 3. The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Morris
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on October 30, 2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on November 13, 2014 she dismissed the  appeal  on
    all grounds.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on November 28, 2014 alleging:

      a. The FtTJ failed to  take  into  account  the  fact  the  respondent
         accepted at the hearing she was a prostitute in  Albania  and  that
         such persons were at risk of being trafficked.


      b. The FtTJ failed to apply the correct standard of proof when  making
         key findings.


      c. The FtTJ erred by failing to consider  the  risk  she  faced  as  a
         single mother including the risk of being trafficked.


      d. The FtTJ erred by failing to allow the appellant to  give  evidence
         on her son's legitimacy.


      e. The FtTJ erred by requiring corroboration.


      f. The FtTJ made irrational findings and took into account  immaterial
         facts.


      g. The FtTJ failed to set out specific reasons for her findings.


 5. On December  12,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cox  gave
    permission to appeal finding grounds one and two had merit and he  also
    stated the remaining grounds could be argued.

 6. On December 19, 2014 the respondent filed a Rule 24 statement in  which
    she submitted:

      a. The respondent did not accept his representative in the  First-tier
         had conceded she was a prostitute as it was contrary to the refusal
         letter upon which reliance had been placed.


      b. At paragraph [13] of his determination the FtTJ gave cogent reasons
         for rejecting the account and the  determination  demonstrated  the
         correct burden of proof had been applied.


 7. The appellant was present at the above hearing and was  represented  as
    set out above.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE


 8. The appellant's solicitors had filed an application under  Rule  15(2A)
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 that  included  a
    statement and exhibit  from  the  appellant's  original  counsel.  This
    statement averred that the respondent's representative had conceded the
    appellant was a prostitute in oral submissions despite the  content  of
    the refusal letter.

 9. Mr Duffy did not seek to challenge this  concession  and  accepted  the
    concession had been made at that hearing.

10. The FtTJ's notes  confirmed  this  but  went  on  to  record  that  the
    respondent argued she was voluntarily engaged in being a prostitute and
    it was not accepted she had been detained or trafficked.

11. I therefore approached the appellant's appeal today on that basis.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


12. Mr Markus adopted the grounds of appeal and sought to persuade me there
    was an error for the following reasons:

      a. Ground One and Ground Six. The FtTJ failed to take into account the
         appellant was accepted as a prostitute or have regard  to  relevant
         objective evidence. He submitted the FtTJ failed to  consider  that
         people who worked as prostitutes are at risk. The  FtTJ  noted  the
         respondent's concession at paragraph 16(ii)  of  the  determination
         but she attached no weight to this concession. The FtTJ  failed  to
         consider why the appellant would  leave  Albania  to  come  to  the
         United Kingdom if she was voluntarily working as a  prostitute  and
         she also failed to resolve why the appellant left when Albania when
         she was heavily pregnant. The appellant's claim was she  was  being
         forced to have an abortion and if the FtTJ had considered this  and
         accepted this claim then this may have affected her  assessment  of
         the claim. The FtTJ also failed to have  regard  to  the  fact  the
         appellant and her family are from  Northern  Albanian  family  when
         considering whether she was voluntarily working as a prostitute.


      b. The FtTJ also failed to consider the risk to  the  appellant  as  a
         single mother. Paragraphs [59] and [60] of AM  and  BM  (Trafficked
         women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC)  discuss  social  issues  in
         Albania and the FtTJ failed to demonstrate she had regard to  these
         factors when making her findings.


      c. Ground Two    The FtTJ applied the wrong  burden  and  standard  of
         proof.  At  paragraph  [16(iii)]  she  stated  "there  is  a   real
         possibility that the true position is as set out in paragraph  [14}
         whereas she should have stated there is "no real  possibility  that
         it is true". At  [16(iv)] she made the  same  error.  At  paragraph
         [18] she stated, "in all likelihood"  and  at  paragraph  [21]  she
         stated, "there is a real likelihood that it is a fabrication"  when
         she should have said the evidence was a fabrication. If  there  was
         only one slip then that may  not  amount  to  a  slip  but  as  the
         approach is continuous throughout the  determination  he  submitted
         that the FtTJ has used the wrong test.


      d. Ground Three  The FtTJ appeared  to  be  wanting  corroboration  in
         paragraph [16(iv)] and in  an  asylum  claim  no  corroboration  is
         necessary  as  it  is  rare  to  have  corroboration  due  to   the
         difficulties in obtaining such evidence.


      e.  Ground  Four    The  FtTJ  made  findings  based   on   irrational
         conclusions and immaterial  factors.  At  paragraph  [13(iii)]  she
         failed to consider passage of time when Lulzim came to see her, the
         time she spent in prison and  the  fact  she  had  an  illegitimate
         child. A bigger point is what she earned and the fact she  was  not
         allowed to leave the house and would therefore  have  money  unless
         that money was taken off her. The FtTJ should have  considered  her
         reason for not trying to escape instead of holding against her  the
         fact she did not tell the nurse when she was having an abortion  in
         hospital and the FtTj overlooked the nurse's attitude and  that  of
         society. The appellant was at a legitimate hospital but no evidence
         that traffickers would not use a legitimate hospital.


      f. Ground  Five    The  FtTJ  failed  to  give  specific  reasons  for
         findings. The FtTJ failed to do this in paragraphs [13], [15], [17]
         and [24].


      g. Ground Seven  Following the decision of RR  (Challenging  Evidence)
         Sri Lanka [2010] UKUT  00274  the  FtTJ  should  have  put  to  the
         appellant any issues she had concerns over. At  paragraph  [16(iv)]
         the FtTJ made  a  finding  and  did  not  put  the  matter  to  the
         appellant.


      h. Credibility findings have to be made in the  round  so  where  some
         fall away then that alters the whole perception of the case.


      i. The decision should be set aside.


13. Mr Duffy relied on the Rule 24  letter  dated  December  19,  2014.  He
    responded as follows:

      a. Ground One    The judge  acknowledged  she  was  a  prostitute  and
         therefore had this matter  in  her  mind.  She  accepted  this  but
         disbelieved the rest of the claim. The real issue  is  whether  the
         credibility findings are sustainable. If yes then  CG  decision  is
         not relevant. If the FtTJ did not accept she  was  trafficked  then
         look at paragraph [182] of AB and BM. The potential  risk  is  them
         going after her and getting their money or punish her or  make  her
         work again. As the FtTJ found she was paid for services and left of
         own free will then AM and BM does not bite. Mr Duffy submitted  the
         FtTJ had done enough and had given plenty of reasons  at  paragraph
         [13]. She gave examples of inconsistencies and found  she  was  not
         confined and that she was paid for the work she did. The  FtTJ  was
         not saying she did not make  an  escape  attempt  but  it  was  her
         explanation  of  how  she  escaped  that  the  judge  found  lacked
         credibility.


      b. Ground Two    The errors  on  the  standard/burden  of  proof  were
         "slips" but they were not material. The FtTJ clearly demonstrated a
         clear grasp of the evidence and made findings  that  were  open  to
         her.


      c. Ground Three  The FtTJ did not require corroboration.


      d. Ground Four   The FtTJ accepted the arguments in the refusal letter
         but made her own findings at paragraphs [13] to [16].


      e. Grounds Five-Seven fall away if earlier grounds have no merit.


      f. The appeal should be dismissed.


14. I reserved my decision after hearing the submissions and agreed that if
    there were an error in law the matter would be remitted to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as evidence would need  to  be  heard  afresh  and  fresh
    credibility findings made.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


15. The FtTJ considered this claim and in a detailed determination  refused
    the  appellant's  application.  Mr  Markus  has  raised  a  number   of
    challenges to the FtTJ's approach and these are contained in  both  the
    written grounds of appeal and his oral representations as  set  out  in
    both my record of proceedings and as summarised above.

16. Mr Markus relied on all of the grounds but in particular submitted that
    the FtTJ erred in her approach to the appellant being a prostitute  and
    that she failed to apply the correct standard of proof.

17. The FtTJ set  out  the  appellant's  claim  in  paragraph  [8]  of  her
    determination she referred both to the case of AM and  BM  and  the  US
    Department Report in paragraph [12]. At paragraph  [13]  the  FtTJ  had
    regard to the psychological and other damage inflicted  on  victims  of
    trafficking but found the inconsistencies and contradictions undermined
    the reliability of her evidence.

18. Mr Markus first ground of appeal related  to  the  FtTJ's  approach  to
    whether she was a prostitute but  the  FtTJ  accepted  she  voluntarily
    worked as a prostitute but she was not trafficked.

19. In R and Others  v  SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  Lord  Justice  Brooke
    summarised the points of law which would be encountered most frequently
    in practice as follows (i) making perverse or  irrational  findings  on
    matters that were material to the outcome (ii) failure to give  reasons
    or any adequate reasons for findings on material matters (iii)  failing
    to take into account and/or resolve conflicts of  fact  or  opinion  on
    material matters (iv) giving weight to immaterial matters (v) making  a
    material misdirection of law on any material matter (vi) committing  or
    permitting a procedural or  other  irregularity  capable  of  making  a
    material difference to the outcome or fairness of the proceedings (vii)
    making a mistake as to a material fact which could  be  established  by
    objective and un-contentious evidence when  the  appellant  and/or  his
    advisors were not responsible for  the  mistake  and  where  unfairness
    resulted from the fact that a mistake was made.  The  Court  said  that
    errors of law of which it could be said that they would  have  made  no
    difference to the outcome did not matter.

20. At paragraph [16] the FtTJ specifically found:

         "... The appellant's claim to have worked as a prostitute  has  not
         been disputed. However I find there is no real likelihood that  she
         was trafficked and forced into prostitution by Lulzim as claimed."


    The FtTJ then proceeded  to  explain  her  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion. I am satisfied those findings were open to her.


21. Mr Markus argued that the FtTJ had  not  dealt  with  the  respondent's
    concession but I  disagree.  The  FtTJ  noted  the  concession  in  her
    findings but went onto find that the appellant was  neither  trafficked
    nor forced into prostitution. The FtTJ rejected the rest of her account
    and gave reasons.

22. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC)  the
    Tribunal held that although there is a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which an  appeal
    is determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as a
    whole makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.
    Although a decision may contain an error of law where the  requirements
    to give adequate reasons are not met,  the  Upper  Tribunal  would  not
    normally set aside a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  where  there
    has been no misdirection of law, the  fact-finding  process  cannot  be
    criticised and the  relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into
    account, unless the conclusions the judge draws from the  primary  data
    were not reasonably open to him or her.

23. As regards Ground One of the grounds of appeal I am satisfied that  the
    FtTJ has demonstrated a good grasp  of  the  central  issues.  She  has
    meticulously considered all of the arguments advanced to  her  and  the
    issues raised by Mr Markus do not amount to an error in law.  The  FtTJ
    was aware of the concession but rejected her claim she had been  forced
    into prostitution. Mr Markus argued that being a prostitute in  Albania
    placed this appellant at risk  but  as  the  Tribunal  pointed  out  at
    paragraph [174] of AM and BM -

         "... In Albania, there is  the  availability  of  work  other  than
         prostitution for single women. The victim of trafficking, on return
         to Tirana can access a shelter and is  not  left  on  the  streets;
         there will be assistance in finding work and there  is  some  State
         support. That is very different to the situation  of  a  woman  who
         returns to a country where there is no support from the  State  and
         prostitution is the only way  in  which  she  can  prevent  herself
         becoming destitute."


24. I therefore conclude the FtTJ did not err in her assessment of the risk
    posed as a prostitute or fail  to  have  regard  to  the  fact  it  was
    accepted she was a prostitute.

25. Mr Markus also sought to persuade me that the  FtTJ  should  have  made
    findings on why she fled as  pregnant  woman  to  the  United  Kingdom.
    However, the FtTJ assessed the appellant's claim and the  findings  she
    made led her to reject the appellant's claim. The FtTJ is not  required
    to make findings on each and every part of the claim advanced. The FtTJ
    rejected the core of her claim and whilst I accept the issue was raised
    before the FtTJ in submissions I am satisfied that her decision not  to
    address the issue is not an error in law.

26. Both parties agreed that the second ground raised a possible  error  in
    law with Mr Markus  submitting  the  FtTJ  failed  to  properly  direct
    herself as to the correct standard of proof.

27. The appellant's grounds of appeal set out the  areas  where  Mr  Markus
    submitted  the  FtTJ  erred.  My  attention  was  drawn  to  paragraphs
    [16(iii)], [16(iv)] and [21] of the determination. Mr Duffy argued that
    the use of the word "real possibility" was a slip and that this was not
    material to the FtTJ's assessment of the evidence.

28. The burden of proof was on the appellant  to  prove  her  case  to  the
    standard of proof as set out in PS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ
    1213 where the Court of Appeal said that the single test of  whether  a
    fear of persecution or ill treatment was well founded  was  whether  on
    the evidence there was a real risk of its occurrence or re-occurrence.

29. The FtTJ did not in this case apply the higher standard of proof as the
    words used reflect the lower standard of proof. The  determination  has
    to be taken as a whole and upon any reading of  the  determination  the
    FtTJ has considered the evidence and rejected the claim. She considered
    the appellant's case and rejected it. The words used  could  have  been
    phrased slightly better but I satisfied the FtTJ considered the  appeal
    with the correct burden and standard of proof in mind.

30. Turning to the third ground of appeal Mr Markus has sought to  persuade
    me that the FtTJ required corroboration. At paragraph [16(iv)] the FtTJ
    observed there was no other evidence to support her claim. However, the
    FtTJ had already given reason for rejecting the account.  Often  it  is
    argued that material provided supports an appellant's claim  and  I  am
    satisfied that the FtTJ merely stated that there was no other  evidence
    that may have altered her view of the  appellant's  own  evidence.  The
    FtTJ did not err in her approach.

31. With regard to ground four Mr Markus submitted the  FtTJ  made  adverse
    findings on immaterial matters. The FtTJ was earlier criticised for not
    making findings on why the appellant came to the United  Kingdom  as  a
    pregnant woman. The FtTJ made findings on  matters  that  she  believed
    were relevant. In paragraphs [13] and [16]  of  her  determination  the
    FtTJ considered the issue of credibility and the findings she made were
    findings open to her based on the evidence before her. Whilst Mr Markus
    believed the matters were not material the FtTJ clearly  believed  they
    were sufficiently material to refer to them in  her  determination.  In
    short, she rejected the submissions now being made  by  Mr  Markus  and
    that is of course something she was entitled to do.

32. Mr Markus argued that the FtTJ failed to give reasons for her findings.
    I have considered ground five of the grounds of appeal and Mr  Markus's
    submissions. The FtTJ did not simply accept  the  refusal  letter.  She
    made findings on relevant parts of the claim and also  in  part  agreed
    with the respondent's submissions in the refusal letter. This is not  a
    case where no findings were  made.  The  FtTJ  made  numerous  findings
    between paragraphs [13] and [21] and she rejected the claim. I find  no
    error in her approach.

33. Ground six of the grounds related to the risk posed to the appellant as
    a single mother. In MK (Lesbians) Albania CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00036  the
    Tribunal held that it cannot be said that without more there is a  real
    risk that a woman  without  family  support  in  Albania  would  suffer
    destitution amounting to inhuman or degrading treatment resulting in  a
    breach of her rights under article 3 of the ECHR  or  persecution,  but
    each case must be determined on its own facts. The FtTJ firmly rejected
    the appellant's claim she had  been  trafficked.  Whilst  single  woman
    could be at risk the FtTJ rejected her account and found that  she  was
    not at risk of persecution and at paragraph [17]  the  FtTJ  considered
    general risk n return. There is no merit to this ground of appeal.

34. The final ground of appeal was one of unfairness.  Counsel  represented
    the appellant and at paragraph [16(iv)] the FtTJ  found  there  was  no
    evidence the child was born out of wedlock. This was a finding she made
    having  heard  what  I  was  told  was  five  hours  of  evidence   and
    submissions. The FtTJ was not satisfied when considering  the  evidence
    and she is not required to request clarification from an  appellant  on
    every point where there is a disagreement.

35. Having considered all of the points made I am not persuaded there is an
    error in law.


Decision

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law. I uphold the original decision.

37. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier and I see  no  reason  to  amend  that
    decision.



Signed:     Dated: February 13, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I revoke the earlier fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.



Signed:     Dated: February 13, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
