
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06830/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th April 2016                            |On 19th May 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                                     F S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran who claimed to have been tortured by
    the authorities there and  to  have  converted  to  Christianity.   His
    application for asylum was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  and  a
    decision made to remove him.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal M  Robertson  on  4th  August
    2015.  The appeal was dismissed  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  18th
    August 2015.  The judge did not accept the veracity of the  Appellant's
    account and dismissed the appeal on all grounds. The judge in the First-
    tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction. I have decided  to  make  an
    anonymity order to like effect in this Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant through his representatives  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal  to  this  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The grounds are five-fold.  It was  firstly  contended  that
    documents  in  support  of  the  claim  which  the  judge  felt  should
    reasonably have been obtained were not  so  obtainable  and  the  judge
    should not have expected the Appellant to have  been  able  to  provide
    them.  It was said in the second place that the judge had not  accepted
    that  the  Appellant  had  converted  to  Christianity  but  had  given
    inadequate reasons for the finding and had  not  made  findings  as  to
    whether he would or would not evangelise.  The third  ground  was  that
    the judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  relevant  country  guidance  to
    Christian converts.  In the fourth ground it  was  contended  that  the
    judge had not attached suitable weight to  a  report  provided  by  the
    Medical Foundation which had found that  the  Appellant  suffered  from
    PTSD and that many of the  physical  injuries  he  showed  were  highly
    consistent with his account.  The  judge  had  not  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been wrongfully imprisoned and, it was  said,  the  judge
    had given inadequate reasoning in that regard.  The Medical  Foundation
    had clearly taken account not only of what the Appellant had told  them
    but also of his scars and physical findings.   It  was  contended  that
    insufficient consideration had been given to the report.  In the  final
    ground it was said that the judge had erred  in  her  consideration  of
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules  in  not  accepting  that
    there were very significant obstacles to the Appellant's  reintegration
    into life in Iran.  The judge had attached  inadequate  weight  to  the
    Medical Foundation  report  which  indicated  in  particular  that  the
    Appellant suffered from PTSD and depression.

 3. In granting permission, on 11th November 2015, Designated Judge  Shaerf
    considered that no arguably material error was revealed by Grounds 1 to
    3 but thought  that  Ground  4  disclosed  an  arguable  error  and  in
    consequence of  that  Ground  5  also  had  potential  merit.   In  the
    circumstances permission was  granted  on  all  of  the  grounds.   The
    Respondent put in a response under Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rule  24
    contending that the judge had reached sustainable conclusions.  She had
    correctly directed herself as to the findings in HE  (DRC,  credibility
    and psychiatric reports) Democratic  Republic  of  Congo  [2004]  UKIAT
    00321 and  there  were  good  reasons  for  rejecting  the  Appellant's
    credibility despite the medical report.   The  judge  reached  reasoned
    findings with regard  to  the  Appellant's  claimed  conversion.   With
    regard to the injuries it appeared to be  argued  that  the  judge  had
    impermissibly speculated as to the possible causation of the  injuries.
    The case bore similarities to that described by the Court of Appeal  in
    MM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1601.  It was contended that  the
    judge had followed a similar line of reasoning and  that  her  findings
    were open to her.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Mills relied upon the Rule 24 response.   I
    pointed out that the  grant  of  permission  appeared  to  indicate  no
    arguable merit in Grounds 1 to 3 and Mr Howard indicated  that  he  was
    relying on Ground 4 and Ground 5 was dependent upon that  ground  also.
    He  said  that  the  medical  report  referred  to  specific  injuries.
    Paragraphs 24 and 25 of the judge's decision referred to the finding of
    PTSD.  Paragraph 26 was a summary of the findings and it was  mentioned
    at paragraph 27 that the  injuries  were  highly  consistent  with  the
    Appellant's account and at 30 that the judge bore the report  in  mind.
    Paragraph 37 was the focus of her findings but there  she  referred  to
    the possibility of  his  injuries  having  been  caused  by  a  farming
    accident.  He argued that there was a lack of reasoning on the part  of
    the judge.   She  had  said  at  paragraph  36  that  his  account  was
    consistent and detailed and  the  medical  report  had  said  that  the
    injuries were highly consistent with  what  he  had  said.   Mr  Howard
    contended that there  were  no  reasons  given  for  discounting  those
    elements.  Given the sheer weight of evidence what reason was there, he
    asked, for favouring one view over another.  He contended there  was  a
    significant material error.  There was an insufficiency of  reasons  as
    to why the Appellant's account, supported by the medical report was not
    accepted.  Ground 5 would also succeed if Ground 4 did.

 5. In response, Mr Mills said that the  judge  did  consider  the  medical
    report in detail from paragraph 24 onwards.  She cited a section of the
    guidance in HE.  She referred to the  diagnosis  of  PTSD  and  to  the
    Appellant's physical injuries.  At paragraph 26 she had  wrongly  cited
    the Istanbul Protocol as describing "typical" injuries as  "could  have
    been caused by the trauma described but it is non  specific  and  there
    are many other possible causes" whereas  the  correct  description  was
    "this is an appearance that is usually found with this type  of  trauma
    but there are other possible causes", but he submitted that  that  made
    no difference of consequence.  The amputation of part of his  foot  was
    said to be typical but that was typical  of  the  amputation  of  which
    there were many other possible causes.  It was  just  common  sense  to
    consider that that could have been the result of a farming injury.  The
    Appellant claimed to  have  worked  on  a  farm  for  his  father.   At
    paragraph  27  the  judge  referred  to  some  injuries  being   highly
    consistent with his account and she correctly described the meaning  of
    that phrase under the Istanbul  criteria.   That  indicated  that  some
    injuries had been deliberately inflicted but that  did  not  mean  that
    this had been done by the authorities.  The Appellant had claimed  that
    he had been detained in the 1980s and  the  doctor  could  say  nothing
    about the age of the injuries except  that  they  were  more  than  six
    months old.  He submitted that the judge's  findings  at  paragraph  37
    were justified.  The medical report left open  alternative  causes  and
    the judge was entitled to consider the evidence in the round.

 6. He continued that the judge had given reasons for finding the Appellant
    not credible.  Those reasons related to the core  of  his  account  and
    they should stand.  MM (Sri Lanka) stated that if  reasons  were  given
    and they were rational unless the medical report was of  such  strength
    and indicated that there was no other explanation for the injuries  the
    decision should stand.  The reasons given in the current case were  not
    irrational or perverse.  As  to  the  typical  injuries  there  was  no
    dispute that the Appellant's toes had been  amputated.   The  Appellant
    suffered from PTSD but he was an asylum seeker and in poor health.  The
    judge was entitled to find that the report was not of such weight as to
    outweigh other points adverse to  the  Appellant.   She  gave  reasoned
    conclusions.  Ground 5 he said hung on Ground 4.  If the Appellant  was
    not at risk he could simply return.

 7. Finally Mr Howard referred to paragraph 35 of  the  medical  report  in
    which the doctor went through each injury in detail and indicated  that
    accidental injury was unlikely and that she did not consider  that  the
    Appellant's account was fabricated.  It  was  speculative  to  consider
    that the injuries had been caused by farming activities.  There  was  a
    lack of reasoning and the Appellant was entitled to  know  why  he  had
    failed in his appeal.

 8. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     The judge had before her a medical  report  from  a  highly  reputable
    source, namely the Medical Foundation.  It  was  prepared  by  Dr  Mary
    Beyer following examination of the Appellant  on  17th  and  24th  July
    2014.  The report described  the  Appellant's  claimed  experiences  in
    detail.  Dr Beyer found that the Appellant  was  suffering  from  PTSD.
    She described scars she found on his body and from paragraph 37 onwards
    gave details of those physical scars and her view of their attribution.
     She stated that the amputation of a big toe was typical of  amputation
    due to gangrene.  A rigid toe was likely to be related to trauma during
    the amputation of the big toe.  Depressed, pale old scars on  the  legs
    which the  Appellant  attributed  to  ill-treatment  from  kicking  and
    beating  during  detention  were  stated  to  be  consistent  with  the
    attribution.  A pale scar on the inner upper part of  the  right  thigh
    which the Appellant attributed to kicking or  other  deliberate  injury
    was highly consistent with such an injury and a long scar on the  outer
    side of the right wrist was  highly  consistent  with  the  Appellant's
    attribution of a deliberately inflicted injury with a sharp instrument.
     Old and deep scars on the front of the left arm were highly consistent
    with the Appellant's attribution of deliberate cuts with a sharp  metal
    instrument.

 9. The judge referred to the medical report in detail  from  paragraph  24
    onwards of her decision.  Although  she  wrongly  quoted  the  Istanbul
    Protocol as to the meaning of "typical" I did not regard this as of any
    significance, particularly in light of the fact  that  it  was  not  in
    dispute that the Appellant had suffered amputation of parts of his feet
    for which there would be other possible causes.  At  paragraph  30  the
    judge stated that she bore in mind the medical report in assessing  the
    evidence of the Appellant.  This is not a case such  as  in  Mibanga  v
    SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367  where  a  judge  reached  conclusions  on
    credibility and only  then  considered  the  medical  report.   In  the
    current case Judge Robertson considered the medical  report  first  and
    expressly stated that she bore it in mind  in  her  assessment  of  the
    evidence.

10. In her decision the judge then went on to assess other elements of  the
    Appellant's case.  He claimed to have been  detained  in  Iran  by  the
    authorities following being wrongly accused of involvement  in  a  bank
    robbery, that he had been convicted and sentenced, at a further hearing
    his sentence had  been  reduced  and  that  he  had  subsequently  been
    released on bail.  In Iran he has his mother and a brother and  he  was
    also represented by a lawyer.  The Secretary of State  had  disbelieved
    the Appellant's account.  The judge considered that it would have  been
    reasonable for the Appellant to have obtained supporting  documentation
    as to his alleged conviction and release on bail.   He  had  throughout
    been represented by solicitors in his appeal.  The fact that he had not
    obtained such supporting documentation she considered to be of  weight.
    This view is consistent with the approach taken by the Court of  Appeal
    in TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  40  (at  paragraph  16)  which
    stated as follows:

         "Where evidence to support an account given by a party is or should
         readily be available, a judge is, in my view, plainly  entitled  to
         take into account the failure to  provide  that  evidence  and  any
         explanations  for  that  failure.   This  may  be   a   factor   of
         considerable weight in relation  to  credibility  where  there  are
         doubts about the credibility of a party for other reasons. ..."

    The judge went on at paragraphs 34 to 37 to  consider  the  Appellant's
    claimed conversion to Christianity.  She gave reasons  as  to  why  she
    found that that was not established to  the  necessary  standard.   She
    accepted (at paragraph 36) that the Appellant's account of when he  was
    imprisoned was  consistent  and  detailed  but  reminded  herself  that
    consistency in itself did not establish credibility.

11. The judge expressed her conclusions as follows:

         "37. On the evidence in the round, to the lower standard of  proof,
             I do not accept that the Appellant was ever  imprisoned,  held
             in solitary confinement, tortured or released on bail.  In  so
             deciding I bear in mind the medico-legal report  in  which  Dr
             Beyer states that there was little before her to suggest  that
             the Appellant had fabricated his  account  and   I  take  into
             account that she has significant experience of  assessing  the
             injuries and mental health state of asylum seekers.   However,
             in the Appellant's case, the report on its own is insufficient
             when balanced against the implausibility  of  the  Appellant's
             account for me to find in his favour.  It is possible that the
             amputation lesions are in fact a result of  a  farming  injury
             and that the Appellant has  got  himself  into  some  kind  of
             trouble in Iran in the  distant  past  with  non-state  agents
             which resulted in those injuries which  appear  to  be  highly
             consistent with having been beaten by assailants.   However  I
             do not accept that the Appellant was tortured by  the  Iranian
             authorities.  I find that he  has  not  established  that  the
             events that he states caused him to flee  Iran  in  fact  took
             place and he has not established  to  the  lower  standard  of
             proof that he has a well-founded fear  of  persecution  for  a
             Convention reason.

         38.  On the evidence in the round, again to the lower  standard  of
             proof, I do not accept that the Appellant is a genuine convert
             to Christianity".

12. It is clear from this decision that Judge Robertson did have  fully  in
    mind the report from Dr Beyer.  She gave reasons as to why she did  not
    believe the Appellant's account.  Matters of weight  were  for  her  to
    assess - see SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012]  EWCA  Civ  155.   The  judge
    appropriately directed herself as to the burden and standard  of  proof
    (at paragraph 9 of her decision).  Her conclusions were not  irrational
    or perverse. The Appellant will have understood why he lost; he was not
    believed for the reasons stated. It has not been shown that there was a
    material error of law in the judge's decision with regard to the asylum
    aspect of the claim.

13. As to issues under paragraph 276ADE(vi) if, as  the  judge  found,  the
    Appellant is  not  wanted  by  the  Iranian  authorities  he  would  be
    returning as a man with medical issues but to a country  where  he  has
    his mother and a brother and there was no evidence that he would not be
    able to obtain suitable treatment.  It has not  been  established  that
    there were significant obstacles to  his  reintegration  into  life  in
    Iran. This appeal therefore fails.


Notice of Decisions
There was no material error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, which accordingly stands.

I have considered whether to make an anonymity order, bearing in  mind  that
the appeal was anonymised throughout the proceedings before  the  First-tier
Tribunal. I have decided to make such an order in particular as I would  not
wish the Appellant's proposed return to be compromised as a  result  of  his
identification through this decision.
Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008 as amended I order that publication of any matter  likely  to  lead  to
the identification of the Appellant is prohibited. Breach of this order  may
lead to proceedings for contempt of court.

Signed                              Date 12 May 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
