
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06166/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              AAS (BANGLADESH)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Claire Physsas, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge J Macdonald sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  23  September  2015)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to grant him international or human  rights  protection  on  the
    grounds of his sexual orientation.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity  direction,  and  I  consider  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    appellant continues to be accorded anonymity for these  proceedings  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 5 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Baker  granted  permission
    to appeal as she considered the grounds of appeal had merit:

         "It is arguable that in the light of the FTTJ's findings  that  the
         appellant is homosexual and he wanted to act openly in  Bangladesh;
         that  he  had  largely  hidden  his  sexual  orientation  when   in
         Bangladesh, and in not applying HJ (Iran) the FTTJ may  have  erred
         materially in law in his assessment of risk on return."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date  of  birth  is  3
    September 1985.  He entered the United Kingdom as a student on 11  July
    2009.  On 28 July 2014 a decision was made  to  curtail  his  remaining
    student leave because his sponsoring organisation had had  its  Tier  4
    Student licence revoked.  His leave  was  curtailed  to  expire  on  11
    October 2014.  On 10 October 2014 the appellant  attended  the  Croydon
    Asylum Screening Unit where he claimed asylum on the ground that he had
    a well-founded fear of persecution in Bangladesh as a gay man.

 4. In the subsequent refusal letter, the Secretary of State did not accept
    that the appellant was a gay man.  But on the assumption that  he  was,
    consideration had been  given  as  to  whether  there  was  a  risk  of
    persecution for gay men on  return  to  Bangladesh.   Whilst  same  sex
    activity was illegal under Section 377 of the Bangladesh Penal Code, it
    was noted that the law was rarely enforced.   The  Secretary  of  State
    went on to cite various passages from recent reports.   The  government
    acknowledged the existence  of  a  LGBT  population  during  its  April
    Universal Periodic Review, contrary to its stance in the  2009  review,
    during which the foreign minister stated there were no LGBT individuals
    in the country.  Additionally, the government (now) allocated funds for
    the transgender and Hijra population in  the  national  budget.   There
    were several informal support networks for gays.  These  included  Boys
    Only Bangladesh, which acted as a meeting  place  for  homosexuals  and
    provided advocacy for sexual rights and equality. It  was  working  for
    Section 377  to  be  repealed.   An  LGBT  magazine  was  now  publicly
    available  in  Bangladesh:   a  group  of   volunteers   had   launched
    Bangladesh's  first  magazine  named  "Lesbian,   Gay,   Bisexual   and
    Transgender Issues" hoping to promote greater acceptance  of  the  LGBT
    community, which faced widespread discrimination in the Muslim majority
    country.

 5. The respondent at paragraph [47] cited Section  5  of  the  Refugee  or
    Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification)  Regulations
    2006 which defined persecution as:

         "(a)  sufficiently serious  by  its  nature  or  repetition  as  to
             constitute a serious violation of  a  basic  human  right,  in
             particular a right from which derogation cannot be made  under
             Article 15 of the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human
             Rights and Fundamental Freedoms; or

         (b)  an accumulation of various measures, including a violation  of
             a human right which is sufficiently severe  as  to  affect  an
             individual in a similar manner as specified in (a)".

 6. The above had been considered in line with the case law  of  HJ  (Iran)
    [2010] UKSC 31, which set out the test that should be adopted by  fact-
    finding Tribunals in the UK.  Accordingly, it is not  considered  there
    was a real risk of persecution if he returned to Bangladesh.   Although
    consensual same sex activity was illegal in Bangladesh, the legislation
    was not in force, and there had been no tried cases.  There was also  a
    substantial network of  support  for  gay  men,  and  the  government's
    attitude towards homosexuals was considered to be changing.

 7. On the issue  of  internal  relocation,  he  claimed  that  his  family
    disowned him and that they wanted to kill him.   However,  by  his  own
    admission, his parents had asked him to return to Bangladesh when  they
    became aware that he had travelled to the UK.  In any event,  he  would
    be returned to an international airport in Bangladesh, where  he  could
    then use freedom of movement to travel away from Munshigong  where  his
    family resided.  It was considered reasonable for him to return to live
    in a city such as Dhaka, where he claimed to have lived before  without
    encountering any problems.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The judge's findings were set out at paragraphs [69] onwards.  He found
    that the appellant was a gay man, and he accepted  that  the  appellant
    started having gay sex at the age of 8 with a 10 year old  cousin,  and
    that at the age of 13 he had raped another male cousin who was only  10
    years old.

 9. He found that the appellant had come to the UK in order to  study,  and
    not because of an immediate fear  of  persecution  in  Bangladesh.   He
    found that, aside from his older brother's behaviour when he was living
    under the same roof as his older brother, he  had  not  identified  any
    occasion in Bangladesh when he had experienced  any  event  that  could
    have led him to have a well-founded fear of persecution.  He could  not
    identify any difficulty with his family apart from his  older  brother.
    He said he telephoned his family in or after October 2014 to say he was
    claiming asylum because he was gay. He had remained in touch  with  his
    family and his paternal uncle who was supporting him.

10. The judge concluded that the only basis on which  the  appellant  could
    demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution was by reference to  the
    objective information.  The judge took into account what had been  said
    in the refusal letter on this topic,  and  also  the  entirety  of  the
    Country of Origin Information Report dated 31 August  2013.   He  found
    that this report accurately summarised the position in relation to  gay
    men in Bangladesh.

11. Section 21 made it clear that Hijra and  Kothi  persons  and  male  sex
    workers were subject to bullying and  routine  intimidation.   However,
    the appellant was not a Hijra or a Kothi.  He was not  transgender  and
    he was not a sex worker.

12. Paragraph 21.04 suggested effeminate boys faced  serious  bullying  and
    intimidation in educational and other settings.  The appellant was  not
    effeminate and he was not a boy.  He was now 30  years  old.   Although
    the appellant had produced  some  photographs  of  himself  in  women's
    clothes, these were worn to a party at a gay club.  The  appellant  had
    not said in evidence that he normally wore such clothing in  public  or
    in private.  The pictures and the appellant's evidence  suggested  that
    it was a one-off event (paragraph 99).

13. Paragraph 21.05 indicated that overt  acts  of  discrimination  against
    LGBT individuals were fairly rare.  It went on to say  that  there  was
    significant societal discrimination.  Openly gay individuals found that
    their families and local communities ostracised  them.   The  appellant
    had made it clear that he and his family had parted, and so this  would
    not be a significant issue for him.

14. The police used the laws as a pretext to  bully  individuals.  However,
    read in context, those bullied were effeminate men,  Hijra,  Kothi  and
    sex workers in particular.

15. Based upon the COIR Report and other objective evidence submitted,  and
    taking into account the appellant's lifestyle, he did not find that  he
    was at specific  risk  of  ill-treatment  by  police  officers  nor  by
    "mastans".

16. He noted from paragraph 21.17 of the report that male homosexuality was
    tolerated despite religious sanction.  He noted  from  paragraph  21.18
    that male friendships were traditionally very intimate.  "Sam"  gave  a
    description of his ability to go on trips with  a  male  boyfriend,  to
    hold hands on the streets of Dhaka and to share a bed.  In this context
    it was stated "as long as you don't come out open to  your  family  you
    are safe".

17. The judge said he considered all the above in the light  of  HJ  (Iran)
    and in particular in the light of the following  extract  of  paragraph
    35(b):

         "The question is how each applicant, looked at  individually,  will
         conduct himself if returned and how others will react  to  what  he
         does.  Those others will include everyone with whom he will come in
         contact, in private as well as in public."

18. He found the appellant was likely to conduct himself in public  and  in
    private as a gay man and to behave in the same way as  the  description
    given by  "Sam"  in  paragraph  21.18  of  the  report.   However,  the
    appellant had already broken with his family and come out to them.   He
    was unlikely to have any further contact with them.  He found that  his
    friends were likely to be gay men and in relation to him there would be
    no difficulty in being open about his sexuality.

19. The judge concluded at paragraph [109] that the appellant did not  have
    a well-founded fear of persecution at the hands of the  state  or  non-
    state aggressors.

20. At paragraphs [110] to [114], the judge gave his  reasons  for  finding
    that the threat by the appellant's older brother to kill him was not to
    be taken literally. But even if it was, the appellant would be able  to
    relocate to another part of Bangladesh, in particular Dhaka, where  the
    appellant had lived before coming to the United Kingdom as a student.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the hearing before me, Ms Physsas developed the arguments raised  in
    the grounds of appeal.  In reply, Ms Savage  adhered  to  the  Rule  24
    response settled by a colleague opposing the appeal.   The  grounds  of
    appeal were essentially a disagreement with the judge's findings.   The
    judge was clearly aware of HJ  (Iran),  which  he  cited  at  paragraph
    [107], and he accepted the appellant would  act  openly  in  Bangladesh
    (see paragraph 108).  The judge had had regard to  all  the  background
    evidence and he had given  adequately  reasoned  conclusions  that  the
    appellant was not at risk from either state or non-state actors.

Discussion

22. In HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010]  UKSC  31,  the  Supreme  Court  gave  the  following
    guidance at paragraph [82]:

         "When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  Tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he will be treated as gay by potential persecutors  in
         his country of nationality.  If so, that a Tribunal must  then  ask
         itself whether it is satisfied on the available evidence  that  gay
         people who lived openly would  be  liable  to  persecution  in  the
         applicant's country of nationality.  If so, the Tribunal must go on
         to consider what the individual  applicant  would  do  if  he  were
         returned to that country.  If the  applicant  would  in  face  live
         openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even if he could  avoid
         the risk by living  'discreetly'.   If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
         Tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact live discreetly
         and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he  would
         do so ... If the Tribunal concluded that a material reason for  the
         applicant living discreetly on  his  return  would  be  a  fear  of
         persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as  a  gay
         man, then, other things being  equal,  his  application  should  be
         accepted.  Such a person has a well-founded fear of persecution."

23. Lord Hope cited this formulation  of  the  test  by  Lord  Rodger  with
    approval in his own speech at paragraph [35], but went  on  to  express
    the test in his own words.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out  Lord
    Hope's formulation in full at paragraph [85] of his decision. It cannot
    reasonably be maintained that the judge did not seek to apply the test.
     The issue in controversy is whether he applied it correctly.

24. Looking at the matter through the prism of Lord Rodger's formulation, I
    find that the judge gave adequate reasons for finding, by reference  to
    the objective information, that, with the arguable exception of certain
    high risk categories, gay people who lived openly  in  Bangladesh  were
    not per se liable to persecution.  Lord Hope observed in paragraph [35]
    that there would be little difficulty in holding that in countries such
    as Iran and Cameroon gays or persons who are believed  to  be  gay  are
    persecuted and that persecution is something  that  may  reasonably  be
    feared in those countries.  There is no country guidance  authority  to
    the effect that gays  or  persons  who  are  believed  to  be  gay  are
    persecuted in Bangladesh, and so the judge  rightly  sought  to  answer
    this question by reference to the Home Office's COIR Report.

25. As far as back as 1996, an article in Himal magazine stated  that  male
    prostitutes were available in most towns; in rural areas, homosexuality
    was considered something that young people did for fun and some  elders
    might do in  secret;  and  male  homosexuality  was  tolerated  despite
    religious sanction.

26. Ms Physsas submitted  that  the  judge  was  unduly  selective  in  the
    passages from the report which he cited,  and  that  there  were  other
    passages which supported the proposition that gay  men  generally,  and
    not just male prostitutes, were liable  to  abduction,  rape,  physical
    assault, and of being subjected to  extortion  by  police  and  mastans
    (defined broadly as criminal  thugs,  sometimes  with  local  political
    connections).

27. I find the judge has given  adequate  reasons  for  discerning  in  the
    background evidence a crucial  difference  between  the  experience  of
    "ordinary" gay men and those with an inherently riskier  profile,  such
    as male prostitutes.  I  consider  that  the  judge's  reading  of  the
    background evidence is fair, and that Ms Physsas' interpretation of the
    background  evidence  is  in  reality  no  more  than   expression   of
    disagreement with a finding that was reasonably open to the judge.

28. Another line of attack pursued by Ms Physsas  was  in  respect  of  the
    judge's finding that the appellant would conduct himself in public  and
    private in the same way as described by "Sam" in paragraph 21.18 of the
    report.  She submits that on analysis the lifestyle described by  "Sam"
    is one where he is living discreetly out of fear of persecution, and so
    in comparing the appellant to "Sam", the judge is tacitly acknowledging
    that the appellant would have to live discreetly as  a  gay  person  in
    Bangladesh in order to avoid persecution.

29. However, the life described by "Sam" is  an  openly  gay  lifestyle  in
    that, for example, he feels able to walk hand in  hand  with  his  male
    partner in the streets of Dhaka.  Also, on his own account, he does not
    have to take any steps to conceal the fact that he shares  a  bed  with
    his male partner.  The one respect in which "Sam" said he did not  feel
    he would  be  safe  was  if  he  informed  his  family  of  his  sexual
    orientation.  But it is apparent from the context that the  apprehended
    adverse consequences of coming out to family members does not meet  the
    threshold of persecution or serious harm.

30. Ms Physsas pointed out that "Sam" had not given his real name, but  had
    asked to be referred to by a pseudonym, as he was concerned  about  the
    social and legal implications of his real name being  publicised.   But
    "Sam's" understandable desire for anonymity in a country where there is
    significant societal discrimination against gay people,  and  where  he
    has not come out to his own family, is not to be equated with  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution.

31. It was open to the judge to find, as he did, that the  appellant  would
    pursue a lifestyle in Bangladesh that was not materially different from
    the gay lifestyle which he was leading in the UK.  He would not need to
    conceal aspects of his sexual orientation which he would  otherwise  be
    unwilling to conceal.

32. It is argued in the alternative that the judge's assessment of  whether
    the appellant met the requirements of Rule  276ADE(1)(iv)  was  flawed.
    But the  error  of  law  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings  on  the
    appellant's private life claim is based on the same  proposition  which
    underlies the error of law challenge to  the  judge's  finding  on  the
    asylum claim, namely that if the appellant is returned  to  Bangladesh,
    this would involve the suppression of his  sexual  identity.   For  the
    reasons given earlier in this discussion, this error of  law  challenge
    is not made out.  The society to which the appellant would be returning
    is not a liberal one, but, as stated by  Lord  Hope,  it  is  wrong  to
    approach the issue on the basis that the purpose of the  Convention  is
    to guarantee to an applicant who is gay that he can live as freely  and
    openly as a gay person as he would  be  able  to  do  if  he  were  not
    returned.  As held by the judge, the appellant would be able to live an
    openly gay lifestyle like "Sam" in a place  such  as  Dhaka,  and  thus
    there  are  not  significant  obstacles  to  his   reintegration   into
    Bangladesh.

New Evidence that was not before the First-tier Tribunal

33. In advance of the error of  law  hearing,  the  appellant's  solicitors
    served a supplementary bundle of  evidence  upon  which  the  appellant
    wished to rely at the hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 12 January 2016.
     At the outset of the hearing, I obtained Ms Physsas' confirmation that
    the evidence was only going to be sought to be relied on if an error of
    law was made out.

34. For the avoidance of doubt, I accept the  explanation  that  have  been
    given as to why this evidence  was  not  submitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which was that it was generated in response to  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

35. The explanation is that the appellant contacted a friend in  Bangladesh
    to inform him of the First-tier Tribunal decision, and this set  off  a
    chain of events with the friend writing back to the appellant  as  well
    as informing the appellant's mother about what had happened.

36. The other development relied upon is that the appellant is  now  living
    with Mr S.  Whilst the judge accepted that the appellant and Mr S  were
    friends, he was not persuaded they were in a relationship  which  would
    amount to family life under Article 8.

37. Ms Physsas confirmed that it was not the appellant's  case,  even  now,
    that Mr S meets the definition of a partner under Appendix FM, and so I
    do not consider that the new evidence on this issue takes  matters  any
    further.

38. The evidence emanating  from  Bangladesh  is  not  admissible  for  the
    purpose of supporting an argument that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is vitiated by a material error of law.  This is  because  the
    evidence does not have the characteristics  which  are  required  by  R
    (Iran).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

