

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
AA/06217/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                 Decision  &
Reasons Promulgated
On  25th  February  2016                                                  On
31st March 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


Between:
                                    [S T]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Muquit (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Ms Willocks-Briscoe (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge J.Connor promulgated on the 23rd October 2015, in which
      she dismissed the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Background


   2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born on the [ ] 1983.


   3. It is the Appellant's case that in 2004 he was made to complete  three
      months of compulsory training for the LTTE,  following  which  he  was
      sent to the front line in Omanthai to carry out work digging  bunkers.
      Thereafter, he got a place at College in Colombo,  but  the  LTTE,  he
      says, said that he must continue to work for them in Colombo and  that
      his role was to allow LTTE visitors into Colombo to stay with him  and
      to  take  LTTE  members  to  the  airport,  transport  goods  such  as
      medicines, batteries, flashlights and other electrical goods. He  says
      he continued this work until 2006 when the war intensified and he lost
      contact with these LTTE members and that he completed his  studies  in
      February 2009. In August 2009  the  Appellant's  case  that  he  began
      working  for  a  Non-Governmental  Organisation  (NGO),  the   revival
      project, which helped rehabilitate internally  displaced  people  from
      the camps and provided them with humanitarian aid and  that  this  NGO
      was under the control of the government. He says that he was  arrested
      by the Sri Lankan authorities in May 2010 because he  was  accused  of
      being an LTTE member  and  that  he  had  been  pictured  with  people
      involved with the LTTE and that the authorities had come to know about
      his compulsory training with the LTTE and that he was also accused  of
      helping Tamils in the resettlement project. His case is  that  he  was
      detained for almost 50 days, during which time he claims that  he  was
      beaten very badly in detention, including  being  beaten  with  wires,
      being suspended from  something,  having  a  bag  filled  with  petrol
      wrapped around his face, being beaten with the butt of a gun and  that
      he claims to have scars from mistreatment. It is said  that  in  early
      July 2010 his father arranged his release through paying a  bribe  and
      that he managed to escape coming to the United Kingdom,  where  it  is
      said that he has  been  involved  with  pro-Tamil  demonstrations  and
      celebrating Heroes day. His case is  that  he  fears  the  Sri  Lankan
      government will arrest and torture him if he returned because  of  his
      suspected involvement with the LTTE.


   4. The Appellant claimed asylum on the 29th November 2013, 3 years  after
      having arrived in the UK on the  28th  September  2010.  His  original
      asylum claim was rejected by the  Respondent  in  an  Asylum  Decision
      dated the 10th  March  2015.  The  Appellant  sought  to  appeal  that
      decision to the First-tier Tribunal, and  that  appeal  was  heard  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Connor at Hatton Cross on the 22nd September
      2015, with her decision being promulgated on 23rd  October  2015.  She
      rejected the Appellant's asylum appeal, for the reasons set out within
      her decision which I  have  fully  read  and  taken  account  of.  The
      Appellant sought to appeal that decision to the Upper Tribunal on  the
      grounds set out within the Grounds of Appeal. Permission to appeal was
      initially refused by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  on  the  12th
      November 2015, but permission to appeal was then subsequently  granted
      by Upper Tribunal Judge Allen on the 7th  January  2016.  In  granting
      permission to appeal, Judge Allen  stated  that  "as  regards  to  the
      grounds, I  consider  that  the  matters  raised  in  paragraph  4  in
      particular and the grounds genuinely identify arguable  challenges  to
      the Judge's decision".

      Submissions


   5. Within his oral submissions Mr Muquit told me that the renewed Grounds
      of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal adopted the initial Grounds of  Appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal, and he relied upon both sets of the Grounds  of
      Appeal in support of his  case.  I  have  fully  considered  both  the
      original Grounds of Appeal and the renewed Grounds of Appeal, and have
      fully taken account of the same in reaching my decision. I  have  also
      taken account of the Rule 24 reply, which was  helpfully  provided  to
      the Upper Tribunal by Ms Willocks-Briscoe at the appeal hearing.


   6. In his oral submissions, Mr Muquit argued that the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge had wrongly treated doubts about  one  distinct  aspect  of  the
      Appellant's evidence regarding how he managed to leave  Sri  Lanka  as
      damaging another discreet aspect of the Appellant's  evidence,  namely
      that he was tortured by the authorities,  which  he  argued  had  been
      corroborated independently by medical evidence.  He  argued  that  the
      Judge had irrationally rejected the  Claimant's  claim  that  he  been
      tortured in light of the medical evidence and failed to give  adequate
      reasons in respect thereof. He argued that  the  Judge  had  not  made
      clear findings regarding whether or not both the claim of torture  and
      the Appellant being released on payment of a bribe had been  rejected,
      or whether or not the Judge had simply rejected the assertion that the
      Appellant had been released following  the  payment  of  a  bribe.  He
      further argued that the Judge had failed to treat the Appellant  as  a
      vulnerable  witness  given   the   diagnosis   from   the   consultant
      psychiatrist that the Appellant was suffering from PTSD and failed  to
      assess his evidence in light of him being a vulnerable witness.


   7. He argued that the main objection related to [59] of the Judgement  in
      that it is said that this was  the  only  reason  why  the  Judge  had
      rejected the Appellant's asylum claim in that his claim  that  he  had
      been detained and tortured to the extent that a bribe was paid for his
      release was said to be inconsistent with his application for a student
      visa in his own name within days/weeks of his release. He argued  that
      the fact that if a Appellant had not been believed in respect  of  one
      distinct finding did not lessen the impact  upon  the  credibility  of
      other distinct findings and that no reason for the connection  between
      the  Appellant  being  tortured  and  whether   or   not   there   was
      inconsistencies regarding his application for a student visa had  been
      given, such as to justify rejection of the Appellant's  core  account.
      He argued that the Judge had accepted that the Appellant had worked as
      an NGO, given the further corroboration produced in  this  regard  and
      that the medical evidence  had  shown  that  the  Appellant  had  been
      mistreated at the hands of the authorities and that this  torture  had
      led to PTSD. Although he  agreed  that  the  Judge  was  the  ultimate
      arbiter of facts, he argued that the Judge did need  to  give  reasons
      and those reasons did need to be adequate and sufficient and that  the
      Judge needed to give reasons for discounting the Appellant's evidence,
      especially in light of the medical  evidence  that  the  scarring  was
      typical of the treatment said to have been suffered by the  Appellant.
      He argued that the  Judge  was  unclear  as  to  whether  or  not  the
      Appellant had been tortured and the Judge had failed to  consider  the
      perception of the Appellant if he had previously been  tortured,  upon
      an enforced return.


   8. In her submissions on behalf of the Respondent, Miss  Willocks-Briscoe
      relied upon the Respondent's Rule 24 reply. She handed up to the Upper
      Tribunal, the authorities of JL  (medical  reports-credibility)  China
      [2013] UKUT 00145 (AIC) and MD (Guinea) v Secretary of State  for  the
      Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 733, and  I  fully  taken  account  of
      those authorities in reaching my decision. She argued that in light of
      the case of JL (medical  reports-credibility)  China,  whilst  medical
      report may support an Appellant's case, what has to be  considered  is
      the extent to which a diagnosis is dependent upon whether or  not  the
      Appellant's account is believed. She argued that it was for the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge to consider the credibility of  the  core  account
      and to assess credibility and that the  Judge  had  properly,  in  her
      submission, considered the evidence of both Dr  Martin  regarding  the
      scarring and Dr Dhumad regarding the Appellant's PTSD.



   9. She argued that at [59] the Judgement should not be read in  isolation
      and that when one read [60], it was clear that the Judge, she  argued,
      considered the inconsistency was related to  the  Appellant  being  in
      such fear that  he  disguised  himself  as  a  Muslim  and  used  fake
      identification document, but had attended at the  British  Embassy  in
      Colombo to apply for a student visa in  his  own  name  with  his  own
      documents. She argued that the Judge was perfectly  entitled  to  find
      that this was inconsistent.



  10.  She argued that the Judge had considered all of the evidence  in  the
      round as the Court of Appeal had said should be done in the case of MD
      (Guinea) between paragraphs 7 and 9 of the Judgement. She  argued  the
      fact it was found to be credible that the Appellant had worked for  an
      NGO did not mean that all of his evidence needed to be accepted,  when
      the NGO was working in conjunction with the government.



  11.  Miss Willocks-Briscoe argued that the Judge had gone on  to  consider
      the Appellant's sur place activities and the risk that he  might  face
      as a result and that  adequate  reasons  had  been  given  in  respect
      thereof. She argued that the psychiatric report had  simply  indicated
      that the Appellant had required extra time to answer the questions and
      required regular breaks when giving evidence, but had not said that he
      would be significantly hampered in giving evidence or that his ability
      to recall matters would be affected.


  12. In reply, Mr Muquit argued that there was no rational reason given for
      the alleged inconsistency of the  Appellant  hiding  his  identity  by
      pretending to be a Muslim man  and  using  false  documents,  and  yet
      applying at the British Embassy with his own  identity  documents  and
      even if there was any irrationality in the Appellant's actions, it had
      to be borne in mind that he was suffering from PTSD.



  13. Both advocates agreed that if there were any material errors of law in
      the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Connor  that  the  matter
      should be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  de
      novo.

   My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  14. The findings of fact of any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  have  to  be
      supported by reasons, which are  both  adequate  and  sufficient.  The
      reasoning has to be sufficiently clear  and  adequate  such  that  the
      parties know why they have either won or lost, and in  particular  the
      losing party knows why they have lost.


  15. In this case the First-tier Tribunal Judge did  have  before  him  the
      evidence of Dr Martin, who in his  report  stated  that  the  scarring
      suffered by the Appellant was typical of those he described  as  being
      inflicted upon him whilst being detained and the scarring  was  caused
      by a third-party, but Dr Martin was not able to  say  who  had  caused
      them, and the psychiatric report from Dr  Dhumad  which  again  stated
      that the Appellant was suffering from PTSD and was on antidepressants,
      but had not stated the cause of the symptoms. It has to  be  borne  in
      mind that although Dr Martin had not  stated  that  the  scarring  was
      "diagnostic" of the traumas described by the Appellant, such  that  it
      could not have been caused in any other way  than  described,  he  did
      describe it  as  being  "typical"  of  the  trauma  described  by  the
      Appellant, such that it had an appearance that is usually  found  with
      this type of trauma, but there were other  possible  causes.  However,
      "typical" is the second  highest  categorisation  under  the  Istanbul
      Protocol, and the scarring was described  as  "typical",  rather  than
      simply consistent or highly consistent.


  16. Although within [35] the First-tier Tribunal Judge did state that  "in
      terms of the scarring report by Dr Martin, the  doctor  can  say  that
      they were caused by a third party but  not  who  caused  them.  It  is
      possible to inflict the injuries with the consent of the Appellant and
      the scarring  is  not  determinative  of  anything.",  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge did not go  on  to  make  any  findings  regarding  the
      causation of the scarring, or as to  whether  or  not  they  had  been
      inflicted with the consent of the Appellant, or as to whether  or  not
      they have been caused at any other time other than at the time alleged
      by the Appellant. The Judge simply appears to have considered that the
      medical evidence both in terms of the scarring and  the  psychological
      injury was not determinative of the case, but in  giving  reasons  for
      rejecting the Appellant's account then simply relied upon the  reasons
      set out by him between [59] and [63] of the decision.


  17. When considering  this  reasoning,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
      findings at [59] that "having considered the Appellant's  evidence  in
      the round, I find the Appellant's claim that he was  detained  by  the
      Sri Lankan government and tortured to the extent that a bribe was paid
      for his release is inconsistent with his  application  for  a  student
      visa in his own  name  within  days/weeks  of  his  release"  and  the
      subsequent reasoning between [60] and [52] is inadequate.



  18. The judge goes on at [60] to find that:



        "It is the Appellant's claim that he was released from detention  by
        a bribe and taken into hiding by the agent  because  the  government
        would want to arrest him. The agent then disguised him as  a  Muslim
        and used fake  identification  documents.  However,  the  Appellant,
        whilst in hiding, was able to attend the British Embassy in  Colombo
        to apply for a student visa in his own name with his own  documents.
        On his own evidence, in his  statement,  he  was  travelling  around
        Colombo to the Embassy with a fake ID card whilst also carrying  his
        own documents to apply for a Visa at the British Embassy. It is  not
        consistent that the Appellant was in fear for his  safety  following
        his detention to the extent that he was using false documents and in
        hiding, but was able to attend the British Embassy and apply  for  a
        visa in his own name".


      I consider that the Judge's reasoning in this regard  and  explanation
      for the findings is inadequate to allow the Appellant to know  exactly
      why his account in this regard has been considered to be  inconsistent
      and has been rejected. It is unclear from the  reasoning  within  [59]
      and [60] as to why it is  considered  that  the  Appellant  disguising
      himself as  a  Muslim  and  using  fake  identification  documents  is
      inconsistent with him applying for  a  student  visa  at  the  British
      Embassy in his own name within weeks and days of his  release.  It  is
      not the case as was  wrongly  stated  by  the  Respondent  within  the
      reasons for Refusal Letter at paragraph 44 of the reasons for  Refusal
      Letter as was  summarised  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Connor  at
      paragraph 9 (vi) of the decision that "certainly, it is considered  to
      be inconsistent that you would go through such lengths as to use false
      identity whilst you were in hiding and then  would  approach  the  Sri
      Lankan  government  using  your  own  identity  and  documents".   The
      Appellant in applying for a visa to the British Embassy, would not  be
      applying to the Sri Lankan government, he is applying to  the  British
      authorities. It is unclear from reading  [59]  to  [62],  whether  the
      Judge again has become confused  in  this  regard  in  associating  an
      application for a visa to the British Embassy, as being equivalent  to
      applying to the Sri  Lankan  authorities,  as  was  suggested  wrongly
      within the Refusal Notice. Certainly, however,  the  bald  finding  at
      [59] that "I find that the Appellant's claim that he was  detained  by
      the Sri Lankan government and tortured to the extent that a bribe  was
      paid for his release, is  inconsistent  with  his  application  for  a
      student visa in his own name within days/weeks of his release" has not
      been adequately explained.


  19. To the extent that Ms Willocks-Briscoe sought to argue that the  Judge
      at [60] had clarified her reasoning and that the inconsistency was  in
      terms of the Appellant carrying around the streets of Colombo  both  a
      false ID and his own documents, it  is  not  clear  from  the  Judge's
      reasoning within these paragraphs, that is in fact  the  inconsistency
      that the Judge was alleging, and even if it  were,  it  has  not  been
      properly explained as to why this would necessarily  be  inconsistent,
      as if the Appellant did wish to apply for a student visa, there  would
      be no logical reason for him to do so using a false identity and false
      documentation. If he were to hide his own documents upon  his  person,
      but still use his disguise of being a Muslim and having  his  fake  ID
      documentation for inspection, were he to be stopped by the authorities
      on the streets of Colombo, I fail to see why this would necessarily be
      inconsistent with him fearing for his own safety. This  has  not  been
      adequately explained by the Judge.


  20. Unlike in the case of MD (Guinea), the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has
      not made any definitive findings regarding the cause of the  scarring,
      or the PTSD, other than finding that they are not  conclusive  of  the
      matter, but given the errors regarding the reasoning for rejecting the
      Appellant's account, I am not in a position to say that  the  decision
      would have been the same irrespective of those errors. I  do  consider
      that the error of law in this regard is material in that it  may  well
      have affected the outcome of the  case.  The  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge J. Connor, therefore does contain  material  errors  of
      law and is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the First-tier
      Tribunal to be reheard by any Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge J. Connor.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J.  Connor,  does  contain  a
material error of law and is set aside;
The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  before
any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J.
Connor.

Signed                                                                 Dated
26th February 2016

[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
