
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
AA/06577/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 May 2016                          |On 20 May 2016                 |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                SUKHJIT KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:  Ms K McCarthy (counsel) instructed by Hammersmith &
Fulham            Law Centre
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hanes promulgated on 22 February 2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 10 October 1979 and is a national of India.  On
17 May 2012 the appellant and her two children entered the UK  as  visitors.
They have not returned to India, but remained in  the  UK  as  over-stayers.
The appellant claimed asylum on 13 July 2014.  The  respondent  refused  the
appellant's claim on 22nd August 2014. The appellant appealed  against  that
decision, and in a decision promulgated on 28 October 2014 her asylum  claim
was dismissed  but  the  appellant's  appeal  was  allowed  on  humanitarian
protection & article 3 ECHR grounds.

4. The respondent successfully appealed against the decision promulgated  on
28 October 2014. In a decision dated 15th February 2015 the  Upper  Tribunal
remitted this case to the First-tier.


The Judge's Decision

5.  In a decision promulgated  on  22  February  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hanes ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision on all grounds.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  6  April  2016  Judge  Landes  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "2. I consider that it is arguable that the judge erred  in  departing
      from the findings of Judge Nicholls so far as charitable support  from
      other Christians is  concerned,  as  set  out  in  ground  one.  Judge
      Nicholls did indeed have evidence in the  form  of  letters  from  the
      appellant pastor. Whilst it may be  that  the  financial  support  (as
      opposed to  the  emotional  and  practical  support)  which  would  be
      provided by the  congregation  is  not  significant  to  Judge  Hanes'
      ultimate conclusions, it is not self-evident from  her  findings.  The
      Judge appears to have had more material to enable her to  depart  from
      Judge Nicholls findings in  respect  of  family  support,  but  it  is
      arguable as set out at paragraph 4i grounds that  the  evidence  given
      was not in fact inconsistent on the point of contact with the mother


      "3. I find it difficult to see  how  ground  2  is  arguable.  By  her
      indication  that  she  had  insufficient  evidence  that  there   were
      charitable institutions who would provide support to a person  in  the
      position of the appellant, the Judge was not suggesting that this  was
      a source available to the appellant, rather to the contrary, that  she
      could not consider this source was potentially available to her.


      "4. I do not consider that the Judge made speculative  findings  about
      the appellant accessing AVR. The  appellant  can  be  assumed  to  act
      reasonably in the event that she becomes appeal rights  exhausted  and
      the Judge explained clearly and cogently why she found that AVR  would
      be available to the appellant. Nevertheless as set out at para 10  and
      11 iii grounds it is arguable that the availability of  AVR  does  not
      address Judge Nicholls finding that the appellant  would  have  little
      likelihood of being employed at a reasonable income  level  or  indeed
      his finding at [32] about the difficulties she would have as a  single
      woman with children  finding  accommodation  and  employment  (compare
      11(iii)).


      "5. Although I have made adverse comments on parts of the  grounds,  I
      do not restrict the grounds which may be argued bearing  in  mind  the
      decision in Ferrer"

The Hearing

7. (a) Ms McCarthy for the appellants  moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
reminded me of the procedural history of this case, and  drew  my  attention
to the second paragraph of the Judge's decision, the last two  sentences  of
which record that the case was remitted to the Judge to  give  consideration
to the availability of support charities in India and the  impact  that  the
assisted voluntary return scheme could have on  the  appellant's  case.  She
told me that the remaining findings of Judge Nicholls were preserved.

(b) Ms McCarthy told  me  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  principles  in
Devaseelan 2002 UKIAT 00702   because the  Judge  had  departed  from  Judge
Nicholls findings of fact at [14] & [15} of his earlier decision.  She  told
me that the Judge's findings that  assistance  would  be  available  to  the
appellant from her pastor in India and the congregation of the church  there
amount to nothing more than speculation. She was  critical  of  the  Judge's
finding at [14] of the decision, that the appellant would have support  from
her mother. She argued that none of those  findings  are  supported  by  the
evidence placed before the Judge, and that those findings fly  in  the  face
of the preserved findings of Judge Nicholls. She told me  that  the  Judge's
findings are tainted by irrationality.

(c) Ms McCarthy moved on to the second ground of appeal  and  told  me  that
the Judge had failed to make findings on a  material  matter.  She  told  me
that  the  central  issue  in  the  appellant's  case  is  that  she   faces
destitution if she returns to India, yet  the  Judge  made  no  findings  on
submissions made that there are  no  charitable  institutions  in  India  to
which the appellant can turn for assistance.

(d) Miss McCarthy told me that the Judge's findings that the  appellant  can
benefit from AVR are speculative and that the Judge failed to  take  account
of the appellant's repeated declarations that she will  not  apply  for  AVR
because she does not want to return to India. In any  event,  Miss  McCarthy
told me that AVR does not equate to a solution to the  appellant's  problems
and even if the existence of AVR was relevant, it  would  do  no  more  than
delay  the  appellant's  slide  into  destitution.  She  told  me  that  the
appellant's case clearly engages article 3 ECHR. She urged  me  to  set  the
decision aside and substitute  my  own  decision  allowing  the  appellant's
appeal.

8. Mr Duffy, for the respondent, told me that the decision does not  contain
errors, material or otherwise. He told me that the  appellant  relies  on  a
fallacious argument when addressing AVR. He argued that the  fact  that  the
appellant does not want to return to  India,  and  so  will  not  apply  for
assistance,  does  not  mean  that  assistance  is  not  available  to   the
appellant. He took me to [18] and [19] of the decision  where  (he  told  me
that) the Judge adequately considered and discusses  the  benefits  of  AVR.
The appellant has previously lived in India as a single parent with her  two
children. He urged me to dismiss  the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

9. The first ground of appeal is that the Judge did not apply  the  guidance
given in Devaseelan. The Judge concludes [2] of the decision by recording

      "at the hearing, both representatives  agreed  (although  not  clearly
      stated in the decision of Designated Judge Digney) of the findings  of
      judge Nicholls in all other respects  were  preserved  (including  the
      dismissal of the asylum claim)."

10. Between [5] and [9] the Judge sets out the preserved findings  of  Judge
Nicholls. The Judge commences her own findings of  fact  at  [13],  and,  in
doing so correctly rehearses the guidance given in  Devaseelan.  At  [14]  &
[15] the Judge clearly explains that her findings in relation to  assistance
available from other Christians in India differs from the findings of  Judge
Nicholls, and explains why. In doing so the Judge follows  the  guidance  in
the case of Devaseelan. It is incumbent on  the  First-tier  Judge  to  make
findings of fact. In this decision that is exactly what the Judge has  done.
In this case the Judge has quite correctly taken the  findings  of  fact  of
Judge Nicholls as a starting point, and  then  explains  that  her  findings
differ because of the evidence placed before her.

11. In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the Judge departed  from  the
guidance given in Devaseelan "without good reason". That is  not  the  case.
The Judge manifestly takes guidance from Devaseelan, and then  explains  how
and why she reaches her findings of fact.

12. Having challenged the Judge for making  findings  of  fact,  the  second
ground of appeal moves on to  criticise  the  Judge  for  "failing  to  make
findings on a material matter".  The second ground of appeal drives at  [16]
of the decision and is succinctly put

      "7. However,  at  the  same  paragraph  no  finding  is  made  on  A's
      submissions that there are no other charitable institutions  in  India
      who will provide support to A and her children."

13. The second ground of  appeal  is  misconceived.  The  Judge  (correctly)
makes findings of fact on the basis of evidence presented, not on the  basis
of submissions. The second sentence of [16] is

      "There was insufficient evidence provided to  me  of  other  organised
      charitable institutions who would provide support to  someone  in  the
      position of the appellant and her children (with a male child over the
      age of 5)."

A fair reading of the decision makes it  clear  that  the  Judge  approached
this  case  on  the  basis  that  neither   women's   shelters   nor   other
accommodation provided by a charity would be available to the appellant.

14. The third ground  of  appeal  levels  an  accusation  that  the  Judge's
findings  on  the  availability  of  AVR  are  "speculative".  The  argument
advanced is that the appellant wilfully refuses to apply for  AVR,  so  that
its availability is irrelevant.  There is no merit  in  that  argument.  The
Judge considered the options available to the appellant. AVR  is  an  option
available to  the  appellant.  The  fact  that  the  appellant  declares  an
intention to ignore available assistance is  irrelevant.  If  the  appellant
closes her eyes to AVR, it does not mean that it no longer exists.

15. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

16. There is nothing wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the respondent's appeal amounts to little more than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as she found them  to  be.  The
appellant might not like the conclusion that the  Judge  has  come  to,  but
that conclusion is the result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal  equation.
There is nothing wrong with the Judge's fact finding exercise.  The  correct
test in law has been applied. The  decision  does  not  contain  a  material
error of law.

17.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

18.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

19.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 17
May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
