
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06366/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                      Ms LIYUN (o/w LiLi) WENG(or WEN)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Kannangara (counsel) instructed by Anglo-
                    Chinese Law Firm Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Wilsher promulgated on 22 October 2015, which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 3 October 1974 and is a national  of  China.
On 27 March 2015 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's  application
for asylum and for leave to remain as a partner of a British citizen.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Wilsher  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 16 November 2015  Judge  Frankish
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The appellant was found to be credible her core  account  of  being  a
    mother of two but that she was not thereby at risk; likewise  that  she
    is in a genuine relationship exceeding two years cohabitation.  It  was
    also accepted that the partner would "have difficulty earning a living"
    but not that this  would  amount  to  hardship.  Arguably,  not  having
    considered the partner's absence  of  Mandarin  or  Cantonese,  serious
    hardship has not been adequately considered. Zambrano, as  incorporated
    in Reg 15 A(4A) of  the  2006  regulations  as  amended  has  not  been
    considered at all. These points amount to arguable errors of  law.  The
    findings in respect of asylum are not to be reopened, these not  having
    been challenged in this application."

The hearing

6.    (a)   Mr Kannangara, counsel for  the  appellant,  told  me  that  the
decision is tainted by a material errors of law in relation to  the  Article
8 assessment. He acknowledged that the  permission  to  appeal  prohibits  a
challenge to the asylum aspect of this case, and told me  that  despite  the
fact that the grant permission to appeal  with  specific  reference  to  the
case  of  the  Zambrano  and  regulation  15A(4A)  of  the  Immigration  EEA
Regulations 2006 (neither of which are now pursued by the  appellant),  what
is argued for the appellant is that in determining the appellant  Article  8
rights within the rules the Judge incorrectly applied  paragraph  EX.1,  and
that the Judge's proportionality assessment of Article 8 ECHR  out-with  the
rules is flawed because he conflated the test of "exceptionality"  with  the
test of "insurmountable obstacles", and then imported the  result  into  the
assessment of Article 8 ECHR out-with the rules.

    (b)    Mr Kannangara took me to [8] of the decision and  told  me  that
the Judge correctly identified the test set out in EX.1 and EX.2, but  that,
on the facts as the Judge found them to be, the  Judge  was  wrong  to  find
that there were no insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  between  the
appellant and her British citizen partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.  He
told me that because the Judge had found that the  appellant's  partner  has
some health difficulties,  that  the  appellant's  partner  would  lose  his
employment, & that the appellant's partner can only speak English and is  no
longer in the first flush of youth, the Judge should  have  found  that  any
attempts to pursue family life outside  the  UK  would  cause  very  serious
hardship amounting to insurmountable obstacles.

    (c)    Mr Kannangara told me that the Judge went on to consider Article
8 outside the rules at [9] and [10] of the decision; that  at  [10]  of  the
decision the Judge identified the need to take account  of  section  117  of
the 2002 Act, but thereafter (he  argued)  the  Judge  applied  too  high  a
threshold when attempting to  assess  proportionality.  He  noted  that  the
Judge made reference  to  appendix  FM  and  EX.1,  but  then  imported  the
reasoning that he applies  to  "insurmountable  obstacles"  at  [8]  of  the
decision instead of separately carrying  out  a  proportionality  assessment
which should not contain a test of exceptionality. He urged me  to  set  the
decision aside.

7.    (a)   Miss Fijiwala, for the respondent, told  me  that  the  decision
does not contain errors of law, material or otherwise. She told me that  the
first ground of appeal amounts to an irrationality challenge, and  that  the
Judge had applied the correct test's and had made  findings  of  fact  which
were open to the Judge before reaching the conclusion  that  the  facts  and
circumstances of the appellant and her  partner  did  not  fall  within  the
definition of insurmountable obstacles for the purposes of EX.1.

    (b)    Ms Fijiwala told me that  the  Judge's  approach  to  Article  8
proportionality could not be faulted. She relied on the cases of SS  (Congo)
and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387, R(on  the  application  of  Agyarko)  [2015]
EWCA Civ 440 and Chen [2015] UKUT 189,  and  told  me  that  the  Judge  had
properly followed the guidance contained in those cases. She  told  me  that
the Judge's approach to s.117 of 2002 Act was entirely correct, and that  he
has  applied  the  correct  burden  and  standard  of  proof  in   assessing
proportionality. She told me that the Judge weighed  every  relevant  factor
carefully before  correctly  finding  that,  on  balance,  the  respondent's
decision is a proportionate breach of any Article  8  rights  the  appellant
and her partner might have.

Analysis

8.    The appellant's first challenge drives at the Judge's findings at  [8]
of the decision, and argues that on the facts as the judge found them to  be
the Judge should have found  that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
family life continuing China.

9.    At [8] the Judge correctly identifies the test set out  in  EX.1,  and
the interpretation given in EX 2 to assist in correctly applying  the  test.
After doing so the Judge finds "there is nothing before me to  indicate  the
partner would face insurmountable obstacles in going to  China  although  he
would not wish to go."

10.   At [8] the Judge finds that the appellant's  partner  can  only  speak
English, he takes account of  the  appellant's  partner's  age,  his  health
difficulties, his employment; he finds that  the  appellant's  partner  will
have difficulty earning  a  living  in  China.  It  is  submitted  (for  the
appellant) that those factors amount to insurmountable hardship.

11.   R (on the application of Agyarko) [2015] EWCA Civ 440  considered  the
phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in paragraph EX.1  of  the  Rules.
"... The phrase as used in the Rules is intended to have  the  same  meaning
as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence. It is clear that the European  Court  of
Human Rights regards it as  a  formulation  imposing  a  stringent  test  in
respect of that factor, as is illustrated by  Jeunesse  v  Netherlands  (see
para. [117]: there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  family  settling
in Suriname, even though the  applicant  and  her  family  would  experience
hardship if forced to do so). "

12.   At paragraph 26 of that decision "The mere facts that Mr Benette is  a
British citizen, has lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a  job
here - and hence might find it difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to  re-
locate to Ghana to continue their family life there - could  not  constitute
insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

13.   In reality  appellant's  partner  finds  himself  in  no  different  a
position to that of  Mr  Benette  in  the  case  of  Agyarko.  The  case-law
indicates  that  the  Judge's  approach  is  beyond  criticism.  The   Judge
sensitively took account of the difficulties that  would  be  faced  by  the
appellant and her partner, but correctly concluded that  those  difficulties
do not amount to insurmountable obstacles. No  challenge  is  taken  to  the
legal test applied by the Judge (which was correct).  The  challenge  is  to
his conclusion. As his conclusion is entirely  in  line  with  the  case  of
Agyarko, the conclusion is well within the range of  reasonable  conclusions
available to the Judge, and is also well founded in law. There is  no  merit
in the first ground of appeal, which in  reality  amounts  to  nothing  more
than an expression of dissatisfaction with a  finding  competently  open  to
the Judge to make.

14.    The  second  ground  of  appeal  focuses  entirely  on  the   Judge's
assessment of Article 8 ECHR out-with the rules. The Judge  correctly  takes
guidance from the case of Agyarko at  [9]  of  the  decision.  [10]  of  the
decision contains the Judge's proportionality assessment.

15.   The judge correctly identifies that little weight can be given to  the
relationship between the appellant and her partner because of the  operation
of section 117 of the 2002 Act. As part of  the  proportionality  assessment
the Judge finds that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of  appendix
FM and so, "... must rely on Article 8 pure and simple".

16.   The Judge then finds that the appellant  and  her  partner  are  in  a
genuine, caring relationship but that, because of  the  lack  of  compelling
medical evidence and in the light of the lack  of  financial  evidence,  the
decision is not a disproportionate  breach  of  Article  8  ECHR.  There  is
nothing wrong with the Judge's proportionality  assessment.  The  Judge  has
not imported  the  test  of  exceptionality.  An  holistic  reading  of  the
decision indicates that the Judge considers whether  there  were  compelling
circumstances to consider Article 8 out-with the  rules,  and  even  in  the
absence of those compelling circumstances correctly weighed the facts as  he
found them to be, applying the weight that statute permits to each of  those
factors before concluding that the balance tipped in favour  of  immigration
control.

17.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

18.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
him. He carefully records the submissions that were  made  and  then,  after
correctly directing himself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to the Judge to reach.

19.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

20.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

21.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 8 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

