

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06199/2013
      AA/06243/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennet House, Stoke-on-Trent         |Determination Sent           |
|On 14th November 2013                         |On 22nd November 2013        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker



                                   Between

                                  NINA NJIE
                           CUA (Anonymity granted)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATEFOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Jagadeshan, counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a determination by First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Plimmer dismissing an appeal on asylum and human rights grounds
      against a decision to remove the appellants from the United Kingdom
      following a decision to refuse to recognise them as being in need of
      international surrogate protection. Permission to appeal was granted
      on the grounds that it was arguable


     a. that the judge had erred in law in considering the delay in the
        first appellant claiming asylum as being a primary determinative
        factor as oppose to being a matter to be taken into account as
        damaging credibility
     b. the judge did not address the evidence that the first appellant
        changed her telephone number to avoid her brother's telephone calls
     c. that the judge should have dealt with the relationship between the
        second appellant and his father in more detail despite the evidence
        of limited contact.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal judge refers in [18-21] to the first
      appellant's delay in claiming asylum. She concludes [21]


      I find that the delay in claiming asylum in this case together with
      the implausible explanation for this, significantly undermines the
      appellant's credibility.


   3. She then goes on to state [22]


      I have nonetheless considered whether the first appellant should be
      given the benefit of the doubt. I note her account of ill-treatment
      being perpetrated against her....


   4. She refers to considering all the evidence in the round and in [23] a
      starting point as being her claimed ethnic group; in [25] to
      considering all the evidence together; in [26] to it being difficult
      to understand why she did not change her telephone number (although
      her evidence was that she had). In [27] [28] her significant
      credibility claims reflect back to the rejection of the first
      appellant as Mandinka and the rejection of the claim that she had
      refused to marry the man her father had chosen for her.


   5. Ms Marin submitted that the judge had not reached her overall
      conclusions through a finding that her claim was not credible because
      of delay. Uncharacteristically, this experienced judge fell into
      error. Her credibility findings are predicated on the basis of her
      findings on delay; her use of the word 'nonetheless' indicates a
      requirement on the appellant to provide sufficient evidence to
      misplace the adverse credibility findings as oppose to considering the
      evidence as to delay as an element in the evidence before her - see SM
      (section 8: judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116.


   6. The error in this case is compounded by the reliance on the
      appellant's failure to change her telephone number whereas the
      evidence from the appellant was that she had.


   7. Accordingly I set aside the decision to be remade.


   8. Credibility findings are fundamental to a decision such as the one in
      this appeal. Both parties were agreed before me that it was correct
      for this appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
      determination and I agree.


   9. In so far as the Article 8 assessment is concerned, the claimed error
      in law is not such as would otherwise result in the decision being set
      aside; the conclusion reached by the judge, although brief, was a
      decision open to her on the evidence. But given the serious issues in
      this appeal and the error with regard to the claim for international
      surrogate protection and because the decision is to be remade by the
      First-tier Tribunal I am satisfied that this should be set aside to be
      remade as well.


      Conclusion




     There is an error of law in the decision such that it is set  aside  to
   be remade.


     The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-determined.


     Further directions


    1. No findings of fact to be retained.
    2. Not to be heard by First-tier judge Plimmer.
    3. There will be three witnesses giving oral evidence,  no  interpreter
       required.
    4. If possible  a  date  for  listing  to  be  agreed  with  counsel  V
       Jagadesham.






                                    Date 15th November 2013
         Jane Coker
         Judge of the Upper Tribunal
