
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06344/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester, Piccadilly      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th November 2016                 |On 9th November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                  REHAM [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer (Broudie Jackson & Canter)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission granted by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  in  relation
    to a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S C Clark promulgated  on  8
    February 2016 by which he dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.

 2. The background to this case is that  the  Appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Sierra Leone who entered the UK illegally using false documentation and
    a false name on 16 October 2012

 3. The Appellant's case is that he was born in Masingbe in  Sierra  Leone.
    His parents died when he was 10 or 11 years old  and  he  was  an  only
    child. He then went to live with his mother's younger  brother  but  he
    died in 2012. That uncle was a member of the Poro Society.

 4. Shortly after his uncle's death the Appellant was taken to the bush  to
    be initiated into the Poro Society. The Poro Society is one  of  Sierra
    Leone's secret societies. He had been  warned  by  his  mother  not  to
    become a member of the Poro Society.

 5. In the bush a number of young men were waiting to be initiated, none of
    whom the appellant knew. He and four others managed to escape. One  was
    caught but the Appellant was not and he ran to a friend of his  uncle's
    in Masingbe, who he referred to as Uncle  Nixon  although  he  was  not
    related.

 6. Uncle Nixon offered to help the Appellant and the following day he  and
    the Appellant travelled to Freetown where they stayed in Uncle  Nixon's
    house for around two months. Shortly after  they  arrived  Uncle  Nixon
    began to sexually abuse the Appellant.

 7. During this time, using  papers  given  to  him  by  Uncle  Nixon,  the
    Appellant obtained documents in a false name and went  to  the  British
    High Commission where he was granted a multiple entry visa.

 8. In October 2012 the Appellant travelled to the UK with Uncle Nixon  and
    then lived in Uncle Nixon's house in Manchester. He  was  subjected  to
    further sexual abuse by Uncle Nixon there.

 9. After approximately four months the Appellant was taken by Uncle  Nixon
    to another man's house where he was asked to perform a sex act  but  he
    refused to do so.

10. That same evening, on the way  home,  the  Appellant  and  Uncle  Nixon
    stopped outside a shop and, at Uncle  Nixon's  request,  the  Appellant
    went inside. When the appellant came out of the shop  Uncle  Nixon  had
    gone and he has neither seen nor heard from him since.

11. The Appellant then slept on the streets for two  nights  until  he  was
    directed to social services in Oldham.

12. The Appellant claimed to be 16 years old and so was placed in the  care
    of social services. However, social services were concerned that he was
    not in fact under 18 and he was assessed in April/May 2013 and found to
    be over 18. He was discharged from social services care.

13. In June 2013, as  a  result  of  the  Appellant's  claims  about  being
    sexually  abused,  the  Home  Office  raised  a  potential  victim   of
    trafficking case.

14. Following an assessment he was found not to have  been  the  victim  of
    trafficking.

15. The Appellant has received psychological therapy, being assessed  by  a
    consultant forensic psychiatrist who opined that he was suffering  from
    post-traumatic stress disorder.

16. In the UK the Appellant says that he has established a private life. He
    is attending college and playing in a football team.

17. His asylum claim is based on the fact that he is a Muslim and also that
    he would be seriously at risk from the Poro Society in Sierra Leone.

18. Before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant disputed both his age  and
    the decision that he had not been the victim of trafficking.

19. The Judge noted that the Appellant had given a consistent account  over
    a number of interviews including during his  screening  interview,  his
    interview with the psychiatrist and during his  age  assessment  as  to
    what he had witnessed regarding the Poro  Society  initiation  ceremony
    and the reasons why he ran away. He had also  been  consistent  in  his
    account of having no close relatives in Sierra Leone.

20. It was not in dispute that the Appellant had entered the UK using false
    documentation and a false identity.

21. The Judge accepted the Appellant's  account  of  having  been  sexually
    abused by Uncle Nixon although  given  the  lack  of  evidence,  either
    medical or police evidence, he was unable to make a finding as  to  the
    extent of the abuse or the period of time over which it took place. The
    Judge noted however that the Appellant had not seen or heard from Uncle
    Nixon since April 2013.

22. The Judge did not make adverse findings in relation to  inconsistencies
    raised by the Secretary of State in the refusal letter.

23. With regard to the appellant's age, the Judge did not  accept  that  he
    was under 18 when he claimed asylum. He accepted the age assessment  as
    it was carried out by two experienced social workers with the aid of an
    interpreter and accepted that the Appellant was, the date  of  the  age
    assessment, 18 or 19 years of age.

24. Specifically, at paragraph 26 of the  decision  the  Judge  found  that
    although he was satisfied the Appellant had been  a  victim  of  sexual
    abuse and there was a breach  of  trust  by  Uncle  Nixon  he  was  not
    persuaded, on  the  evidence,  that  the  Appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking. He noted that the Appellant's evidence was that he went to
    Uncle Nixon to ask for help because he was afraid of the Poro  Society;
    that he had lived with him in Freetown for some two  months  and  there
    was no cogent evidence to suggest that the Appellant was not free to do
    as he wished in Freetown.

25. The Judge noted that the  Appellant  had  lived  with  Uncle  Nixon  in
    Manchester for a period of six months but gave no cogent explanation as
    to why he did not leave the house during that time  and  there  was  no
    cogent evidence that he was prevented from leaving to seek help  should
    he wish to.

26. The Judge also did not accept that, having been  supposedly  unable  to
    leave Uncle Nixon's house for those six months, he  was  then  suddenly
    and without warning abandoned in the street.

27. On the basis  of  the  consultant  psychiatrist's  evidence  the  Judge
    accepted  that  the  Appellant  suffered  from  post-traumatic   stress
    disorder but also noted that with psychological therapy there had  been
    a significant improvement.

28. With regard to risk on return and sufficiency of protection  the  Judge
    found that there was no credible evidence that the Appellant had a well-
    founded fear of persecution on the basis  that  he  was  a  Muslim  and
    indeed there was no evidence adduced about that.

29. The Judge then, at paragraph 34 of his decision, considered the risk of
    forced initiation into the Poro Society  and  noted  that  the  refusal
    letter set out extracts from a report by Ref World dated 9  March  2009
    entitled "Fear of forced initiation into the Poro Society"  to  support
    the view that the Appellant would not be at risk on that basis and that
    there was a sufficiency of protection particularly as the Poro  society
    is not a state-sponsored group  nor  linked  to  the  government.  That
    report stated that the Poro Society does  not  have  a  formal  central
    organisation and operates throughout through independent local  groups.
    The  Poro  should  be  considered  a  diversity  of  associations  that
    differentially share some ritual practices... The Poro Society forms  a
    network of connections over a wide reaching area. This network  may  be
    useful for trade, sharing information and for political support.

30. The Judge referred, at paragraph 35, to the Appellant's  representative
    referring him to a number  of  reports  contained  in  the  Appellant's
    bundle. There was a Country of  Origin  Researched  Information  Report
    from the Refugee Information Centre in Ireland dated March  2009  which
    indicated that secret  societies  such  as  the  Poro  Society  are  an
    integral part of Sierra Leonean culture and that nearly everyone living
    in Sierra Leone's provinces, particularly the rural parts, belong to  a
    secret society. The Judge went on to note that in the same report there
    was reference to the 2011 US State Department Report which stated  that
    government sources extrapolated the decrease in male  initiations  from
    observations  that  fewer  young  men  were  returning  to  their  home
    villages, where initiation ceremonies are held, from their jobs in  the
    country's main cities and towns.

31. The Judge then went on to note, at  paragraph  36,  that  he  had  been
    referred by the Appellant's representative to  a  report  by  the  Poro
    Studies Association of October 2014 which, it  was  claimed,  supported
    the Appellant's  evidence  as  to  what  he  says  he  saw  during  the
    initiation ceremony. However he also noted that the report went  on  to
    say "even today Poro  membership  is  of  great  social  and  political
    importance,  although  instead  of  undergoing  circumcision   in   the
    traditional sacred grove... Some very  westernised  parents  will  have
    their son circumcised in  a  medical  clinic  and  then  send  them  to
    abbreviated sessions in the bush."

32. At paragraph 37 the Judge went on  to  state  that  the  Appellant  had
    consistently stated he feared the  Poro  Society  and  that  if  he  is
    returned Sierra Leone he will be killed or will  suffer  serious  harm.
    However the Judge found there to be no cogent evidence before him  that
    forced initiations were taking  place,  especially  amongst  young  men
    working in the towns and cities or  that  the  Appellant  would  suffer
    serious harm as  a  result  of  having  escaped  from  a  Poro  Society
    initiation ceremony some four years earlier.

33. The Judge went on to note that the Appellant is a young adult  who  has
    successfully integrated into the community in which he now lives in the
    UK; that  he  is  attending  college  and  has  obtained  a  number  of
    qualifications which would be relevant to life in Sierra Leone.   As  a
    result the Judge found it would not be unduly  harsh  for  him  on  his
    return to relocate to Freetown or one of the other towns or  cities  in
    Sierra Leone.

34. The Judge then  concluded  that  there  was  no  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood that the Appellant's fear was well-founded.

35. The two grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted  and  which
    were pursued before me were as follows. Firstly, that the  Judge  erred
    in finding the Appellant was not  a  victim  of  trafficking  when  the
    findings  of  fact  that  the  Judge  made  fell  squarely  within  the
    definition of trafficking under the Palermo  protocol  and  in  finding
    that the Appellant had not been trafficked the Judge had  erred.  As  a
    result of that error he  had  further  erred  in  failing  to  consider
    whether  the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  of  being  re-trafficked.
    Secondly, with regard to the risk of forced initiation  the  Judge  was
    wrong to say there was no cogent evidence that forced initiations  were
    taking place when the documents referred to indicated that they were.

36. I do not find the Judge made an error in finding that the Appellant had
    not been a victim of trafficking. The NRM report is  contained  in  the
    Appellant's bundle at page 114. At page  124  the  Competent  Authority
    officer responsible for considering his  case  indicated  that  he  had
    carefully considered all of the information provided to him and decided
    that, based on information available, on the balance of  probabilities,
    the Appellant did not meet the definition of a victim  of  trafficking.
    Pertinent to that conclusion was that the Appellant had claimed to be a
    minor when in fact he had been assessed to be an adult over the age  of
    18. It was not accepted on the basis of the  evidence  given  that  the
    Appellant was  in  any  way  a  prisoner  in  Uncle  Nixon's  house  in
    Manchester. Although the Appellant claimed that Uncle Nixon wanted  him
    to perform a sexual act on another  man,  the  Appellant  was  able  to
    refuse and his uncle had abandoned him without warning or explanation.

37. The officer also noted that despite having claimed to be sleeping rough
    for two nights, when the Appellant presented himself to social services
    his appearance did not suggest that that was the case.

38. The officer also noted the claim made at some point  by  the  Appellant
    that he had a brother in the UK who was a British citizen  contradicted
    his claim to be an only child orphaned at the  age  of  10  or  11.  In
    conclusion the officer  found  that  given  the  ease  with  which  the
    Appellant claimed to have escaped from the alleged trafficker  and  the
    concerns over the veracity of his account as a whole he did not  accept
    that the events occurred as he claimed or  that  he  was  a  trafficked
    person.

39. The Judge was entitled to accept that while the  Appellant  might  have
    been sexually abused by his Uncle Nixon the remainder of his claim  did
    not fall squarely within the definition of trafficking.  There  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant was at any time coerced by Uncle Nixon.  He
    had sought his help to  escape,  he  claimed,  Poro  Society,  and  had
    willingly travelled with him to Freetown, willingly obtained a visa and
    willingly travelled to the UK. Whilst Uncle Nixon's  abusive  behaviour
    towards  the  Appellant  is  inexcusable,  it  does   not   amount   to
    trafficking. The Judge's conclusions  were  also  in  accord  with  the
    findings of the NRM and there was no evidence to support  an  alternate
    view.

40. The Judge, not having considered  the  Appellant  to  be  a  victim  of
    trafficking, did not err in failing to consider  whether  there  was  a
    risk of his being re-trafficked.

41. Notwithstanding what I have said above, whether or  not  the  Appellant
    was a victim of trafficking would only be relevant if there was a  real
    risk that that would put him at risk on return  to  Sierra  Leone.  The
    evidence in the case from the Appellant and repeated several  times  in
    the NRM report is that he did not fear Uncle Nixon  and  did  not  fear
    being re-trafficked. He was not a random victim of trafficking; he  was
    not trafficked at the behest of his family. He came to the UK willingly
    with Uncle Nixon. Uncle Nixon remains in the UK, so far as the evidence
    would suggest. There is no evidence or suggestion that Uncle Nixon  was
    anything other than acting alone and therefore no  possibility  of  any
    finding that the Appellant would be at risk of re-trafficking even  had
    he been trafficked in the first place. Indeed, the  Appellant  did  not
    claim to be at risk of being re-trafficked nor did  he  claim  to  fear
    Uncle Nixon. Accordingly I find that even if  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in considering that the Appellant had  not  been  trafficked,
    which I do not find, that would have made no material difference to the
    outcome of that aspect of the Appellant's claim. Quite simply it  could
    not have succeeded on the evidence.

42. The second criticism of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the  Judge's
    dealing with the risk of forced initiation and criticism of  the  Judge
    saying that there was no cogent evidence that forced  initiations  were
    taking place when there were documents to that effect  in  the  bundle.
    The Judge did not say there was no evidence. The judge referred to  the
    evidence that he had been referred to by the Appellant's representative
    and also to the evidence contained in the Secretary of State's  refusal
    letter. What the Judge said was that there was  no  "cogent"  evidence.
    The Judge's finding that there would be no risk to the Appellant living
    in a city such as Freetown or another large  city  or  town  in  Sierra
    Leone is entirely in accordance with the evidence.





Notice of Decision

For the above reasons I find that the Decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
does not contain an error of law material to the outcome and  I  uphold  it.
I therefore dismiss the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 8th November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

