
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06419/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 18 March 2015                     |On 13 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              ASADUZZAMAN RONEE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Yeo counsel instructed by Henry Hyams & Co
For the Respondent: Mr M Shilliday Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cox promulgated on 10 December 2014 which dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born  on  19  January  1990  and  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.

 4. On 10 February 2014 the Appellant  applied for asylum.

 5. On 11 August 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application and made directions for his  removal.  The  refusal  letter
    gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Respondent did not find that the Appellant's account to  be  at
         risk on return arising out of a land and financial  dispute  to  be
         credible.

      b) The App's claim that the decision would breach his right to  family
         and private life was considered under  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
         276ADE.

      c) The Appellant's estranged wife was pregnant but the  Appellant  had
         failed  to  establish  that  he  had  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with  the  unborn  child  or  had  access  rights  and
         therefore could not meet the requirements of the  Parent  route  of
         Appendix FM.

      d) There were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of leave
         outside the Rules.

The Judge's Decision

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Cox ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against  the  Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

      a) He did not find the facts  underpinning  his  asylum  claim  to  be
         credible.

      b) In relation to Article 8  the  Appellant  had  not  made  a  formal
         application under the Rules or paid a fee. He had raised the  issue
         at a late stage and had not given the Respondent an opportunity  to
         consider the documents in support of that part of his claim.

      c) The was a paucity  of  evidence  to  show  that  contact  with  the
         Appellant was in th best interests  of  the  child.  There  was  no
         evidence that family court proceedings had been instigated  relying
         on Mohamed (Family Court Proceedings-outcome)  [2014]  UKUT  00419.
         The Appellant could  reasonably  be  expected  to  lodge  a  formal
         application under the rules and therefore the  decision  to  remove
         was proportionate.

 7. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the basis that the Judge  had  wrongly
    suggested that the Article 8 claim had been raised at a late stage  and
    therefore failed to engage with the fact that this claim was raised  as
    the result of the service of a s 120 Notice with the Refusal Letter and
    that the Judge had failed to properly engage with the ratio of Mohammed
    and Mohan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA  Civ
    1363.

 8. On 12 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes gave permission  to
    appeal on both grounds.

 9. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Yeo  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a. Having discussed the matter with Mr Shilliday he had conceded  that
         there was an error of law in that  the  Appellant  had  given  good
         notice of his Article 8 claim.

      b. He argued that the error was material. The child was born  in  July
         2014 and there was evidence before the  Judge  of  the  acrimonious
         nature of the breakdown of  the  relationship.  The  Appellant  had
         tried to establish contact with his newborn child  and  received  a
         harassment warning from the police.  Paternity  was  no  longer  an
         issue and there was evidence of that in the bundle.

      c. If the family proceedings were successful or there was an agreement
         out of court the Appellant could have  applied  for  leave  as  the
         parent of a United Kingdom child and there was no reason  to  think
         that application would not be successful as there was no reason  to
         believe that contact with his father was not  in  the  childs  best
         interests.

      d. The court of appeal said  in  Mohad  that  the  immigration  courts
         should let the family court make the decision in  relation  to  the
         childs welfare.

      e. This Appellant's case was stronger than both Mohad and Mohammed  in
         that they both related to deportation  appeals  were  there  was  a
         strong public interest in favour of removal and in the  Appellant's
         case there had only been a short delay between the child's birth in
         July and the pursuit of a case in October.

      f. The Judge had failed to engage  with  the  issue  and  should  have
         allowed the appeal on  human  rights  grounds  directing  that  the
         Appellant be granted a  short  period  of  discretionary  leave  to
         pursue the ongoing family proceedings.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Shilliday submitted that:

      a. While he referred to the Rule 24 notice he conceded that there were
         errors of law in the Judges approach and there was force in what Mr
         Yeo had said.

      b. He accepted that it would appear that paternity was not in  dispute
         it was simply that the mother had failed to engage with the process
         of contact.

      c. He accepted that while the motive in initiating such proceedings as
         evidenced by delay may be relevant as suggested in RS  (Immigration
         and Family Court) India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC)  he  accepted  that
         given that the child was born in July  and  the  process  began  in
         October it was not a strong argument in this case.

11. In reply Mr Yeo on behalf of the Appellant submitted:

      a. In relation to paternity while the Appellant had been told that his
         name was not on the  birth  certificate  that  did  not  mean  that
         paternity was in issue. The child's maternal grandparents had  sent
         the Appellant photographs of the child which did not  suggest  that
         there was any dispute as to paternity.

      b. In relation to any potential delay or motive this  was  not  argued
         before the first tier and was not referenced in the decision.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made material errors of law.

13. This is an appeal against the Article 8 assessment only of the decision
    of Judge Cox in dismissing the Appellant's claim for asylum.

14. The first ground argues that the Judge erred in  paragraph  48  of  the
    decision in treating the Article 8 claim as one made 'at a late  stage'
    and not one  supported  by  a  'formal  application  under  the  rules'
    (paragraph 49). I am satisfied that Mr Shilliday rightly conceded  that
    there was an error of law in viewing the Article 8 claim in  this  way.
    The factual matrix underpinning the claim, the fact that he had married
    a United Kingdom citizen who was pregnant with his  child,  was  raised
    and considered in the refusal letter at  paragraphs  59-60  .Thereafter
    the Appellant was served with a section 120 notice and  again  set  out
    the additional grounds relating to the birth of his child  on  22  July
    2014 in the appeal grounds dated 2 September 2014.  The  rule  24  also
    notice further properly  conceded  that  Appendix  FM  Gen1.9  (a)  (i)
    provides that the requirement to make  a  valid  application  will  not
    apply when the Article 8 claim is raised as part of an asylum claim  or
    as part of a further submission in person after  an  asylum  claim  has
    been refused.

15. I am satisfied  that  this  was  a  material  error  since  it  clearly
    prevented the Judge  from  making  an  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 claim.

16. I am also satisfied tht Mr Shilliday was  right  to  concede  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to address and determine the  guidance
    set out in Mohammed and  Mohan  .The  Judge  was  obliged  to  consider
    whether there was a realistic prospect of the  family  court  making  a
    decision that would have a material impact on the relationship  between
    the child born as a result of his relationship with his British citizen
    spouse. At the time of the hearing the Judge had  evidence  before  him
    that the Appellant had engaged in mediation with his estranged  partner
    with a view to establishing contact. There was a  letter  corroborating
    that dated 17 October 2014 as part of the court papers. I am  satisfied
    that the  Judge  was  obliged  to  assess  the  current  stage  of  the
    Appellant's case and the absence of proceedings before the family court
    was  not  fatal  to  the  Appellant's  case  as  the  Judge   concluded
    particularly given that the provisions of the Children and Families Act
    2014 reflects a preference for resolution of such  issues  outside  the
    court system and therefore efforts at mediation are required before  an
    application can be made to the court.

17. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
    entirety. Mr Yeo and Mr Shilliday both indicated that they were content
    for the decision to be remade.

18. Mr Yeo made an application by way of  Rule  15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal
    procedure (Upper Tribunal ) Rules 2008 to admit the additional evidence
    that forms part of the bundle numbered 1-90 that  was  not  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I was content to admit the evidence.

19. Mr Yeo indicated that on the  basis  of  the  additional  documentation
    which was now before this court he would seek a period of discretionary
    leave of 1  year  be  directed  by  the  Tribunal  as  the  Appellant's
    estranged wife was not co operating with the family court and this  was
    likely to drag the proceedings out.

20. Mr Shilliday agreed that a period of 1 year was appropriate.

Remaking the Decision

21. In this case the Tribunal is  being  asked  to  consider  allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules and directing that a period of
    discretionary leave be granted in accordance  with  the  guidelines  in
    Mohammed and Mohan to allow the Appellant  to  pursue  the  proceedings
    before the family court and establish contact with his son.

22. I am satisfied that the provisions of Appendix FM are  not  a  complete
    code in relation to family life. This  Appellant's  circumstances  were
    not addressed by the Rules in that at the time of his  application  the
    Appellant was aware that his wife was pregnant and although  the  child
    was a month old at the time of the decision  the  Appellant  could  not
    meet the eligibility requirements of the Rules as he had at  that  time
    no access rights to the child.

23. I have determined the issue on the basis of the questions posed by Lord
    Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?

24. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has  a  right  to  establish  a
    relationship with the child born out of his  relationship  with  Jannah
    Begum.

If  so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?

25. I am satisfied that removal would have consequences of such gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?

26. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for the
    decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights which is
    precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate his conduct
    by reference to it.

If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?

27. The interference does have legitimate aims since it is  in  pursuit  of
    one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8  (2)  necessary  in
    pursuit  of  the  economic  well  being  of  the  country  through  the
    maintenance of the requirements of a policy of immigration control.

If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?

28. In making the assessment I have also taken into account  ZH  (Tanzania)
    (FC)  (Appellant)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home   Department
    (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale noted Article  3(1)  of  the
    UNCRC which states that "in all actions  concerning  children,  whether
    undertaken  by  ...  courts  of  law,  administrative  authorities   or
    legislative bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a  primary
    consideration."

29. Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among  other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary  of  State
    must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring  that  those   functions   "are
    discharged having regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom".  Lady  Hale  stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not  be
    "in accordance  with  the  law"  for  the  purpose  of  article  8(2)".
    Although she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the
    best interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she  added  "Of
    course, despite the looseness with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes
    used, "a primary  consideration"  is  not  the  same  as  "the  primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration".

30. I am satisfied that it is in the best interests of the  child  in  this
    case to establish a relationship and contact with his  father  even  if
    the estrangement of his parents means that he cannot be brought  up  by
    them all living together in one household.

31. I am satisfied that the Appellant's child was born on 22 July 2014.  Mr
    Shilliday did not seek to argue before me that paternity was in  issue.
    I accept that informal efforts were made by the Appellant to  establish
    contact after the child's birth with his mother Jannah Begum but  these
    were unsuccessful. This led to the Appellant consulting solicitors  who
    wrote to ms begum on 17 October 2014 in an effort  to  arrange  contact
    without court proceedings through  mediation  via  the  West  Yorkshire
    Family Mediation service.  There is a letter from  the  West  Yorkshire
    Family Mediation  dated  1  December  2014  indicating  that  they  had
    attempted to arrange mediation with Ms Begum and had been unsuccessful.

32. I  accept  that  pages  6-29  of  the  new  bundle  indicates  that  an
    application has now been submitted to Leeds County Court  in  order  to
    pursue his attempt to make contact.

33. I am also obliged if making a 'free standing' Article 8 assessment that
    from 28 July 2014 section 19 of the Immigration  Act  2014  is  brought
    into force: article 3 of the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  No  1,
    Transitory and Saving  Provisions)  Order  2014  (SI  2014/1820).  This
    amends the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by  introducing
    a new Part 5A which contains sections 117A, 117B, 117D and 117D.  These
    statutory provisions apply to all appeals heard on  or  after  28  July
    2014 irrespective of when the application or immigration  decision  was
    made.I therefore take into account in  assessing  the  public  interest
    that the maintenance if immigration control is in the public  interest.
    I take into account that the Appellant cannot apparently speak English.
    I take into that at the time the child was born the Appellant's  status
    in the UK was precarious.

34. I am satisfied that the Appellant could not  realistically  pursue  his
    application if he was removed from the United Kingdom. I  am  satisfied
    that these proceedings were not initiated in  order  to  frustrate  his
    removal: the child was born in July 2014 and the Appellant  has  sought
    to establish contact since his birth but given the  acrimonious  nature
    of the marital breakdown this has proved  impossible  although  he  has
    received photographs of the child. There is nothing about the Appellant
    to suggest that a court would conclude that it  was  not  in  the  best
    interests of the child to have contact with the Appellant.

35. I am satisfied that there is a realistic prospect of the  family  court
    making a decision that would have a material impact on the relationship
    between the Appellant and his child .Therefore taking into account  the
    guidance in the various authorities before me I am  satisfied  that  it
    would be disproportionate to consider  the  removal  of  the  Appellant
    until the conclusion of the family proceedings that he has initiated in
    what I accept is a genuine attempt to establish  contact  with  his  UK
    citizen child.

CONCLUSION

36. I therefore found that errors of law have been established in  relation
    to  the  Judges  assessment  of  Article  8  and   that   the   Judge's
    determination should be set aside

DECISION

37. I remake the appeal.

38. I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR to  the  limited  extent
    that the Appellant should be granted 1  years  discretionary  leave  in
    order to pursue contact through the family court proceedings.



Signed      Date 2.4.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

