
IAC-PE-AW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06203/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th January 2015                          |On 10th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    SEAs
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  2nd  August  1964.   He
    entered the United Kingdom on 22nd  February  2012  on  a  flight  from
    Pakistan using his  own  national  passport  endorsed  with  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student visa valid from 30th January 2012 until 30th November
    2013.  He was accompanied by  his  five  dependants  and  they  claimed
    asylum at Heathrow Airport on arrival.

 2. On 2nd August 2014 the Secretary of State issued a Notice  of  Refusal.
    The Secretary of State noted that the Appellant's claim for asylum  was
    based  upon  a  fear  that  if  returned  the  Appellant   would   face
    mistreatment due to his religion and that his  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection was based upon a purported fear that if  returned  he  would
    face a real risk of unlawful killing in the  country  of  return.   The
    whole basis of the appeal turned on whether or not the Appellant was or
    was not as claimed of the Ahmadi faith.  The conclusions reached by the
    Secretary of State set out in a very lengthy Notice of Refusal was that
    it was not accepted that the Appellant was an Ahmadi.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Raikes sitting at Stoke on 25th  September  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 9th October 2014  the  Appellant's  appeal
    was dismissed on asylum grounds and the Appellant was found not  to  be
    in need of humanitarian protection.  On 20th October 2014 the Appellant
    lodged Grounds of Appeal and on 30th October 2014 Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Deans granted  permission  to  appeal.   Judge  Deans  noted  that  the
    Appellant had claimed to fear persecution or serious harm  in  Pakistan
    as an Ahmadi but that the judge  did  not  find  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence was credible and was not satisfied that he was of  the  Ahmadi
    faith.  Judge Deans noted that the application for permission to appeal
    contended among other things that the Appellant's presentation  of  his
    appeal was hindered by the Respondent  not  having  produced  documents
    which  the  Appellant  had  submitted  on  previous  occasions.   These
    included  letters  from  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  and,   in
    particular, the  Appellant's  ID  card  and  marriage  certificate.   A
    submission was made to the judge about the apparent loss of these items
    by the Respondent but the judge failed to address this issue adequately
    or fairly.  A subject access report request after  the  hearing  showed
    that the ID card had been provided to the Respondent on  22nd  February
    2012.  Judge Deans concluded that arguably the judge did not adequately
    address the consequences of documents, said by the  Appellant  to  have
    been provided to  the  Respondent,  having  gone  missing  and  granted
    permission to appeal.

 4. On 5th November 2014 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That response contended that the grounds had  no
    merit and merely disagree with the adverse outcome of the  appeal.   It
    was claimed that the judge had considered all  the  evidence  that  was
    available to him and came to a conclusion open to  him  based  on  that
    evidence and the relevant Rules on the balance of probability  and  did
    not disclose any error.  The Rule 24 response points out that the judge
    had considered Devaseelan  and  at  paragraph  12  and  throughout  the
    determination had referred to the fact that the previous  determination
    found the Appellant not to be credible.

 5. The Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Fripp.  Mr Fripp has
    considerable experience of this  matter,  having  appeared  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and also by being the  author  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mc McVeety.



Preliminary Issue

 6. One of the purported Grounds of Appeal related to the  failure  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to anonymise this matter.  It was conceded by
    Mr Fripp that that could not constitute a material error of law  but  I
    agreed, bearing in mind that there  are  young  children  who  have  an
    interest in this appeal, that it would be appropriate to anonymise this
    matter for both this  hearing  and  ongoing  hearings  and  Mr  McVeety
    indicated he had  no  objection.   I  consequently  made  an  anonymity
    direction.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. I am considerably assisted in this matter by the approach adopted by Mr
    McVeety on behalf of the Secretary of State who points out that missing
    documents had not been considered by the  judge  and  that  this  is  a
    position he is unable to defend and therefore he accepts that there  is
    an error of law and that it would be material.  He indicates that  none
    of the findings of fact should stand and the matter should  be  reheard
    and he asked me to remit the matter to the First-tier.

 8. Such a submission is most helpful but it might,  bearing  in  mind  the
    rehearing of this matter, be of assistance to  the  court  and  in  the
    interests of justice to set out the  submissions  made  orally  at  the
    hearing by Mr Fripp.

 9. Mr Fripp submits that the Respondent's own documents attested that  the
    Respondent had lost or failed to disclose at  the  date  of  hearing  a
    substantial body of evidence provided to  the  Secretary  of  State  on
    different occasions which went to the heart of the claim namely whether
    or not the Appellant was an Ahmadi Muslim.  A baggage  pro  forma  from
    Heathrow in February 2012 (presumably when the Appellant and his family
    arrived in the country) listed as being taken for  further  examination
    documents including a letter from employers, two Pakistani ID cards, an
    ID letter and other items including cash which the  Appellant  concedes
    was returned to him.

10. The Appellant attended an asylum interview in March 2012 and  Mr  Fripp
    points out that at that interview other documents were provided to  the
    Secretary of State and these documents are referred to at page 6 of the
    Respondent's  bundle  from  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Further the Appellant has with him an undated card from  the  Ahmadiyya
    Muslim Association of Great Britain and at  the  same  section  of  the
    interview records that other documents were  handed  over  including  a
    letter from  the  Ahmadiyya  Muslim  Association  and  the  Appellant's
    marriage certificate and that all these documents are recorded  at  the
    end of the interview and I am referred to the comments section therein.
     Mr Fripp consequently contends therefore that a  number  of  documents
    came into the possession of the Secretary of State but no reference  is
    made to these documents in the Notice of Refusal which Mr Fripp  points
    out took the Secretary of State some two and a half years  to  produce.
    The only document referred to therein (and he takes me to paragraph  11
    of the Notice of  Refusal)  is  a  letter  purported  to  be  from  the
    Ahmadiyya Muslim Association  UK  dated  22nd  March  2004.   Mr  Fripp
    acknowledges that the Appellant's passport does not state that he is an
    Ahmadi.

11. Mr Fripp takes me to paragraph 15 of the Notice  of  Refusal  which  he
    points out refers to correspondence  with  a  British  High  Commission
    which contends that passports can be abused and that one of  the  bases
    of the Secretary of State's contention that the  Appellant  is  not  an
    Ahmadi is because the Appellant's passport does not stipulate  that  he
    is but he points out that  the  previous  letters  from  the  Ahmadiyya
    Muslim Association, the Appellant's Pakistani ID cards etc., which  had
    been lost are ignored and that all these documents were  raised  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge but that the Secretary of State failed to
    explain the position and that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  failed
    to deal adequately or at  all  with  these  issues.   He  takes  me  to
    paragraph 62 of the determination where he submits there  is  only  the
    most minor of reference to these documents therein.

12. He acknowledges that the judge saw a copy of the  marriage  certificate
    but that he was unable to see the original because of course this was a
    document handed to the Secretary of State which  had  gone  astray  and
    that the judge did not accept the copy as he could not  cross-reference
    it to the original and therefore the losses incurred by  the  Secretary
    of State create considerable procedural unfairness  to  the  Appellant.
    Further he submits the judge failed to ask the Secretary  of  State  to
    account  for  the  lost  documents  and  therefore  the  decision   was
    unbalanced and he asked me to set it aside.  Further he points out that
    it is interesting to note that the  Rule  24  response  also  makes  no
    reference to the loss of documents by the Secretary of State.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

15. I have probably within this error of law  decision  gone  into  greater
    detail than is absolutely necessary bearing in  mind  firstly  that  Mr
    McVeety has made a concession on behalf of the Secretary of State  that
    there is a material error of law and secondly because  I,  rather  than
    any other judge, will be rehearing this matter.  However it is I  think
    appropriate that the matter be considered in context.  It is clear that
    the issue that is outstanding is whether or not the Appellant can  show
    that he is a member of the Ahmadi  faith.   Documents  that  have  gone
    astray are material documents and it is incumbent upon the Secretary of
    State, even if they cannot be found, to at least provide some  form  of
    explanation as to what has happened.  There is, I am satisfied, a  real
    prospect of procedural unfairness in  the  failure  to  consider  those
    documents by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In  such  circumstances  I
    agree with the  contentions  made  by  both  representations  that  the
    previous decision cannot be sustained.  It is appropriate to set  aside
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge with none of the findings
    of fact to stand and for the matter to be reheard.

16. We are starting afresh and it would have been possible to have remitted
    this matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to yet another judge.   The
    Appellant's family have been involved in several appearances before the
    Immigration Tribunal.  There was a previous  determination  dated  22nd
    May 2013 in respect of the Appellant's  mother.   There  was  then  the
    decision against the Appellant of Immigration Judge Raikes.   It  seems
    that continuity needs to be maintained in this matter and  this  matter
    disposed of once and for all and on that basis none of the findings  of
    fact are to stand, the matter is to be remitted to be heard  afresh  in
    the First-tier Tribunal reserved to myself.


Notice of Decision and Directions

(1)  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law.  For the reasons set out above  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge is therefore set aside with none of the findings of fact
    to stand.

(2)  It is recorded that the issue in this matter centres on whether or  not
    the Appellant is or is not an Ahmadi Muslim.

(3)  That the matter be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard
    afresh reserved to Immigration Judge Harris sitting  at  Manchester  on
    Wednesday 25th March 2015 at 10am with an ELH of four hours.

(4)  That the Secretary of State do provide an explanation  of  the  missing
    documents which they have recorded  that  they  have  received  to  the
    Tribunal at least seven days pre-hearing.

(5)  There be leave to the Appellant to serve an updated bundle of  evidence
    upon which he seeks to rely at the hearing at  least  seven  days  pre-
    hearing and that a copy of that bundle be served on the Home Office.

(6)  That any skeleton arguments or authorities upon which the parties  seek
    to rely be lodged at court in a separate bundle at least seven days pre-
    hearing.

(7)  Urdu interpreter required.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 28th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed        Date 28th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
