
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06757/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     V K
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Saleem, Solicitor from Malik and Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Jones, QC (the judge), promulgated on 23  October  2015,
    in which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal  was  against
    the Respondent's decision of 26 March 2015,  to  remove  the  Appellant
    from the United Kingdom as an illegal entrant.





Proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The Appellant's claim was based upon the alleged existence of  a  blood
    feud in Albania. He asserted that there had been past  killings,  legal
    proceedings against his uncle,  and  that  he  was  at  risk  from  the
    opposing family if returned.

 3. The judge rejected the claim in its entirety. He placed  no  weight  on
    items of documentary evidence (paragraphs 23 and 25), held the delay in
    claiming asylum against the  Appellant  (paragraphs  29  and  33),  and
    ultimately concluded that the Appellant was simply an economic  migrant
    (paragraph 29). The judge went on and reached a conclusion on the claim
    at its highest. On this alternative scenario it was said that there was
    insufficient evidence to show  that  the  opposing  family  had  enough
    influence to harm the Appellant in another part of  Albania  (paragraph
    34).

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 4. The grounds, which are admirably concise, contend that the judge  erred
    in his consideration of court documents  from  Albania,  and  that  the
    alternative conclusion at paragraph 34 is flawed.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchinson on 19 November 2015.

The hearing before me

 6. Mr Saleem relied on the grounds. He sought to introduce  a  new  ground
    based upon the  judge's  approach  to  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004. There had  been  no
    prior application to do so and this was not an obvious point. I refused
    permission to amend the grounds.

 7. In respect of ground 1, and having considered  the  relevant  documents
    contained in the Appellant's bundle,  Mr  Staunton  accepted  that  the
    judge probably erred  in  his  consideration  of  the  court  evidence.
    However,  he  submitted  that  this  was  not  material   because   the
    alternative conclusion at paragraph 34 was sustainable.

 8. In reply, Mr Saleem emphasised the country information on corruption in
    Albania and the inability of the Appellant to know for sure what  power
    the opposing family in fact wielded.

Decision on error of law

 9. There is a clear error  of  law  in  respect  of  the  court  documents
    produced by the Appellant.

10. The document in question was (or at least purported to be)  a  judgment
    of the Albanian Court of Appeal relating to the upholding of a  twenty-
    year  sentenced  imposed  upon  the  Appellant's  uncle  (the   English
    translation is at 130-131 of the Appellant's bundle).

11. The only apparent consideration  of  this  evidence  by  the  judge  is
    contained in paragraph 25 of his decision, in which he states:
         "The appellant referred to the document at page 128 in  support  of
         the proposition that [DK] (the uncle)  had  been  sentenced  to  20
         years imprisonment. It does not disclose  when  that  sentence  was
         imposed or for what crime."

12. Contrary to  the  judge's  observations  on  the  document,  the  Court
    judgment in fact expressly states the date of sentence,  the  basis  of
    the crime in respect of the Albanian Criminal Code,  and  (importantly)
    that the offence was committed because of a blood  feud.  It  is  quite
    clear to me that the judge failed to consider the actual Court judgment
    adequately or at all. In  reality,  it  seems  highly  likely  that  he
    instead had regard only to the Certificate from the  Albanian  Ministry
    of Justice at page 127  of  the  bundle  which  stated  the  length  of
    sentence but no other details.

13. The failure to deal with such  an  important  aspect  of  the  evidence
    undermines the totality of the adverse credibility findings.

14. I note too in this regard that in paragraph 33 the  judge  acknowledged
    the existence of, "strands of independent evidence capable  of  lending
    support to the appellant's core story" and the "significant  amount  of
    detail" provided by the Appellant. These comments only add to  my  view
    that the overall findings cannot stand.

15. Whether any of the above is material depends upon my view of ground  2.
    I take as a starting point that if  an  alternative  'at  its  highest'
    conclusion is to be provided in a protection claim, it is vital to deal
    with the matter in detail and with due regard to  all  relevant  factor
    going to risk, protection, relocation and such like.

16. In paragraph 34 the judge considers the issue  of  internal  relocation
    only and finds against the Appellant  solely  on  the  basis  that  the
    evidence of influence was said to be speculative.

17. In the context of this case, I  am  just  persuaded  that  the  judge's
    consideration of the alternative scenario was materially inadequate.  I
    say this for the following reasons.

18. First, whilst it appears correct that the Appellant was  to  an  extent
    speculating about the possible reach of the opposing family, the  judge
    failed to  deal  with  the  submission  (and  any  evidence  pertaining
    thereto) that a member of that family had received a lesser sentence in
    other proceedings, thus indicating a degree of influence.

19. Second, the judge has seemingly not dealt with  the  substance  of  the
    country information to which he was referred relating to corruption  in
    Albania. This information potentially went to the  issue  of  influence
    and reach.

20. Third, the reach of an opposing family is only one factor  set  out  in
    the country guidance decision of EH (blood  feuds)  Albania  CG  [2012]
    UKUT 00348 (IAC) (see paragraphs 3 and 6 of the headnote). In  my  view
    it was incumbent upon the judge to deal with all matters to  which  the
    country guidance refers when assessing the alternative scenario.

21. In light of the above, there are material errors of law in the  judge's
    decision and I therefore set it aside.



Disposal

22. Having  regard  to  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice  Statement,  it  is
    appropriate that I remit this case back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Credibility will need  to  be  reconsidered  afresh,  and  a  carefully
    assessment of risk on return conducted.

Anonymity

23. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    Appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings. This direction has been made in order to protect the
    Appellant from serious harm, having regard to the interests of  justice
    and the principle of proportionality.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to the parties
      1. The remitted appeal will be a complete rehearing, with no findings
         preserved from the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Jones;
      2. The Appellant is, no later than 10 working days before the remitted
         hearing, to file and serve a skeleton argument dealing with all
         relevant issues and making specific reference to extracts of any
         country information relied upon;
      3. The parties shall comply with any further directions issued by the
         First-tier Tribunal.

Directions to Administration
      1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;
      2. It shall be reheard at the Hatton Cross hearing centre, on a date
         to be fixed by that centre;
      3. It shall not be reheard by First-tier Tribunal Judge G Jones QC;
      4. An Albanian interpreter will be required for the remitted hearing;
      5. There is a 3-hour time estimate for the remitted hearing.


Signed      Date: 29 January 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

