

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
AA/06652/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On: 11th May 2016                        |  On:  31st May 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                              MAHAMED ABDIQANI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:          Dr Mynott, Broudie Jackson & Canter
For the Respondent:           Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male national of Somalia  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as the 1st  January  1989.  He  has  permission[1]  to  appeal
    against a determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pickup)[2] to
    dismiss his appeal against refusal of his protection claim.


 2. The core facts of the Appellant's account were not  challenged  by  the
    Respondent. It was accepted that  the  Appellant  is  from  the  Ashraf
    minority clan and that he was latterly living in Afgoye.  Whilst living
    there he was from time to time approached by al-Shabaab recruiters  but
    he always declined.  In  January  2012  he  married  a  woman  who  had
    previously been married to  an  al-Shabaab  commander.  This  commander
    decided that he wanted to remarry the woman in question  and  came  and
    kidnapped her from her home. The Appellant went looking for  his  wife.
    During the search a group of men attacked and beat him.  The  Appellant
    was saved from death  because  there  were  other  people  around.  The
    Appellant went into hiding and then after some time left  Somalia  with
    the assistance of an uncle who lives in Afgoye.

 3.  Having  accepted  those  facts  the  Respondent  declined   to   grant
    international protection. African Union forced liberated Afgoye in  May
    2012 and there is no indication that the Appellant  is  at  risk  today
    from members of al-Shabaab. He is a young man who is able to  work  and
    he could relocate without any undue hardship to another city in Somalia
    if he did not wish to return to Afgoye.


    The Determination

 4. On appeal the  First-tier  Tribunal  concurred  with  the  Respondent's
    analysis that there was no discernible risk to the Appellant in  Afgoye
    today.  The  attempts  to  recruit  him  were  casual  and   apparently
    noncommittal; there appeared to be no real interest  in  the  Appellant
    himself, only his wife. Now that the commander had taken her, there was
    no reason to suppose that he would be interested in the Appellant.   In
    any event, al-Shabaab had been driven out of Afgoye. The Tribunal  then
    went on,  apparently  in  the  alternative,  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant might reasonably be expected to relocate within Somalia.  The
    Tribunal applied the extant country guidance: MOJ and Others (Return to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] 00442 (IAC).  It directed  itself  to  the
    country guidance distilled at paragraph 407. It noted the findings that
    there are no clan militias in the city, no clan based violence, or even
    discriminatory treatment.  The determination then sets  out  the  Upper
    Tribunal's guidance on the reasonableness or otherwise of relocation to
    Mogadishu:

         "If it is accepted that a person facing a return to Mogadishu after
         a period of absence has no nuclear family or close relatives in the
         city to assist him in re-establishing himself on return, there will
         need to be a careful assessment of all of the circumstances.  These
         considerations will include, but are not limited to:


                      i)       circumstances in Mogadishu before departure
                     ii)       length of absence from Mogadishu;
                    iii)       family or clan associations to call upon  in
                         Mogadishu;
                     iv)       access to financial resources;
                      v)       prospects of securing a livelihood,  whether
                         that be employment or self employment;
                     vi)       availability of remittances from abroad;
                    vii)       means of support during the  time  spent  in
                         the United Kingdom;
                   viii) why his ability to fund the journey to the West no
                         longer enables an appellant  to  secure  financial
                         support on return.


         Put another way, it  will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         Mogadishu to explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the
         economic opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  "economic
         boom", especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees
         are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away".

 5. The determination notes that the Appellant has managed to come  to  the
    UK, an entirely strange country, and re-establish himself. On  his  own
    evidence he has managed to earn a living in the past by shining  shoes.
    He is a healthy young man. The Tribunal does not accept the Appellant's
    evidence that he has completely lost touch with his family.  His  uncle
    was obviously a man of some wealth since he  managed  to  shepherd  the
    family from Mogadishu after the death of the Appellant's father, assist
    them in re-establishing themselves in Afgoye  and  when  the  Appellant
    faced his more recent problems, get him out.  Judge  Pickup  noted  the
    evidence in MOJ that the cost of arranging passage from Somalia to  the
    UK can be as much as $25,000.  The Appellant has given no  satisfactory
    explanation as to why he has lost contact with his family.






    The Grounds and Response


 6. Permission has been granted on the grounds that the  Tribunal  arguably
    erred in making speculative findings not based  on  the  evidence.  The
    Appellant had stated that he had lost touch with his family  and  since
    his credibility was not doubted by the Respondent there was  no  reason
    to reject this evidence. The grant of permission to appeal considers it
    arguable that the determination lacks any proper  analysis  of  whether
    the Appellant would be at risk, given that he is a young  man  who  had
    previously come to the attention of al-Shabaab.

 7. Before me Dr Mynott expanded on the grounds of appeal as  follows.   It
    was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal has failed to  consider  the
    relevance of the Appellant's  past  interaction  with  al-Shabaab.  For
    instance no consideration had  been  given  to  whether  there  was  an
    "ongoing  dispute"  with  the  commander  in  Afgoye  because  of   the
    Appellant's marriage to his  wife;  nor  had  the  Tribunal  considered
    whether the Appellant's interactions with would-be recruiters would re-
    occur, thus bringing him to the organisation's attention; nor  had  any
    attention been given to the  evidence  that  in  2008  the  Appellant's
    father was murdered by al-Shabaab in Mogadishu for  his  opposition  to
    the Islamic Courts.  Dr Mynott submitted that it was not  open  to  the
    Tribunal to find that there was  nothing  to  suggest  that  al-Shabaab
    would be currently interested in the Appellant.  The  background  facts
    indicated that there would be a number of reasons  why  they  would  be
    interested.

 8. In respect of the position in Mogadishu, Dr Mynott submitted that   the
    First-tier Tribunal was factually wrong to say that the  Appellant  had
    an extended family in Somalia who could help him, and who could  supply
    the Appellant would financial resources. Dr Mynott took me to the  note
    taken of the oral evidence by  Ms  Johnrose  who  was  the  Appellant's
    representative before the First-tier Tribunal. This records that at the
    opening of cross-examination the Appellant was asked about what  family
    members he has in Somalia. He reports having  one  maternal  uncle.  In
    respect of how that uncle raised the funds to get him out  of  Somalia,
    the Appellant had told the Tribunal that his uncle had gone to  friends
    and asked for help. People had rallied round  and  contributed  to  the
    fund to pay for the Appellant to get out.   It was  not  therefore  the
    case that the Appellant had a wealthy extended family who could  assist
    him in relocating.

 9. Mr McVeety opposed the appeal on all grounds.  He  submitted  that  the
    objective country background evidence should be my starting point.  Al-
    Shabaab was driven out of Afgoye in 2012 by the African Union  and  the
    Upper Tribunal has held in MOJ that they have no presence in Mogadishu.
     There was a concrete finding that al-Shabaab had been  driven  out  of
    the city and that this constituted a durable change.  In respect of any
    alleged risk to the Appellant from residual fighters who  had  remained
    underground in  either  city,  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that  the  'risk
    factors' identified by Dr Mynott in truth amounted to nothing. It could
    not sensibly be argued that the Appellant would be at risk  because  of
    his father's opposition to the Islamic Courts; he had lived  after  his
    father's murder for four years under al-Shabaab control in  Afgoye  and
    they had shown no adverse interest in him for this reason.  As  to  the
    claim that the Appellant had been targeted for forcible recruitment  in
    the past, and so would be again in the future Mr McVeety took me to the
    Appellant's own asylum interview where the  Appellant  described  these
    approaches as follows. Asked there had been any previous incidents with
    al-Shabaab  before  his  wife's  kidnap  the  Appellant  said  [at  40]
    "..nothing it was not life threatening. They were pestering me to  join
    them" and [at 41] "they gave me leaflets because I was in the market or
    asking directly because it would be very nice if  you  could  join  us,
    sooner you join us will be the better".   In closing summary Mr McVeety
    submitted that if the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  given  a  paucity  of
    reasons, had made speculative findings  or  had  failed  to  conduct  a
    complete risk assessment in respect of Mogadishu, on the facts as found
    none of this could be said to be material.








    My Findings


10. Before me Dr Mynott essentially advanced two grounds.  First, that  the
    Tribunal failed to conduct a proper analysis of what  might  happen  if
    the  Appellant  were  to  return  to  Afgoye.   At  paragraph  16   the
    determination gives three reasons why it found  there  to  be  no  risk
    there: al-Shabaab were no longer in control of the city, the  Appellant
    had remained there for 3-4 months after the claimed incident,  and  now
    that his wife has been captured, there  would  be  no  reason  for  al-
    Shabaab to target him. All of these are perfectly good reasons to  find
    no current risk. Dr Mynott submitted that the Tribunal  had  failed  to
    consider that the Appellant still regards himself  as  married  to  his
    wife; by his very presence he would be perceived to be  a  threat.  The
    facts do not support that submission.  Had  al-Shabaab  considered  the
    Appellant to be a threat, they  no  doubt  would  have  killed  him  or
    attempted to do so. The fact that the Appellant has  left  Somalia  and
    made no further attempts to find his wife would indicate that he has no
    pressing imperative to do so. He appears to have accepted  that  he  is
    powerless to do anything to save her, and on the facts that  assessment
    is sadly almost certainly correct.   As for the submission that he  had
    previously come to the adverse interest of al-Shabaab  recruiters,  the
    extract from the asylum interview speaks for itself: it was no part  of
    the Appellant's own evidence that he had faced persecution or any level
    of harassment above what he himself describes as "pestering".


11. The second ground centred on the findings on internal flight. As I note
    above there was found to be no risk in Afgoye so it is  not  altogether
    clear why the  determination  goes  on  to  address  the  situation  in
    Mogadishu. Nevertheless I am satisfied that there is no arguable  error
    in the  approach  taken  to  the  'alternative'  findings  on  internal
    relocation. The question of whether the Appellant would be  financially
    supported by his uncle, or  by  the  collective  Ashraf  community,  is
    entirely moot. That is because he is a young and healthy  man  who  has
    been able to work to support himself in the past. Applying MOJ it  will
    be for the Appellant to explain why he would not be able to access  the
    economic opportunities that have resulted from the economic boom in the
    capital.   Even if Judge Pickup had accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    lost contact with his uncle that burden had not been discharged.

12. Alternatively Dr Mynott attempted to extract an arguable risk from  the
    accepted fact that the Appellant's father had been killed in  Mogadishu
    in 2008. Whilst that history is no doubt painful for the  Appellant  it
    is not, given the  findings  in  MOJ,  something  that  is  capable  of
    founding a present day risk:

         There has been durable change in the  sense  that  the  Al  Shabaab
         withdrawal from Mogadishu is complete and there is no real prospect
         of a re-established presence within the city. That was not the case
         at the time of the country guidance given by the Tribunal in AMM.




            Decisions

13. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law such that the decision should be set aside and it is upheld.


14. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    see no reason to do so.









                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    26th
                                  May 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge RA Cox on the on
the 28th August 2015 but granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal
Judge Eshun on the 23rd September 2015.
[2] Determination promulgated 7th July 2015

