
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06813/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 7th September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                                     ML
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL WITH REASONS

 1. The anonymity direction made in the First-Tier Tribunal is continued.

 2. The appellant is a male citizen of Iran, born 3 April 1977.  He arrived
    in the United Kingdom in August 2013.  He claimed  asylum  and  a  year
    later the respondent made a decision to refuse his application, and  to
    remove him as an illegal entrant.  The appellant appealed that decision
    and his appeal came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Britton
    sitting at Newport on 24 April 2015.  An oral hearing was held and both
    parties were represented.  In a determination dated 10 May 2015,  Judge
    Britton dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds  having  found,
    inter alia, that the appellant lacked credibility.

 3. The appellant sought leave to appeal,  grounds  being  contained  in  a
    document prepared by the barrister who  represented  him  before  Judge
    Britton.

 4. The very full grounds in support  allege  three  errors.   Firstly  the
    inappropriate treatment of the medical evidence that was  available  at
    the  hearing.   Secondly  misunderstanding  or  misstatement   of   the
    appellant's evidence and thirdly making speculative findings and giving
    inadequate reasons.

 5. The application came before another judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal
    who granted leave to appeal indicating that all grounds  were  arguable
    though casting  doubt  as  to  the  allegation  of  error  relating  to
    speculation on the part of Judge Britton.

 6. The respondent lodged a response under Rule 24 of the  Procedure  Rules
    indicating that in the opinion of the respondent the judge had directed
    himself  appropriately.   Reference  was  then  made  to  the   judge's
    treatment of the medical report and indicating that the judge  had  not
    contradicted the opinion of the doctor.

 7. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

 8. Ms Capel relied upon  the  grounds  seeking  leave  and  in  particular
    paragraphs 52 and 61 of Judge  Britton's  determination.   He  had  not
    engaged with the evidence and had failed  to  recognise  the  objective
    information  contained  in  the  doctor's  report.   The   doctor   had
    considered whether or not the appellant had been feigning the injuries.
     The doctor did not seek to make credibility findings.  Also there  was
    a misstatement of the evidence with regard to the appellant's  evidence
    as to his involvement in demonstrations.

 9. Mr Richards in his submission was of the  opinion  that  there  was  no
    material error of law.  The judge had taken all evidence into  account.
    He had analysed  the  evidence  and  found  the  appellant  lacking  in
    credibility.  The judge must take into account the evidence and he  did
    that.  The conclusions were properly open to  him.   In  any  event  if
    there had been and error of law was it truly material?

10. In her response Ms Capel again relied upon the grounds.   The  question
    of credibility must be taken in the round.   The  appellant's  evidence
    was that he had been detained and tortured.

11. At the end of the hearing I announced that I found a material error  of
    law contained in the determination of Judge Britton to the extent  that
    his findings and conclusions must be set aside and  that  it  would  be
    appropriate in the circumstances to remit the case back to  the  First-
    Tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.  Both  representatives  agreed  to
    that course of action.

12. For the reasons set out in the grounds seeking leave  I  consider  that
    Judge Britton fell into errors  in  his  determination  and  that  such
    errors were material to the outcome of the appeal.

13. The main thrust of the challenge to his determination is with regard to
    his treatment of the medical  evidence  that  was  placed  before  him.
    Paragraph 52 of the determination  clearly  shows  that  he  took  into
    consideration all the evidence "including that of Dr Alison Battersby".
     The judge's only other  reference  to  that  report  is  contained  in
    paragraph 61.  That paragraph contains the sentence "whatever  he  told
    Dr Battersby,  the  doctor  has  to  accept,  unless  it  is  obviously
    something that could not have happened".

14.  If  Judge  Britton  says  (paragraph  52)  that  he  has  taken   into
    consideration the evidence of Dr Battersby I have no doubt that he did.
     However the determination itself makes little other reference to  that
    evidence and the comment at paragraph 61 shows that the judge  rejected
    what was contained therein.  A reader of the  determination  cannot  be
    satisfied that Judge Britton engaged with the evidence of Dr  Battersby
    to any material extent.  He has not explained what that  evidence  was,
    how it might support the appellant's own evidence and neither  does  it
    explain exactly why the judge rejected it.  I consider such explanation
    is necessary at least to show the reader of the determination  why  the
    judge had reached the conclusions that he did.  With respect to  simply
    indicate that  the  doctor  would  pay  lip  service  to  anything  the
    appellant said is simply not enough.  That  in  itself  constitutes  an
    error of law which is material to the outcome.

15. As to the second allegation of error there is  merit  in  the  argument
    that Judge Britton did  not  engage  accurately  with  the  appellant's
    evidence both at interview and at the hearing.  Paragraphs 54 and 55 of
    the determination makes reference to dates  and  seeks  to  distinguish
    between peaceful and  violent  demonstrations.   The  judge  found  the
    appellant's evidence not to be credible because whilst  he  was  saying
    that he only attended peaceful demonstrations the objective information
    showed that demonstrations on  the  dates  mentioned  were  other  than
    peaceful.  I am satisfied that the judge may  have  reached  the  wrong
    conclusions on these dates and the nature of  the  demonstrations,  and
    this may again be an error.

16. I have  noted  the  allegation  regarding  the  making  of  speculative
    findings.  Given that there was evidence before  the  judge  that  CCTV
    coverage of Metro stations did take place in Tehran and  therefore  the
    judge's conclusions that the alleged incidents involving the  appellant
    could we have been filmed it is not appropriate to preserve this or any
    of the other findings made by Judge Britton.

17. I therefore find for the reasons contained above that  the  judge  fell
    into material error and it is appropriate  to  remit  this  appeal  for
    hearing de novo before a First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than  Judge
    Britton.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
