
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06904/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th January 2015                            |On 19th January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MRS RENUKA PARAMANATHAN
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting
                  Officer)
For the Respondents:    Ms E Harris (instructed by Nag Law Solicitors)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Secretary of State with regard to a  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge McWilliam)  dated  10th  November  2014  by  which  she
    allowed the  Respondent's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse her asylum and to return her to Sri Lanka.

 2. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal which was granted by
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge on  5th  December  2014.   She  thought  it
    arguable that the Judge  had  erred  because  she  failed  to  restrict
    herself to the risk categories contained in the Country  Guidance  case
    of GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319 (IAC).

 3. I agree that the Judge made material errors of law  for  the  following
    reasons.

 4. The Judge at paragraph 27 appears to have misunderstood what the  Court
    of Appeal said in MP (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 829 and  proceeded  on
    the basis that she could consider the UNHCR risk categories  and  allow
    the appeal on the basis that the Appellant came within  one  of  those.
    The Appellant in this case, on the basis of the  Judge's  findings  did
    not come within any of the GJ risk categories.

 5. Additionally I note the Robinson obvious error of law at  paragraph  32
    of the determination where the Judge notes that the Appellant's husband
    claimed asylum but  was  refused  and  lost  his  appeal  against  that
    refusal.  The Judge said that that decision was not before her  and  so
    she could not say  whether  or  not  he  had  been  found  credible  or
    incredible.  She then found him credible.  Such a  matter  is  crucial.
    Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 clearly applied  and  the  Judge  could  and
    should have taken steps to obtain that determination. She proceeded  on
    the basis that he was credible whereas there  may  have  been  previous
    strong findings to the contrary.

 6. As a result of the error of law none of the Judge's findings can  stand
    and I set aside the determination in its entirety and remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  full  rehearing,  before  which  the
    earlier determination in relation to the Appellant's husband should  be
    available.

 7. The appeal by the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.








Signed                              Date 16th January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
