
IAC-AH-     -V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06811/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27TH JANUARY 2015                         |On 2ND FEBRUARY 2015          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                 MS GA BLACK


                                   Between

                                  MR.  Y W
                          (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     MR J PLOWRIGHT (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    MR E TUFAN( Senior Home officer presenting officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant of  a  decision  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge CM Courtney)  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  on
    asylum, human rights and humanitarian  protection  grounds,  concluding
    that there was an internal flight alternative.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Sudan.  His date of birth is 15th January
    1978.  He claimed  asylum  on  religious  grounds,  that  as  a  Coptic
    Christian he faced a real risk of persecution if returned to Sudan.

 3. The Tribunal found the Appellant to be credible as to his religion  and
    that he had been arrested, detained and ill treated in Sudan by  police
    officers on four occasions. His account of  his  exit  from  Sudan  was
    found implausible [74] and his claim to have been accused  of  adultery
    was accepted, but found not to be linked to his religion [69].

 4. The Tribunal found that "he has been the subject of  localised  adverse
    interest on the  part  of  certain  police  officers  in  Omdurman  and
    Khartoum, who perceived him as a trouble maker and  as  susceptible  to
    bribery.  I am  persuaded  to  the  lower  degree  of  proof  that  the
    Appellant has been mistreated in detention as he  describes,  and  that
    this  mistreatment  was  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that   he   is   a
    Christian."[77 &  82  ]   The  Tribunal  found  there  was  a  risk  of
    repetition and an enhanced risk in Khartoum and Omdurman. [85]

 5. Thereafter the Tribunal  considered  internal  relocation  [85-92].  It
    considered that having found that the risk was from certain religiously
    intolerant police officers in his locality, this risk could be  avoided
    by moving to the northern part of Sudan, specifically Port Sudan  where
    he has a brother, or to Dongola.  He found the Appellant to be  at  the
    same level of risk as all other church-going Coptic Christians in  that
    area [91].

Grounds

 6. The Tribunal failed to consider if the Appellant can live safely if  he
    relocated to an different  area  and  whether  there  is  the  risk  of
    repetition of ill treatment in light of aggravating factors.

 7. The Tribunal erred by failing  to  consider  the  risks  faced  by  the
    Appellant in the event that he displayed religious icons at home and at
    work, and distributed humanitarian aid, which  would  lead  him  to  be
    singled out for religious reasons.

 8. In MG (Christians, including Coptic Christians) Sudan CG  [2006]  UKAIT
    00047) it was accepted that there was no sufficiency of protection  for
    Coptic Christians once singled out [33].

 9. The Tribunal failed to take into account that the  factors  which  made
    the Appellant vulnerable continued to exist  and  would  not  alter  on
    relocation.

Permission

10. Permission was granted by  FJT  JM  Holmes  on  12  December  2014  who
    concluded that "Arguably the Judge's analysis of the  risk  faced  upon
    return was inadequate."  Judge Holmes  expanded  upon  the  Appellant's
    grounds and considered that the Tribunal did not pose the question,  or
    answer it, as to whether a direct return to Port Sudan was possible  or
    safe for practical reasons and/or whether the Appellant was at risk  at
    the airport.

11. Judge Holmes stated that it was arguable that the Tribunal was  obliged
    to consider if the Appellant would face  the  same  treatment  in  that
    locality as he had in Khartoum, assuming that he pursued his faith  and
    lived his life in the way he wished. The Tribunal  failed  to  consider
    why similar problems would not arise in the area  of  relocation  as  a
    result of pursuit of his faith.

Hearing

12. I heard submissions from both representatives, the details of which are
    set out in the record of proceedings. Mr Plowright  elaborated  on  the
    grounds and the observations made by the permitting Judge.   He  relied
    on the CG decision of MG at [40] which appeared to be reflected in  the
    Tribunal's decision.  He submitted that the Appellant was  at  risk  of
    repetition for the same reasons as in MG.  He  further  submitted  that
    the Tribunal failed to hear specific evidence from the Appellant as  to
    how he would pursue his religion and his  life  if  relocated  to  Port
    Sudan. There was no evidence to show that he would not be  at  risk  in
    any other city or area in Sudan. The Appellant came to the attention of
    the authorities through his work,  he  was  identifiable  as  a  Coptic
    Christian  and  had  been  accused  of  spreading   Christianity   when
    distributing aid parcels.

13. Mr Tufan submitted that the Appellant's circumstances were  exacerbated
    by his religion and that this was not the main cause of the persecution
    which was localised to his home area.  MG was outdated.  There  was  no
    evidence that the Appellant would  face  any  risk  in  Port  Sudan  or
    elsewhere in the  north.  Many  Christians  were  identifiable  from  a
    tattoo. There was no background evidence to show  any  risk  to  Coptic
    Christians in Sudan and the burden was on the Appellant to show that it
    was not safe.  Port Sudan was a Christian area and a  major  port.   It
    was reasonably likely that the Appellant  could  travel  there  safely.
    The Appellant faced no ill treatment at the airport when leaving Sudan.



Discussion and decision

14. The Tribunal's decision is detailed and  well  considered  and  clearly
    establishes that it fully engaged with the issues and evidence relevant
    to this appeal.  However, I am satisfied that the  grounds  pursued  by
    the Appellant that the Tribunal's  treatment  of  the  internal  flight
    alternative was inadequate, given the findings made and  having  regard
    to the Country guidance decision of MG, have merit. The Tribunal  deals
    with the issue of internal relocation very succinctly in two paragraphs
    91 and 91.

15. The Tribunal did not consider the risk of  repetition  in  other  areas
    having found that the risks faced by the Appellant were localised.   It
    failed to consider the risk of repetition in Port Sudan or elsewhere in
    light of the circumstances in which  the  Appellant  had  come  to  the
    attention of the authorities  in  Khartoum,  as  a  trouble  maker  and
    thereafter his religious identity led to ill treatment  by  religiously
    intolerant police officers.  The Upper Tribunal in  MG  took  the  view
    that once a person had come to the attention of  the  authorities  (for
    whatever reason), persecution for religious reasons became a real risk.

Error of  law decision

16. I am satisfied that this amounts to a material  error  of  law.  I  set
    aside the decision.  The findings of fact  made  by  the  Tribunal  are
    preserved.

Remaking decision

17. Both Mr Plowright and Mr Tufan relied on submissions already  made.  Mr
    Plowright submitted that there was no need for a further hearing unless
    the Upper Tribunal considered it necessary  to  hear  further  evidence
    from the Appellant about Port Sudan.  Mr Tufan agreed.

18. Having regard to the findings of fact and objective evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal I am satisfied that the Appellant comes within  the
    category of person  envisaged in MG who having come to the attention of
    the authorities would then be at risk of persecution in  Sudan  [33&36]
    and where there is no internal flight alternative. He did  not  advance
    his case on the basis that he has been prevented from openly expressing
    or pursuing his religion. I take into account his  characteristics  and
    vulnerability  which  led  to  his  coming  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities, together with the evidence that  in  the  north  of  Sudan
    Coptic  Christians  are  isolated  and  there  is  no  sufficiency   of
    protection available [33].  Although the Tribunal found that  the  risk
    of persecution was localised, it  failed  to  consider  that  once  the
    Appellant had come to the attention of the authorities,  some  of  whom
    were religiously intolerant, he faced  the  same  risk  of  persecution
    elsewhere.  The  three  factors  found  by  the  Tribunal  at  [85]  as
    significant to risk of persecution are  not  in  my  view  specific  or
    limited to the Appellant's home area. Indeed the  Tribunal  found  that
    the Appellant's arrest on the first occasion followed  from  a  dispute
    with his neighbour over land, the second occasion was in  circumstances
    where having been approached to pay money to security forces,  he  then
    refused to take down religious icons in  his  shop  and  on  the  third
    occasion he came to their attention for refusing to buy a  gun.  In  MG
    the Appellant was arrested when he refused to buy out of date food.   I
    find no basis on which to conclude that the  same  circumstances  would
    not arise elsewhere for the Appellant. The Appellant would continue  to
    work, practice his religion and carry out similar activities as before.
     I take the view that this Appellant clearly  fits  into  the  type  of
    person as described by Peter Verney, the expert in MG [14].  He  stated
    "General hindrance and petty  harassment  of  Christians  could  easily
    develop into the persecution of  particular  unfortunate  individuals."
    There is  no  evidence  that  religious  intolerance  exists  in  state
    officials located in only the south  or  Khartoum.  Further  the  Upper
    Tribunal in MG clearly had in mind that  fact  that  in  areas  (unlike
    Khartoum) where Coptic Christians are few in  number,  their  isolation
    increases the risks that they face.  The  current  background  evidence
    shows that Coptic Christians  remain  a  "dwindling  community"  facing
    persistent harassment which in certain cases develops into  full  blown
    persecution.  The Tribunal cited a report [44] on religious freedom  in
    Sudan dated 2011 which identified the north as an area where Christians
    suffered mistreatment "primarily as a result of the entrenchment  of  a
    strict interpretation of Sharia law in the  north."  Further  reference
    was made to the fact that churches in Khartoum were  considered  to  be
    targets by the government and that prosecutions  of  proselytisers  had
    been stepped up.  Whilst the evidence fails to establish a general risk
    of persecution for Coptic Christians per se, I am inclined to the  view
    that there is no recent evidence to show that  MG  no  longer  applies.
    In addition the COIR refers to impunity of security forces as a current
    problem together with abuse of powers and  routine  torture  in  police
    stations.

19. Accordingly I remake the decision.

20.  I allow the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

21. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        Date 29.1.2015

Judge GA Black
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Date 29.1.2015

Judge GA BLACK
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
