
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06260/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2015                 |On 9th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                               mr Abdul Waheed
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Thathall (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, with  permission,
    concerning  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hillis)
    promulgated on 7th July 2015, dismissing his appeal against a  decision
    of 20th March  2015  refusing  to  grant  him  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection and refusing a human rights claim.



The Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan and was born  on  1st  December
    1970.  He claimed to have entered the UK, utilising a  false  passport,
    in April 1992.  He said he had remained in the UK ever since.   He  has
    produced documentary evidence suggesting that he came to the  attention
    of the Home Office in  January  2001  or  possibly  a  little  earlier.
    According to the Respondent, he was arrested for working  illegally  in
    the UK on 2nd August 2002 and was served  with  papers  as  an  illegal
    entrant.  There is some documentation suggesting that consideration  of
    an initial asylum claim was delayed because he had absconded  and  some
    other documentary evidence suggesting that, as of 25th March  2011,  he
    had never claimed asylum.  On 18th December 2014 the Respondent, having
    reviewed the situation, seems to have  decided  that  no  valid  asylum
    claim had ever been made and also concluded that he had  "no  basis  of
    stay in the United Kingdom".  The Appellant did, thereafter, in fact on
    8th October 2014 make an asylum claim.

 3. The basis of the claim for asylum made on 8th October 2014 was that  he
    would be at risk upon return  to  Pakistan  because  he  had  formed  a
    relationship, in the UK, with one Shafeena Rehman, a  British  citizen,
    and that her former husband, who is in the UK but  who  has  family  in
    Pakistan with government connections, wished to kill him as  a  result.
    It was also the Appellant's case that, having  been  in  the  UK  since
    1992, he met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules (his claiming to have been in the UK continuously  for  at  least
    twenty years) and that he satisfied the requirements of  Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), both within and outside
    the Rules, on the basis of his relationship with Ms Rehman and  on  the
    basis of his relationship with her youngest daughter.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. There was an oral hearing which took place  on  17th  June  2015.   The
    First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from the Appellant, from  Ms  Rehman
    and from Mr Zahid Hanif Kahut, a solicitor, though  not  the  solicitor
    representing the Appellant.  It found that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness, it disbelieved his claim to be at risk upon return to
    Pakistan, it disbelieved his claim to be in a genuine relationship with
    Ms Rehman and it concluded he had failed to show that he  had  been  in
    the UK for a continuous period of at least twenty years.  As  to  those
    matters, it said this;

         "Findings as to Credibility and Fact

         Credibility

         38.  The Appellant, on his own account, states that he entered  the
             UK using a false passport.   He  also  states  that  he  first
             learned of the claimed threats to him by Mr. Rehman five years
             ago and that he has been living as husband and  wife  with  Ms
             Rehman since 2013 and delayed  applying  for  asylum  and  any
             legal status within the Immigration Rules notwithstanding  the
             documentation in this appeal  from  the  Respondent  and  A.Q.
             Butt.  These  two  facts  contained  in  the  Appellant's  own
             account engage the  terms  of  Section  8  (above)  and  I  am
             required to consider this as one  factor  adversely  affecting
             the Appellant's credibility in the  balance  of  the  evidence
             taken as a whole in  assessing  the  Appellant's  credibility.
             Engaging the terms of Section 8 (above)  is  not,  of  itself,
             determinative of the Appellant's credibility.

         39.  In his oral account the Appellant was  regularly  inconsistent
             in where he lived and worked  in  the  UK  since  his  claimed
             arrival in 1992 and claimed to have been living in two  places
             at the same time on occasions.  He was also vague and,  in  my
             opinion, evasive when answering questions as to where he lived
             and worked during that period.

         40.  The Appellant originally stated in his evidence-in-chief  that
             he arrived in the UK in 1992 looking for  work  and  lived  in
             Heckmondwike with his brother for  approximately  six  months.
             He then moved to Huddersfield to find work and shared a  house
             with friends.  He was sacked from the takeaway  he  worked  at
             for about four  months  when  he  was  unable  to  supply  his
             employer with his National Insurance number (NIN).  He  stayed
             in Huddersfield for about three or four years before moving to
             Sheffield in 1996/97 in the hope of getting a "proper job" but
             working illegally as he had no NIN.

         41.  He lived with friends in Sheffield rent free for about four or
             five years and worked for  about  seven  months  in  takeaways
             during that period.  He lost his job and returned to  live  in
             Huddersfield permanently.  He stated he did not  remember  the
             date he returned to Huddersfield.

         42.  He then stated he moved to Crawley in 1993/94 to live  with  a
             cousin and worked in various jobs in takeaways for about seven
             or eight years during which he worked for  a  total  of  about
             three to four years.   He  then  claimed  his  first  stay  in
             Huddersfield was for less than a year.

         43.  The Appellant then stated he left Crawley and lived for period
             of time in Oxford from 2000 and that he  went  to  the  police
             there to claim asylum and leave to remain.   He  was  released
             the following day with some papers which  he  lost.   He  left
             Oxford after about 18 months to two years having  been  unable
             to find work as no jobs were available.   He  now  claimed  to
             have returned to Huddersfield when he left  Crawley  which  is
             inconsistent with his earlier testimony set out above.  It was
             at this time that he met Ms. Rehman about  four  months  after
             arriving back in Huddersfield.  He stated this  was  in  about
             2004 to 2005 which is again inconsistent with his earlier oral
             testimony.  He then claimed they started  to  cohabit  two  to
             three years later.

         44.  During cross-examination the Appellant stated he did not  have
             a good memory which is inconsistent  with  Ms.  Rehman's  oral
             evidence that he  does  have  a  good  memory.   He  gave  two
             addresses where he lived in Sheffield but was unable  to  give
             any addresses where he lived in Crawley or Oxford.

         45.  The Appellant then claimed that the people he  lived  with  in
             Crawley  were  not  actually  relatives  but  neighbours  from
             Pakistan.  He then said that he thought the question was about
             Oxford and said he does have relatives in Crawley and  he  has
             aunts and cousins in Pakistan.  He stated his sister  lives  I
             London but that he has never visited her there and  only  seen
             her in the UK when she visits their brother  in  Heckmondwike.
             He said his elder  brother  from  Heckmondwyke  now  lives  in
             Oxford.  And that he had also lived ion Crawley before  moving
             there.

         46.  I note here that there is no written or oral  evidence  before
             me from the Appellant's elder brother, his sister or any other
             relatives who live in the UK.  The Appellant  stated  that  he
             did not ask any of his relatives in the UK to provide evidence
             in support of his claim despite the fact he  asked  Mr.  Majid
             and Mr. Kahut to do so.  He stated when he lived in Crawley it
             was not with his elder brother  as  he  was  still  living  in
             Heckmondwike but that he did live with his brother in  Oxford.
             He then claimed his other brother lives in Sheffield.

         47.  The Appellant stated that  he  had  never  made  any  previous
             formal application for asylum or leave to remain, he  did  not
             recall the name of the solicitors he  saw  in  Manchester  and
             that he only spent about five to ten  minutes  at  A.Q.  Butt,
             Solicitors and he did not remember signing anything whilst  he
             was there and,  on  being  shown  their  letter  of  the  12th
             January, that he did not recall instructing them to apply  for
             asylum.

         48.  In re-examination he said he could not  answer  any  questions
             about the "A.Q. Butt application" and that he had  never  seen
             any correspondence from them at any time.

         49.  During cross-examination the Appellant stated that he and  Ms.
             Rehman did not start to live together until 2013 as  he  moved
             away  form  Huddersfield  to  Sheffield  due  to  them  having
             arguments about food but that the relationship did  not  break
             up at that time.  Mrs. Rehman stated  in  her  oral  testimony
             that they had never argued about food and that he did not move
             to Sheffield due to any arguments.

         50.  I conclude, for the reasons set out above, that the  Appellant
             is not consistent and his evidence  is  neither  credible  nor
             reliable.

         51.  I reject the Appellant's claim that Mr. Rehman or  his  family
             seek to cause him serious harm or kill him if he  is  returned
             to Pakistan.  There is no reliable evidence  that  Mr.  Rehman
             has threatened  the  Appellant  or  Ms.  Rehman  at  any  time
             following the start of their relationship during her  marriage
             to him.  I conclude that there is no reliable evidence  before
             me that Mr. Rehman is  only  seeking  to  have  the  Appellant
             harmed if he returns to Pakistan as neither he nor his  family
             will avoid persecution if the Appellant is harmed in  the  UK.
             If Mr. Rehman had felt that his and his  family's  honour  had
             been harmed by the Appellant he would, in  my  judgment,  have
             sought retribution in the UK within a relatively short  period
             following the breakdown of his marriage.

         52.  The fact that, on the  Appellant's  own  account,  Mr.  Rehman
             lives a five-minute drive from Ms. Rehman and  the  Appellant,
             has made no overt threats and has  never  visited  their  home
             leads me to conclude  that  he  does  not  seek  to  harm  the
             Appellant nor Ms. Rehman in this country or in Pakistan.

         The Relationship with Ms. Rehman

         53.  The Appellant and  Ms.  Rehman  in  their  witness  statements
             stated that the reason they did not move in together and  live
             as husband and wife was that such behaviour  outside  marriage
             is  against  their  religion  and  disapproved  of  in   their
             community.  I conclude that this is not  consistent  with  the
             fact  that  they  now  claim  to  have  lived  together  in  a
             relationship akin to marriage for possibly two or three years.
              The Appellant claims it is two  or  three  years  since  they
             moved in together and Ms. Rehman states  it  was  in  November
             2013 which, at the date of the hearing, was  approximately  18
             months.  I do not find this  inconsistency  insignificant  and
             conclude that neither timescale is reliable.

         54.  The Appellant and Ms. Rehman were also inconsistent in respect
             of the approximate date that she returned to work following  a
             period of ill-health due to clinical depression.

         55.  The Appellant relies on the medical evidence  of  miscarriages
             but there is no evidence before me to show  that  he  was  the
             father.  Additionally, in light of the inconsistencies set out
             above I find that the Appellant has failed to show that he  is
             in a genuine and subsisting relationship with  Ms.  Rehman  as
             claimed.  In reaching this decision I have taken into  account
             the letters from Ms. Rehman's s daughters but conclude  I  can
             place no evidential weight on them as there is  no  indication
             that they are aware of the gravity of the appeal  hearing  and
             the need for them to be truthful.  Additionally, the  contents
             of the letters has not been tested in cross-examination.   The
             Appellant has not sought  to  call  anyone  from  outside  his
             claimed family  with  Ms.  Rehman  to  give  evidence  of  the
             relationship despite his claim that a number of his own  close
             relatives live in the  UK  and  that  his  friends  and  elder
             brother have accommodated and maintained him over a number  of
             years since 1992.

         56.  I, therefore, conclude that the Appellant does  not  meet  the
             terms of paragraph EX1 as he has failed to show  he  is  in  a
             genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.    Additionally,   the
             evidence of Ms. Rehman shows that even if they are not  living
             as husband and wife that only started  in  November  2013  and
             does not fulfil the definition set out in Gen1.2, namely,  two
             years of cohabitation.

         57.  Mr. Majid's and Mr. Kahut's evidence of knowing the  Appellant
             through informal cricket matches in 1992 and possibly a number
             of summers thereafter does not show that the Appellant was  in
             the UK continuously as claimed.  Ms. Rehman cannot provide any
             evidence in that respect which is independent of Mr. Waheed as
             she has known him at best for the last eight years only.   The
             Appellant has, in my judgment,  been  unable  to  provide  any
             reliable evidence that he has  been  in  the  UK  continuously
             since 1992 and I, therefore, conclude that the Appellant  does
             not meet the terms of the "Ten Year Route."  I find  that  the
             Appellant has failed to show that  he  meets  the  Immigration
             Rules on the basis of a private or family life in the UK.

         58.  The Appellant claims  that  there  is  not  a  sufficiency  of
             protection for him in  Pakistan  from  an  honour  killing  or
             serious harm at the hands of Mr. Rehman's family and relies on
             paragraph 2.2.19 in the COIS Report to show that men are  also
             "affected" by honour killings where a man claims that a  woman
             has brought dishonour to his  family.   The  Report  does  not
             expand on what is meant by "affected by" and  only  refers  to
             women being  the  subject  of  the  violence.   I,  therefore,
             conclude that the Appellant has failed  to  show  that,  as  a
             male,  he  will  be  "affected"  to  the   extent   that   his
             circumstances come within a category recognised by the Refugee
             Convention or that anything that may happen to him will engage
             the terms of Article 2 or 3 of the ECHR.

         59.  The Appellant, on his  own  account,  has  largely  relied  on
             charity and led to what Mr. Spence has referred to as a "hand-
             to-mouth existence."  The Appellant claims he cannot return to
             Pakistan as there is no work for him and he will be destitute.
              The Appellant has voluntarily lived what may be regarded as a
             life of hardship in the UK by choice as he has largely  failed
             to find any of the employment he came to the UK to  undertake.
             I conclude that the Appellant will not suffer any hardship  in
             excess of what he claims to have  suffered  in  the  UK  since
             1992.  He is still a relatively young able-bodied man who will
             be able to find at least as much work as he has in the  UK  to
             support himself.  He also has relatives in Pakistan who, in my
             judgment, he can turn to in the same manner as he did with his
             relatives in the UK to assist him on return.

         60.  I conclude that the Appellant will not face any  serious  harm
             or undue hardship on return to Pakistan and that  there  is  a
             sufficiency of protection  available  to  him  against  honour
             killings.

         61.  There is no reliable evidence before me, for the  reasons  set
             out above, that the best interests of Ms,  Rehman's  daughters
             will be served by the Appellant remaining  in  the  UK.   They
             will be more likely,  in  my  judgment,  to  be  able  to  re-
             establish familial relations with their father and brothers if
             Mr. Rehman is no longer in the UK and can  remain  with  their
             mother in the UK.  Mr. Rehman, on their mother's account,  has
             only been living at their home for about 18 months  and  there
             is no reliable evidence that his relationship with  them  will
             cause them  significant  difficulties  if  he  is  removed  to
             Pakistan.  There is no evidence that they will not be able  to
             keep  in  contact  with  him  by  using  modern   methods   of
             communication and visit him during holidays if they so wish."

 5. Hence the appeal failed on all counts.

The Permission Stage

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was granted by a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    salient part of the grant reads as follows;

         "2.  The Appellant's grounds are as follows:

             (a)  the judge failed to consider  the  substantial  lapse  of
                  time over the past twenty years  and  its  effect  on  A's
                  ability to recall information;

             (b)  the judge failed to grasp that the genuine threat  of  an
                  honour killing is as equally applicable to a male as to  a
                  female, particularly as 2.219 of the COIS  Report  clearly
                  states "the majority of victims  were  women,  though  men
                  were also affected";

             (c)  the judge perversely concludes that the COIS Report  does
                  not expand on what is meant by affected even  though  this
                  is  "Robinson  obvious",  and  it   would   otherwise   be
                  discriminatory to limit the interpretation only to women;

             (d)   the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  claim  under  the
                  Immigration Rules, or under Para.276ADE  despite  A's  20+
                  years' residence in the UK;

             (e)  the judge failed to shift the  burden  of  proof  to  the
                  Respondent  to  show  that  A  had  not  been  in  the  UK
                  continuously from 1992;

             (f)  the judge erred in failing to make  a  proper  assessment
                  under Section 55 as to  the  best  interests  of  the  two
                  children of his British partner.

         3.   The judge was in error in [57] in referring to  the  'Ten-Year
             Route', which in any event only applies to  lawful  residence.
             A's claim is to have resided  continuously  in  the  UK  since
             1992, a period of 23 years, and in those circumstances  it  is
             arguably that the judge ought to have considered the matter in
             light of Court of Appeal's decision in  Edgehill  and  Anor  v
             SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 402.  Moreover, it is arguable  that  the
             comments in [58] as to the meaning of 'affected' suggests that
             the judge has not given sufficient weight to the  COIS  Report
             as to the prevalence of honour killing in Pakistan in relation
             to both men and women."

 7. The hearing was convened so that consideration could be  given  by  the
    Upper Tribunal to the contention that the First-tier Tribunal had erred
    in law such that its decision ought to be  set  aside.   Provision  was
    also made for the decision to be remade at the same hearing if that was
    necessary and appropriate.

 8. Mr Thathall, for the  Appellant,  made  oral  submissions  which  were,
    essentially, in line with what he had said in his written grounds which
    were summarised, succinctly but accurately in my view, in the grant  of
    permission.  He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  had  failed  to
    bear in mind the lapse of time when taking points against the Appellant
    for his failure to remember where he had lived in previous  years.   He
    took me to documentation contained within the  bundle  which  had  been
    filed on behalf of the Appellant for the  purposes  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing and contended that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not
    sufficiently taken those documents into account.  Further, it  had  not
    properly considered the evidence of  Mr  Kahut.   In  general,  it  had
    "placed too  high  a  burden  on  the  Appellant"  when  assessing  his
    credibility.  It had been wrong to reject evidence  touching  upon  the
    relationship with Ms Rehman.  It had not properly considered background
    country material indicating that males as well as females might well be
    the target of honour killings.   Mrs  Pettersen,  for  the  Respondent,
    submitted that all the First-tier Tribunal's findings had been open  to
    it and have been properly explained.  It had been entitled to make what
    it did of the evidence before it.

 9. I have  decided,  after  careful  consideration,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an error of  law  and  that  its  decision  must,
    therefore, stand.  I set out my reasoning below.

10. The key to most if not all of the arguments  advanced  when  permission
    was sought and before me, is the soundness or otherwise of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's assessment  as  to  credibility.   In  this  case,  not
    unusually, there were two standards of proof in play.  The  "real  risk
    test" was applicable  with  respect  to  the  claim  for  international
    protection.  The balance of  probabilities  test  was  applicable  with
    respect to the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

11. The First-tier Tribunal correctly directed itself as to the  applicable
    standard  of  proof  with  respect  to  the  claim  for   international
    protection at paragraph 5 of its determination.  It did  not  expressly
    remind itself that it was assessing the other matters on the basis of a
    balance of probabilities.  However, it is a very basic  principle  that
    with respect to matters other  than  those  relating  to  international
    protection,  the  applicable  standard  is  that  of   a   balance   of
    probabilities and I cannot see that,  without  anything  positively  to
    suggest otherwise, the First-tier Tribunal would have been  unaware  of
    or would have lost sight of something as fundamental  as  that.   Judge
    Hillis, I might add, is a very experienced judge but I would not expect
    even a novice judge to lose sight of it.

12. The credibility assessment which I have  set  out  in  full  above,  is
    certainly detailed and holistic.  Mr Thathall, though,  contested  that
    too strict or too high a standard was applied.  I cannot  see  anything
    at all in what the First-tier Tribunal said to indicate  that  that  is
    so.  In looking at the particular criticisms made during the course  of
    the oral hearing,  it  is  right  to  say,  and  the  contrary  is  not
    suggested,  that  the  Appellant  did  give  inconsistent   information
    regarding the times he said he had been living at various locations  in
    the UK since 1992.  The difficulties with his evidence, in that regard,
    are highlighted from paragraph 39 to  45  of  the  determination.   The
    First-tier Tribunal did not  expressly  say  that  it  had  taken  into
    account that the Appellant was attempting to  recollect  matters  which
    had occurred some years ago but it can be  taken  to  have  appreciated
    that.  That much was obvious.  Further, it did  not  base  its  adverse
    credibility finding solely upon such  matters,  relying,  additionally,
    upon the lack of evidence from family members in  the  UK  where  there
    appeared  to  be  no  impediment  to  such  evidence  being   obtained,
    inconsistencies between the  Appellant  and  Ms  Rehman  regarding  the
    history of their relationship and the  implausibility  of  Ms  Rehman's
    former husband, who is living in the UK, wishing to have him killed  in
    Pakistan yet making no attempts to seek retribution in the UK.

13. As to the failure to take into  account  documentary  evidence,  it  is
    certainly the case, as Mr Thathall submits, that there was  documentary
    evidence placing the Appellant in the UK from around the latter end  of
    2000 and early 2001 and, thereafter, in and beyond 2012.   Mr  Thathall
    took me to it.  The point the First-tier Tribunal was seeking to  make,
    though, was that the Appellant had, in its view, failed to  demonstrate
    that he had been in the UK continuously from 1992 until a  twenty  year
    period from the date  of  his  arrival  had  been  reached.   The  word
    continuously is the key here.  Thus, for example, evidence placing  him
    in the UK in 1992 and evidence placing him in the UK in  2000  did  not
    mean, necessarily, that he had been in the UK, without any break,  from
    1992 to 2000.  Similarly for the period, for example  from  2000  until
    2012.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  the  Appellant's  bundle,  which
    contained the documents  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  as  to  long
    residence, in front of it and can be taken to have known  what  was  in
    it.  Indeed, it referred to certain of the  documents  therein  in  its
    determination.  I do not accept that it would have forgotten or  failed
    to take into account the content of those documents when  reaching  its
    decision.  It was, of course, not required to refer to each  and  every
    document when explaining its reasons for making the  findings  that  it
    did.

14. Mr Thathall submitted, at one point, that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    been irrational in requiring documentary evidence to indicate  that  he
    had been living at specific addresses.  However, it does not seem to me
    that it did impose any such  requirement.   It  was  not  the  lack  of
    documentation concerning the addresses which caused  it  to  decide  to
    disbelieve the Appellant's claims as to where  and  when  he  had  been
    living but, rather, the inconsistency in what he had had to  say  about
    his historical places of residence.

15. As to the oral evidence of Mr Kahut, he had said that he had played  in
    cricket matches involving the Appellant in the summer of 1992 and  1993
    (see paragraphs 5 and 6 of his witness statement).  He had also said he
    had seen him "intermittently for many years" but that he was  not  able
    to recall  exact  dates  or  occasions  (paragraph  8  of  the  witness
    statement).  Mr Thathall, in his initial oral submissions on the  point
    and in his Grounds of Appeal, had criticised  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rejecting Mr Kahut's evidence.  However, it does  not  seem  to  me
    that it did reject his evidence.  When one looks at paragraph 57 of the
    determination,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    implicitly accepting that Mr Kahut had or may have seen him at  cricket
    matches in 1992 as might a Mr Majid who had given written,  though  not
    oral, evidence of a similar  nature  but  that,  again,  that  was  not
    capable of demonstrating the amount of continuous residence claimed  or
    required.  Mr Thathall also contended, I think by way of an alternative
    argument, that the First-tier Tribunal had not sufficiently  considered
    or borne in mind the evidence of Mr Kahut and Mr Majid.  It seems to me
    quite clear, though, from what it said at paragraph  57,  that  it  did
    properly bear it in mind and take account of it.

16. As to the credibility of the claims regarding the relationship with  Ms
    Rehman, Mr Thathall submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had  applied
    what he described as "too wide a test".  I assume he means too strict a
    test.  However, it noted  what  it  clearly  found  to  be  significant
    inconsistencies in the evidence the two had given regarding  the  dates
    they had started cohabiting from and the date on which  Ms  Rehman  was
    able to return to  work  following  a  period  of  ill  health  due  to
    depression.  It thought their evidence to  the  effect  that  they  had
    delayed moving in together because such behaviour outside  marriage  is
    culturally disapproved of to be inconsistent with their claim that they
    had actually done so.  It considered written evidence from Ms  Rehman's
    daughters but explained, at paragraph 55 of its determination,  why  it
    was not attaching weight to them.  It noted the lack of any evidence as
    to the existence of the relationship  from  the  Appellant's  UK  based
    family members and friends.

17. In light of all of the above I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    did not err in law with respect to its consideration of the Appellant's
    credibility.  It did not, in my judgment, apply  an  incorrect  or  too
    demanding standard of proof with respect to any element of the  account
    the Appellant had offered.  It  did  not  fail  to  take  into  account
    material considerations nor did it take  account  of  irrelevant  ones.
    Its findings and conclusions were open to it on the evidence  and  were
    adequately justified.  I can quite  see  that  a  different  First-tier
    Tribunal, on a different day, might have reached different conclusions,
    at least about the claims regarding the  relationship  and  the  claims
    regarding the period of the long residence but that is not the  test  I
    have to apply.  I appreciate in particular, though Mr Thathall did  not
    make this point, that a different judge might have thought that if  the
    evidence he had been present in the UK on  a  date  in  1992  could  be
    accepted (and this First-tier Tribunal did seem to accept that  on  the
    basis of the evidence of Mr Kahut  and  Mr  Majid)  then  it  would  be
    unlikely that, as an illegal entrant, he would then  voluntarily  leave
    the country only to come back illegally again but, of course, that does
    not necessarily follow. The mere fact that it would have been open to a
    different First-tier Tribunal to reach a different  conclusion  on  the
    same facts does not mean that this tribunal erred in law.   I  conclude
    that the  credibility  assessment,  in  all  its  aspects,  is  legally
    sustainable.

18. There are some further matters to consider.  It was  contended  in  the
    grounds, although this was not expressly pursued  in  oral  submissions
    before me, that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  misdirected  itself  by
    referring to a "ten year Rule" in circumstances where  it  should  have
    been asking itself whether the Appellant had  been  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of at least twenty years given the  content  of  Rule
    276ADE.  However, when the determination is read  as  a  whole,  it  is
    clear  that  it  was  asking  itself  about  a   twenty   year   period
    notwithstanding its erroneous reference to  the  "ten  year  route"  at
    paragraph 57.  It correctly identified the potentially applicable  Rule
    at paragraph 13 of the determination and, of  course,  that  Rule  does
    require consideration of a twenty year period rather than  a  ten  year
    period.   It  specifically  said,  when  recording   the   Respondent's
    submissions to it, that it  had  been  contended  by  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer that the Appellant had not "been continuously in the
    UK over the last  twenty  years".   Against  that  background  I  would
    conclude that it was, in fact, asking itself about a twenty year rather
    than a ten year period.  It considered the provisions contained  within
    paragraph 276ADE, but concluded that the requirement of at least twenty
    years' continuous residence had not been met.

19. Mr Thathall contended that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in failing
    to shift the burden of  proof  to  the  Respondent  to  show  that  the
    Appellant had not been in the  UK  continuously  from  1992  given  its
    apparent finding that he had been in the UK, at  some  point,  in  that
    year.  Mr  Thathall,  though,  did  not  provide  any  legal  authority
    demonstrating that  the  burden  of  proof  would  be  shifted  to  the
    Respondent in such circumstances.  The requirements are clearly set out
    in paragraph 276ADE and it is, it seems to me, simply, with respect  to
    the required time period, for the Appellant to demonstrate that he  has
    been in the UK continuously for twenty years.  I cannot see that  there
    is any basis to conclude that if a person is in the UK for some  period
    of time that the burden somehow shifts.  On the material before me  and
    on the basis of the argument as put I find that  the  burden  does  not
    shift and, therefore, the First-tier Tribunal did not make an error  of
    law in this regard.

20. As to the arguments regarding the  prevalence  of  honour  killings  in
    Pakistan any error that there might have been  could  not  possibly  be
    material if the findings that there is no relationship and is no threat
    from the former husband have been soundly made.  I have concluded  that
    they have.  Criticisms have been made as to the claimed failings of the
    First-tier Tribunal with respect  to  findings  under  the  Immigration
    Rules regarding the relationship with Ms  Rehman  and  the  Appellant's
    relationship with her children and the claimed failure to carry  out  a
    proper assessment as to the best interests of the  children.   However,
    again, these challenges simply fall away in the event of  the  findings
    to the effect that there is no genuine  relationship  being  sound.   I
    have concluded that they are.

21. The above then is  really  the  end  of  the  matter.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal, as I say, reached  legally  sustainable  conclusions  on  the
    basis of the evidence before it  even  though  others  may  have  found
    differently.  It is not my task  to  substitute  my  own  view  of  the
    evidence for that of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  heard  and
    decided the case.  I conclude that there was no error of  law  so  that
    the decision must stand.

Conclusions

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   I  make  no
order regarding anonymity.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

