
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06676/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st February 2016                 |On 24th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     OS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Sirikanda, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Co Sols
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Turkey born on the 3rd March  1992.   He
    appeals with permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Devittie) to dismiss his appeal, on asylum and  human  rights  grounds,
    against a decision to remove him from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.




    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The Appellant is a Turkish Kurd. He claimed  asylum  approximately  ten
    months after his claimed  illegal  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    advanced a case of persecution for reasons of  his  political  opinion.
    The Appellant claims to be a supporter of  the  PKK  and  the  DTP.  He
    states that in 2008 he was arrested and tortured by the Turkish  police
    for 3 days; he was expelled  from  school;  in  November  2008  he  was
    arrested on a demonstration and again subjected  to  torture  during  a
    detention which lasted two  days  and  ended  in  his  release  without
    charge. He moved areas and got a  job  working  on  construction  of  a
    bridge in Dersim.  In February 2012 a party of  Turkish  soldiers  were
    crossing that bridge when it was blown up. All the Kurdish  workers  on
    the site were rounded up and arrested. The Appellant's history came  to
    light and he was transferred to Tunceli Security Headquarters. He  was,
    he claims, there subjected to severe torture and accused of involvement
    in the explosion on the  bridge.  On  the  third  day  of  torture  the
    Appellant was threatened with death. He  was  mentally  and  physically
    drained. He agreed to whatever  they  wanted.  They  made  him  sign  a
    statement that he was not allowed to  read.  He  was  released  on  two
    conditions: that he was to report for military service, and  that  each
    week he was to attend  the  anti-terrorist  branch  to  report  on  the
    activities of the PKK. Upon his release he convalesced with  a  cousin,
    and thereafter left Turkey with the  assistance  of  the  sebeke.   The
    Appellant states that he did not  claim  initially  asylum  in  the  UK
    because he had heard that people were being  detained  and  removed  to
    Turkey.

 3. The Respondent disbelieved the entire account.  It was found that there
    were material inconsistencies in the evidence that  the  Appellant  had
    given on various  occasions  and  his  account  was  not  supported  by
    objective country background material.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  gave
    oral evidence and relied on his witness statement. He further relied on
    a  lengthy  medico-legal  report  prepared  by  Freedom  From   Torture
    (formerly Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture).  This
    report had been prepared by a Dr David Hamer, a Consultant Psychiatrist
    who had seen the Appellant on four occasions. Dr Hamar found inter alia
    that the Appellant bore scars consistent with having been  kicked  with
    steel capped boot,  had  dental  repair  work  consistent  with  having
    damaged his teeth in a trauma, and that he met the diagnostic  criteria
    for a diagnosis of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.

 5. The determination  sets  out  the  Appellant's  account,  and  gives  a
    detailed summary of all of the reasons for refusal. At paragraph  6  it
    is noted that the Appellant relies on a medical report  in  support  of
    his claim:

         "... The medical report shows evidence of dental repair  consistent
         with his account. It shows two scars which are consistent with  his
         account of being kicked and is diagnosed as suffering from PTSD.  I
         shall consider this medical evidence in the round, and against  the
         background of the totality of the evidence. In this regard  I  find
         that  there  are  a  number  of  unsatisfactory  features  to   the
         Appellant's evidence, which undermine the credibility of his  claim
         of past persecution and the weight of the  medical  evidence.  They
         are as follows:"

 6. The determination then sets out four reasons why  the  claim  does  not
    succeed. The first is an inconsistency in the Appellant's evidence.  In
    his witness statement  he  claims  to  have  distributed  leaflets  and
    attended meetings of the youth wing of the DTP whereas at interview  he
    denied having taken part in such activities. The second was that he had
    apparently believed that the PPK, DTP and BDP were all the same  entity
    and that they were  all  led  by  Abdulla  Ocalan.  Country  background
    material showed this to be  a  fundamental  misunderstanding.   Thirdly
    there was no objective confirmation that there had been an explosion on
    a bridge in Dersim in February 2012. The Appellant's  explanation  that
    it was not reported for security reasons was  rejected,  since  similar
    events had been reported in the Turkish press. Finally the  Appellant's
    explanation for the delay in claiming asylum was rejected, since he had
    on his own evidence been involved in the Kurdish  community  since  his
    arrival.  The appeal was thereby dismissed on all grounds.

 7. The grounds of appeal are detailed but in essence submit that the First-
    tier Tribunal erred in the following material respects:

      i) Failure to give appropriate  weight  to  the  medico-legal  report/
         failure to make findings on what weight should be attached to it;

     ii) Failure to have regard to material evidence,  such  as  an  article
         from Akifhaber reporting on a large  scale  security  operation  by
         Gendarmes in the relevant area in February 2012,  the  reasons  for
         which were unknown to the authors of  the  report  who  stated  "no
         explanation has been provided about  these  operations  until  this
         day";

 8. Permission was granted on all grounds.

    Error of Law

    Country Background Material

 9. The central feature of the Appellant's case was that in  February  2012
    he was working for a company called  Limak  building  a  new  road  and
    bridge near Dersim (Tunceli).  He  states  that  a  number  of  Turkish
    soldiers were killed by a blast on or near that  bridge.   It  is  this
    event which, he claims, led to his detention, ill treatment and  caused
    him to flee to the UK.

10. The Respondent did not accept that this event occurred. The  case-owner
    took various steps to check the veracity of  the  Appellant's  account.
    She checked the website for Limak, a large  construction  company,  and
    found nothing to suggest that they  had  been  contracted  to  build  a
    bridge in or near Dersim. She further surveyed Turkish media reports to
    see if there was any evidence that soldiers had been killed in the area
    in February 2012. Although she found stories relating to soldiers being
    killed in Dersim, for instance in September 2012, she found nothing  to
    support the claim that a blast had occurred  in  February  2012.  This,
    taken with inconsistencies in the  Appellant's  evidence,  led  her  to
    conclude that his account was not true.

11. The First-tier Tribunal adopted this reasoning at paragraph 6 (iii)  of
    the determination, expressly rejecting the Appellant's explanation that
    the event was subject to a media blackout.

12. The Appellant now submits that in  reaching  its  conclusions  on  this
    central event the Tribunal failed to have regard to  material  evidence
    which appears at D7 of the Respondent's bundle. It is an article  which
    appeared in Aktifhaber, an online Turkish  language  news-site.  It  is
    dated 24th  February  2012  and  states  that  security  services  have
    embarked on a large scale operation in Tunceli, in an area believed  to
    be used by the terror organisation the PKK:

         "In the early hours of the morning gendarme special task force  was
         brought down in Skorsi helicopters and began an operation with  the
         support of two Kobra helicopters. No explanation has been  provided
         about these operations until this day".

    This, it is submitted, supports the Appellant's case  in  two  material
    respects. First, it confirms that  some  incident  took  place  in  the
    Tunceli area in later February 2012 which caused the  Turkish  security
    services to mount a large scale operation, and second, it confirms that
    no-one knows why.

13. Mr Wilding accepted that  this  evidence  was  not  considered  by  the
    Tribunal,  but  submitted  that  the  logic  in  the   refusal   letter
    nevertheless remains good. There are  articles  in  the  Turkish  press
    about other incidents involving the killing of soldiers on other dates:
    why not this one?

14. I am satisfied that the  omission  to  consider  this  evidence  was  a
    material error of law.  Although in the final analysis this article may
    not be judged sufficient to outweigh the logic in the  refusal  letter,
    it was evidence, expressly relied upon  by  the  Appellant,  that  went
    directly to one of the central matters in issue.   The brevity  of  the
    paragraph dealing with this claimed incident belies a lack  of  anxious
    scrutiny, and this evidence should have been considered.

    Medical Evidence

15. It is trite asylum law it is not a function  of  a  medical  expert  to
    comment on the overall credibility of  an  account:  that  is  for  the
    decision maker [see for instance HH (Ethiopia) v SSHD [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    306]   The medical expert's role is limited to making findings  on  the
    subject's clinical presentation, be that physical  and/or  mental,  and
    assessing the extent to which those findings are  consistent  with  the
    account given, in accordance with the framework set out in the Istanbul
    Protocol.  When such a report is presented as  evidence  in  an  asylum
    appeal, the Tribunal must consider the contents in the round  with  the
    other evidence.  It is an error of law to first reject  an  appellant's
    credibility, and then to attach no weight to the medical  report  as  a
    result: Ex parte Virjon B [2002] EWHC 1469, Mibanga v SSHD [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367.

16. In this case the central feature of the medical report relied  upon  by
    Ms Sirikanda was somewhat  unusual.  It  did  not  so  much  relate  to
    scarring or to anything that the Appellant had told  Dr  Hamar,  as  to
    what he had not said.

17. Dr Hamar was able to comment upon the Appellant's  psychological  state
    as well as his physical condition. In respect of the  latter  Dr  Hamar
    finds the Appellant to have seven identifiable scars, of which only two
    are attributed  to  ill  treatment:  a  small  mature  scar  above  the
    Appellant's eye, and a mature scar on his chin that is approximately  3
    cm long and shows suture marks. Both are found to  be  consistent  with
    having been kicked in the face with a steel-capped  boot.   As  to  the
    Appellant's psychological condition Dr Hamar finds that  the  Appellant
    experiences enough of the relevant symptoms to be diagnosed with  PTSD.
    He also finds it to be likely that the Appellant  was  sexually  abused
    whilst in prison [at paragraph 89]. He bases this  finding  largely  on
    his evaluation of the Appellant's demeanour and responses during  their
    interview, for instance:

         '[O] looked embarrassed, ashamed, his head dropped and  tears  came
         to his eyes at this point' [20]

         "They did many things. It would have been better to have died  than
         they things they did" ([O]'s demeanour changed and he became  still
         and quiet at this point.) He said "I cant talk about it"[23]

         He went quiet and his eyes filled with tears. He replied  "can  you
         please ask me something else?" [at 25]'

    The only place in which the Appellant appears to have acknowledged  any
    torture with a sexual element is in  his  witness  statement  where  he
    states that electrodes were attached to his  genitals  and  nipples  in
    order that electric shocks be administered. He did not  volunteer  this
    information to Dr Hamar but when asked whether it was true he confirmed
    it was: paragraph 20.

18. Ms Sirikanda complains that Dr Hamar's conclusion about the  likelihood
    of the Appellant having been subjected to sexual abuse does not feature
    at all in the determination. The only reference to the  medical  report
    is at paragraph 6 where it simply notes the findings on the  scars  and
    the diagnosis of PTSD. She submits that the Tribunal manifestly  failed
    to consider the entire report, and in doing so erred in its  assessment
    of the  Appellant's  credibility  as  a  witness.   Dr  Hamar  saw  the
    Appellant over the course of four  consultations  and  made  a  careful
    evaluation, which was not based exclusively on what he was told: rather
    his opinion was based on his own  clinical  observations.  She  further
    observed that Dr Hamar had specifically directed his  mind  to  whether
    the Appellant could be faking his symptoms,  but  had  discounted  this
    possibility.  Ms Sirikanda relied  on  the  Asylum  Policy  Instruction
    which advises case-owners in the Home Office  that  significant  weight
    should be attached to reports published by Freedom From Torture.

19. Mr Wilding submitted that paragraph 6 of the determination showed  that
    the Tribunal had taken the medical evidence into account. It  had  been
    weighed in the round in accordance with  the  principles  set  down  in
    Mibanga.  As to the suggestion of sexual abuse  the  only  evidence  of
    this was Dr Hamar's conjecture. The report had been  written  in  2013,
    the appeal heard in 2015, and there was no further evidence to  support
    the claim. There was for instance no evidence that  the  Appellant  had
    been receiving counselling. Aside from his claim  that  electrodes  had
    been placed on his genitalia the Appellant himself  made  no  claim  to
    have been sexually abused in detention. If the  Appellant  himself  was
    not advancing that case it was difficult to see what else the  Tribunal
    could have done.

20. This was (even by the standards of Freedom  From  Torture)  a  careful,
    lengthy and detailed report. Dr Hamar was at pains  to  show  that  his
    conclusions were based not simply on what the Appellant said but on his
    own clinical observations of his physical responses to certain  topics.
    This is in accordance with the Istanbul Protocol.  I am satisfied  that
    paragraph 6 of the determination shows that the  Tribunal  had  regard,
    albeit briefly, to two of the report's central conclusions  (the  scars
    and the PTSD) but no attention is anywhere given to Dr Hamar's view, as
    an experienced Consultant Psychiatrist, that this man is likely to have
    been sexually abused that he is  unable  to  talk  about.    Errors  in
    approach to medical evidence will very often impinge on the  assessment
    of credibility and this is a paradigm case: for instance  it  might  be
    argued that a man who cannot face talking about his ill treatment would
    wish to avoid claiming asylum and doing so.  I am  satisfied  that  the
    determination fails to  give  adequate  consideration  to  the  medical
    report.

    Conclusions

21. This was not at first a promising case. The refusal letter is unusually
    well-reasoned and carefully researched, and Mr Wilding was quite  right
    to emphasise significant credibility issues  such  as  the  Appellant's
    basic deficit  of  knowledge  about  Kurdish  politics.  I  am  however
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider two  material
    elements of the evidence presented on behalf of the Appellant.  In  the
    context of a claim for asylum, where the level of scrutiny must be high
    and the standard of proof low, this renders the decision unsustainable.

    Decisions

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside in its entirety.

23. The parties agreed that should I set the  decision  aside,  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  In view of  the  extent
    of the fact-finding required I agree that this  is  the  most  suitable
    course of action.

24. In view of the subject matter, and having had regard to to Rule  14  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to  the
         Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to
         contempt of court proceedings".


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           8th February 2016
