
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06359/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  15th January 2015                 |On 16th February 2015                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                                    N.S.
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tettey, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Tunisia who was born on the 3rd  November
    1982. She appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Turnock to dismiss her appeal against  the  respondent's
    decision to refuse her application for asylum and to  remove  her  from
    the United Kingdom.

The grounds of appeal

 2.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  Appellant  is  a  lesbian
    [paragraph 54]. This finding  is  not  challenged  by  the  respondent.
    However, the Tribunal also found that this fact would not place her  at
    risk on return to Tunisia [paragraph 85]. Permission to appeal has been
    granted on the basis that  it  is  arguable  that  this  assessment  is
    legally flawed. The reasons given for this contention in the grounds of
    appeal are set out with commendable brevity in  the  application.  They
    begin by  summarising  the  background  country  information  that  was
    considered by Judge Turnock -

          i) Consensual same sex activity remains illegal under  the  Penal
             Code [paragraph 79].

         ii) Anecdotal evidence shows that LBGT people face discrimination,
             police sometimes harassed openly gay people and  accused  them
             of being a source of HIV/AIDS [paragraph 79].

        iii) There is no known report  of  persons  arrested  for  same-sex
             activity [paragraph 79].

         iv) However, local LGBT activist have reported an 'uptick'  during
             the hear of harassment and assault by unknown  individuals  on
             persons perceived to be LGBT including multiple  incidents  in
             which individuals were followed to their homes  and  assaulted
             by alleged Salafists [paragraphs 79 and 83].

          v) Amnesty International has expressed concern over the televised
             comments  of  the  Minister  of  Human  Rights  referring   to
             homosexuality as a  'perversion  that  needed  to  be  treated
             medically' [paragraph 79].

         vi) Anti-Homosexuality laws were being used  to  target  political
             opponents [paragraph 81 to 83].

    The grounds thereafter recite the fact that the Appellant had presented
    evidence to the Tribunal from a 'Mr Gharbi', a national of Tunisia  who
    had been granted refugee status on account of his sexuality,  and  that
    it was her case that she had been beaten by her own  family  when  they
    discovered that she was a lesbian. The grounds conclude,  at  paragraph
    10, with the following statement -

             The evidence before Judge Turnock did show that the  Appellant
             would be subject to persecution on return as a lesbian.  Judge
             Turnock  was  wrong  to  conclude  otherwise  based   on   the
             background evidence he quoted.

Analysis

 3. It is apparent from the above that the grounds in this case  amount  to
    little more than an unreasoned  expression  of  disagreement  with  the
    Tribunal's evidence-based conclusion of that Gay Women in Tunisia are a
    particular social group which experiences societal discrimination  that
    falls short of persecution. The grounds do not provide any  reasons  to
    support the rather general assertion that "the evidence  ...  did  show
    that the Appellant would be subject  to  persecution"  and  that  Judge
    Turnock, "was wrong to conclude otherwise". Rather, they appear to rely
    upon the assumption  that  these  assertions  are  self-evident.  This,
    however, is very far from the  case.  Indeed,  the  evidence  that  was
    before the Tribunal self-evidently supported the conclusion that is now
    the subject of challenge. I nevertheless set  out  the  reasons  why  I
    consider this to be the case.

 4. The background evidence upon which the Tribunal relied,  and  which  is
    accurately summarised in the grounds of appeal, was  principally  drawn
    from the US State Department report,  'Human  Rights  Practices  Report
    2011 - Tunisia'. It referred to reports of random  acts  of  harassment
    and  discrimination  by  individual  police  officers  rather  than  to
    systematic persecution by State agencies.  Such  reports  were  in  any
    event described as "anecdotal". In other words, they  were  unverified.
    Moreover, a report  by  a  single  LGBT  activist  of  "harassment  and
    assaults by unknown individuals upon  persons  perceived  to  be  LGBT"
    could not have supported a finding that membership of a sexual minority
    group would place the appellant at risk of  being  persecuted  by  non-
    state actors. It is also noteworthy that the reports of harassment  and
    discrimination that are cited in the US State Department do not seek to
    distinguish between the various sexual minorities but,  rather,  refers
    to them collectively as 'LGBT'. The potential importance of  this  lack
    of discrimination can be seen  from  the  fact  that  there  was  other
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that   contradicted   the   US   State
    Department's assertion that all consensual same-sex activity is illegal
    under the Penal Code. Thus, a report by the International Lesbian, Gay,
    Bisexual, Trans and Intersex  Association  (ILGA),  which  is  entitled
    'State-Sponsored Homophobia 2014: Tunisia', states that although sexual
    activity between males is illegal, sexual activity between  females  is
    legal [see page 92 of the appellant's bundle of documents].  Therefore,
    whilst Judge Turnock may have  done  little  more  than  summarise  the
    background country evidence and thereafter stated his conclusion,  that
    conclusion was amply supported by the evidence.

Notice of Decision

 5. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.  The  appeal  is  therefore
    dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
