
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06120/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2015                    |On 17th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   Miss BK
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Clarke, Counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the respondent but
    nonetheless I shall refer to the parties as they were described  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, that is Miss  BK  as  the  appellant  and  the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.



The Appellant

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on 16th March 1987  and  she
    arrived in the UK  in  November  2012.   She  claimed  asylum  on  11th
    December 2013 and was served with an IS.151A as it was considered  that
    she had entered the country illegally.

 3. The appellant had fled her family home in June 2012, because she claims
    she was to be forced to marry, with her boyfriend Edi  and  went  to  a
    hotel in Elbasab.  She stayed in the hotel for a  week  and  then  left
    Albania on 17th or 18th June 2012 and flew to Italy with Edi.  She then
    went to France and stayed in Paris  with  people  she  believed  to  be
    Romanian.  She was put in a car and sent to England whereupon  the  car
    was stopped by the police but she was released.

 4. On 9th September 2013 a referral was made on her behalf to the national
    referral mechanism for a competent authority to make a decision  as  to
    whether she was a victim of trafficking as established by  the  Council
    of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings.

 5. On 31st July 2014 it was determined that the appellant  was  considered
    to be a victim of trafficking and granted twelve months'  discretionary
    leave, owing to her personal circumstances, until 1st August 2015.

 6. Nonetheless a description of the Romanian  protective  legislation  and
    assistance to victims of trafficking in Romania  was  set  out  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter dated 8th August  2014  and  the  respondent
    declined to grant the  appellant  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or
    protection under the European Convention. When  the  appellant's  claim
    for international protection was refused the respondent noted that  she
    had a daughter, MK, born in England on 28th October 2013.

 7. The appellant appealed further to  Section  83(2)  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  This is appeal is restricted.

 8. The appellant's appeal was heard by Judge  McIntosh  on  22nd  December
    2014 who set out the following:

    "22. In reaching my decision I have taken  into  account  the  evidence
         presented in the appeal file the oral evidence  of  the  appellant,
         the respective submissions of the representatives and the  skeleton
         argument of Miss Clarke.

    23.  It is the respondent's case that the appellant does not  meet  the
         criteria, that the appellant can relocate to southern  Albania  and
         that the appellant comes from a  financially,  stable  family  with
         liberal views in a modern society.

    24.  The appellant was educated to the age of 18 and was able to  visit
         friends without the need to be chaperoned by a male member  of  her
         family. It is argued that  in  those  circumstances  the  appellant
         could return to her family, failing that she would have  the  means
         to relocate to southern Albania and re-establish life there.

    25.  There is evidence both from the  expert  report  and  the  Country
         Guidance Information, of the conservative views  held  by  Albanian
         society.  Whilst I appreciate  the  information  of  the  moves  to
         educate the police, judges and those likely  to  review  returnees;
         this does not extend to the views of society as a  whole.   I  find
         that the consensus is that there is a real risk  of  the  appellant
         being the subject of ill-treatment from her family and  society  in
         general.

    26.  I have taken into account the fact that the appellant may seek  to
         disguise the fact of her history as the victim of trafficking,  the
         fact remains that the appellant is a single female with a dependent
         child.  This in itself will attack (sic)  negative  attention  from
         society at large.  It is difficult to be certain that the appellant
         would be ostracised by her family but there remains a real risk.

    27.  It is the appellant's case that she disobeyed her father  choosing
         not to marry the man of his choice.  I find from the evidence  that
         there is an element of a  liberal  approach  from  the  appellant's
         family.  The appellant and other siblings were educated to the  age
         of 18, however there appeared to be a  retention  of  older  values
         including arranged marriages for the  females  in  the  family.   I
         found the account  of  the  appellant's  family  background  to  be
         credible and consistent.  I found less consistent the account given
         in relation to the travel arrangements made  with  Edi.   The  fact
         that the appellant was prepared to travel to the United Kingdom  in
         the boot of a car,  and  although  apprehended  on  that  occasion,
         agreed to travel  to  England  separately  from  Edi  on  a  second
         occasion.

    28.  The pivotal consideration to the appellant's asylum claim  is  the
         likely treatment of the appellant on her return to Albania.  I have
         had regard to the report from Maranda Vickers, the Country Guidance
         Information and the decision of AM and BM I also have regard to the
         personal circumstances of the appellant who would have a  dependent
         child to be returned to Albania with her.  The appellant  would  be
         respondent for supporting herself and her child.  I find  from  the
         material before me, that there is a real risk that upon return  the
         appellant would be left without support and left vulnerable with  a
         risk of exploitation.  There is also a risk to  her  child  if  she
         cannot be cared for by the appellant.

    29.  I find there is no evidence of the state providing support for the
         appellant and  her  dependent  child.   Whilst  the  risks  to  the
         appellant and her child may not amount to a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution, I find that there are  sufficient  grounds  that  upon
         return the appellant and her child, may face serious harm for which
         there is insufficient state  protection  from  the  views  by  that
         society in general.  I find  there  are  grounds  for  Humanitarian
         Protection for the appellant to succeed on appeal.

    30.  I have also considered the appellant's appeal in  accordance  with
         the appellant's right  to  private  and  family  life  pursuant  to
         Article 8 ECJR.

    31.  I also have regard to the need to consider the  best  interest  of
         the child under Section 55 of Border Control  and  Immigration  Act
         2009."

 9. The judge proceeded to reject that the risks to the appellant  and  her
    child may amount to a well-founded fear of persecution  and  apparently
    dismissed the appeal on the basis of the asylum claim.

10.  Judge  McIntosh,  however,  allowed  the  appeal  on  the   basis   of
    humanitarian protection and the European Convention.

11. An application for permission to appeal was made by the  respondent  on
    the basis that the judge had erred in allowing the  appellant's  appeal
    on non-asylum grounds as her  right  of  appeal  was  restricted  under
    Section 83(2) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

12. It was also asserted that the judge had erred in finding that there was
    "no evidence before the court of the state providing  support  for  the
    appellant and her dependent child" (29).  Thus the judge failed to have
    regard to the country guidance AM and BM (Trafficked women) Albania  CG
    [2010] UKUT 80 (IAC).

13. On submissions from Ms Fijiwala and  with  regards  the  error  of  law
    stage, I can accept that the judge erred in  law  in  relation  to  the
    application of Section 83(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act.  The judge appeared to dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds  which
    was the only grounds of appeal open and  available  to  the  appellant.
    Abiyat and others (rights of appeal) Iran [2011] UKUT 00314(IAC)

14. This was an error of law.  I set aside the decision  but  preserve  the
    findings in paragraphs 24, 25, 26, and 27.  I note the remarks made  by
    the judge at the close of paragraph 27 but nonetheless  the  respondent
    accepted that the appellant had indeed been trafficked.

15. In response to Ms Fijiwala's assertion  that  there  had  been  further
    developments since AM and BM to which the judge had not had regard  and
    this had affected the assessment of risk on return.

16. Ms Clarke submitted that there was  no  finding  regarding  the  asylum
    claim.

17. Ms Clarke submitted that the judge referred to the expert report of  Ms
    Vickers in relation to the appellant's ability to seek  protection  and
    this in  turn  addressed  the  issues  in  relation  to  the  IOM.   In
    particular Ms Clarke made the point that the appellant is not going  to
    return voluntarily to Albania and therefore would not be able  to  take
    advantage of the IOM assistance.  The expert criticised the  assistance
    offered by the IOM and taken as a whole no Tribunal would have come  to
    another conclusion and the decision should not be set aside.

18. Ms Fijiwala stated that the details in regard to the IOM were  set  out
    in the reasons for refusal letter and there was a PDF document referred
    to in the reasons for refusal letter in relation to  the  shelters  and
    the judge did not  consider  this.   The  Vickers  report  referred  to
    societal pressures and this was insufficient.  In  essence,  the  judge
    had not analysed the evidence before  her  and  why  she  accepted  the
    Vickers report over the IOM references.

Conclusions

19. Having found an  error  of  law  I  therefore  proceed  to  remake  the
    decision.

20. The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at  paragraph  26  that  "the  fact
    remains that the appellant is a single female with a dependent  child."
    The judge in addition at paragraph 27 stated:

         "The appellant and other siblings were educated to the age  of  18,
         however there appeared to be a retention of older values  including
         arranged marriages for the females in  the  family.   I  found  the
         account of the appellant's family background  to  be  credible  and
         consistent."

21. The judge proceeded on the basis that the pivotal consideration in  the
    appellant's asylum claim was the likely treatment of the  appellant  on
    her return to Albania.

22. It is important to note that the respondent accepted that the appellant
    was and had been a victim of trafficking.  It was also accepted in  the
    respondent's reasons for refusal letter that the appellant fell  within
    a particular social group for the purposes of the  Refugee  Convention.
    The respondent considered that the appellant could relocate to southern
    Albania.

23. Applying AM and BM:

         "a)  It is not possible to set out a typical profile of  trafficked
             women from Albania: trafficked women come from  all  areas  of
             the country and from varied social backgrounds.

         b)   At its worst the psychological damage inflicted on a victim of
             trafficking can lead to  difficulties  in  reintegrating  into
             Albanian society and has implications on whether or not it  is
             possible for  the  victim  of  trafficking,  should  she  fear
             persecution in her own area, to relocate.

         c)   Much of Albanian society is  governed  by  a  strict  code  of
             honour which not only means that trafficked women  would  have
             very considerable difficulty in reintegrating into their  home
             areas on return but also will affect their ability to relocate
             internally.  Those who  have  children  outside  marriage  are
             particularly vulnerable.  In extreme cases the close relatives
             of the trafficked woman may  refuse  to  have  the  trafficked
             woman's child return with her and could force her  to  abandon
             the child.

         d)   Those  that  see  themselves  outside  society,  for  example,
             divorced or abandoned  women,  or  others  who  wish  to  live
             abroad, may seek out traffickers in order to facilitate  their
             departure from Albania and their establishment in prostitution
             abroad.  Although such women are not 'trafficked women' in the
             sense that they have not been  abducted  against  their  will,
             there  is  likely  to  be  considerable  violence  within  the
             relationships and the psychological affect  of  that  violence
             may lead to a situation where the  pressures  which  they  are
             under and the lack of freedom they are under means  that  such
             women should be treated as trafficked women.

         e)   The Albanian Government and authorities are  taking  steps  to
             protect trafficked women who return but  such  steps  are  not
             always effective.  When considering whether or not there is  a
             sufficiency of protection for a trafficked woman who is to  be
             returned her particular circumstances must be considered.  Not
             all trafficked women returning to Albania will  be  unable  to
             access the arrangements and  facilities  available  to  enable
             successful re-integration.

         f)   Trafficked women  from  Albania  may  well  be  members  of  a
             particular social group on that account alone.   Whether  they
             are at risk of persecution on account of such membership   and
             whether they will be able to access sufficiency of  protection
             from  the  authorities  will  depend  upon  their   individual
             circumstances including but not limited to the  following:  1)
             The social status and  economic  standing  of  the  trafficked
             woman's family.  2) The level of education of  the  trafficked
             woman or her family.   3)  The  trafficked  woman's  state  of
             health, particularly her mental health.  4) The presence of an
             illegitimate child.  5) The area of origin of  the  trafficked
             woman's family.  6) The trafficked woman's age."

24. The individual factors in this are that this is a lone  woman  who  has
    had children outside marriage and AM and BM confirms that  those  women
    are particularly vulnerable.  It was accepted by the judge  that  there
    was evidence that this was  a  family  who  although  liberal  in  some
    respects did abide by a strict code of honour and the  judge  concluded
    that there was a risk that the appellant would indeed be ostracised  by
    her family.

25. There was also a reference to women who, albeit  not  abducted  against
    their will, because of the psychological effects that  may  lead  to  a
    situation where the women are under pressure such that they effectively
    lack freedom and should be treated as trafficked.   Thus  although  the
    judge found less consistent the account given in relation to the travel
    arrangements made with the ex-boyfriend  and  the  fact  that  she  was
    prepared to travel to the United Kingdom in the boot of a car I do  not
    consider that this means that the appellant was willingly  accompanying
    her traffickers.  Indeed there was an acceptance as I  state  that  she
    was trafficked.

26. The critical question is whether there is sufficiency of protection for
    a  trafficked  woman,  who  is  to  be  returned  and  her   particular
    circumstances must be considered.  Those circumstances should, however,
    be considered in the context of the available  assistance  in  Albania.
    Ms Fijiwala did not contend that the country guidance of AM and BM  was
    no longer extant and as the appellant is found to  be  a  member  of  a
    particular social group the relevant question as to whether she can  be
    granted asylum rests on the country conditions  should  she  return  to
    Albania.

27. Information was extracted from the  Country  Information  and  Guidance
    Albania: Trafficking dated 19th September 2014.  The question asked  at
    1.1.7 was whether those at risk were able to seek effective  protection
    and at 1.1.8 it was acknowledged that whilst  the  Albanian  government
    and authorities had taken steps to protect trafficked women who  return
    such steps had not always been fully effective.

28. It was acknowledged at 1.1.9 that since 2010 the  government  had  made
    significant  efforts   to   fight   human   trafficking   and   created
    "legislative, organisational and operational frameworks in the areas of
    investigation, prosecution, protection and prevention".

29. For example, in 2013 the criminal code was amended  to  strengthen  its
    anti-trafficking provisions, there was training given to regional anti-
    trafficking agencies and the anti-trafficking protection  efforts  were
    said to be undertaken "by increasing  identification  and  referral  of
    trafficking victims to appropriate services".

30. Of particular relevance is 1.1.12:

         "The government  has  also  increased  anti-trafficking  protection
         efforts by increasing identification and  referral  of  trafficking
         victims  to  appropriate  services,  and  by  providing   financial
         assistance to victims."

31.  In  particular  1.1.13  stated  that  "there  are  a  number  of  non-
    governmental organisations in Albania who  are  active  in  trafficking
    issues and can potentially assist the person to avail themselves of the
    protection of the state."  However, those references confirm that there
    is only one state-run shelter for victims of trafficking and only three
    shelters operated by  NGOs  albeit  that  they  offer  a  comprehensive
    service including psychological care, legal assistance,  medical  care,
    reintegration services and assistance for victims' children.  There  is
    also a reference to being able to 'potentially assist' which is not the
    same as confirmation of assistance.

32. In particular, and here is the question which Ms  Fijiwala  stated  was
    not addressed by the judge  at  all  was  that  with  effect  from  1st
    November 2013 the  IOM  International  Organisation  for  Migration  on
    behalf of the  Home  Office  had  established  a  dedicated  assistance
    package for victims of trafficking voluntarily returning from the UK to
    Albania including those with children and at 1.1.14 it is stated:

         "It  has  been  designed  explicitly  to  help  them  resettle  and
         reintegrate in a humane and sustainable way to mitigate the risk of
         re-trafficking or related ill-treatment.  Any victim who chooses to
         return  would  be  subject  to  a  pre-departure  and  post-arrival
         assessment  to  ensure  that  return  was  both   appropriate   and
         sustainable.  They will be met  at  the  airport  by  state  Social
         Services and normally transferred to the secure National  Reception
         Centre for Victims of Trafficking, guarded by special police  24/7.
         The centre  offers  onsite  accommodation,  health,  psycho-social,
         legal  and  rehabilitation  assistance  for  victims   (and   their
         children).   This  is  a  state  facility  but   advised   by   the
         International Organisation for Migration  and  funded  in  part  by
         UNICEF and the Austrian Development Cooperation."

33. There was, however, little more  information  that  was  given  in  the
    Country of Origin Information  Report.   In  particular  there  was  no
    confirmation as to the permanence or  otherwise  of  the  accommodation
    offered by that one centre, how long a person with a child  could  stay
    in the centre or information about conditions after leaving.

34. There was a report of Dr Eileen Walsh, clinical psychologist,  and  she
    recorded the vulnerability of the appellant and diagnosed that she  had
    PTSD with "a pre-existing vulnerability due to  her  adverse  childhood
    that makes the  psychological  consequences  of  the  trafficking  more
    difficult to manage" (71).

35. She added at paragraph 77:

         "Ms BK's mental health is unlikely to improve, and is highly likely
         to deteriorate should she not have stability and a  high  level  of
         support.  Her symptoms are already severe and are at  least  partly
         maintained due to her fears about  the  future.   Without  adequate
         support Ms BK is likely to experience deterioration in  her  mental
         health.  She requires a stable, secure environment where she  feels
         safe in order begin to recover for the effects of  her  experiences
         and to continue to provide adequate parenting to her daughter."

    Dr Walsh considered that in her  clinical  experience  treatment  would
    "not be possible if the person had significant fear  for  their  safety
    and that of their child".  She detailed that the appellant  was  highly
    fearful of her family or others who know them  finding  out  about  her
    experiences.  And she added "she is also frightened of  her  trafficker
    or any associates of his finding her and harming her or her  daughter".
    In summary she considered  that  the  removal  process  would  lead  to
    significant psychological harm to Ms BK although she denied any current
    suicidal thoughts.  At this point I note that  Judge  MacKintosh  found
    the appellant's account to be credible.

36. A further expert report was  commissioned  from  Miranda  Vickers,  who
    styles herself as "an internationally renowned expert and specialist on
    Albanian affairs".  Although she predominantly presents as a  historian
    I note that she is also an adviser to  international  bodies  including
    the British Foreign Office, the Council of Europe and the International
    Crisis Group and would appear to have knowledge of the region  and  had
    visited Albania as recently as October 2014.  I was also concerned that
    she may stray from her professional remit as she proceeded  to  comment
    on the appellant's trauma from her experience.  She considered that the
    appellant would not wish to go  voluntarily  and  therefore  would  not
    qualify for the IOM assistance.  I am not prepared to accept that  just
    because the appellant would not make herself voluntarily available  for
    relocation that she would not be offered the package of  assistance  on
    return.  There was no evidence put before me to the effect that the IOM
    would refuse to assist this appellant.

37. However, Ms Vickers specifically addressed the remit of the IOM project
    and identified that the IOM  does  not  have  any  shelters  itself  in
    Albania for victims of trafficking.  She confirmed at  page  8  of  her
    report

         "There is an IOM office located in Tirana, which works  with  local
         NGOs and  government  partners  to  deliver  assistance  to  return
         trafficking victims.  The National  Coalition  of  Anti-Trafficking
         Shelters in  Albania  coordinates  the  country's  shelters.   This
         includes both government and civil  society  service  providers  as
         part of the national referral mechanism for the identification  and
         assistance of victims of trafficking."

38. Ms Vickers continues that:

         "Because IOM does not have its own shelters it is up to  the  local
         Social Services and the NRM to determine  how  long  a  person  can
         remain in a shelter.  Due to the acute shortage of  such  shelters,
         persons over the age of 18 years have to move on from the  shelters
         into either state-run hostels or private accommodation."

39. She added that "as of December 2014 IOM has assisted only  two  victims
    who have voluntarily returned from the UK."

40. Much of the Country Information and Guidance  on  Albania:  Trafficking
    relates to the prosecution of offenders and  the  appellant  maintained
    that she was particularly afraid of this as she did not wish to attract
    attention to herself.

41. Ms Vickers states that for other NGOs to try and find accommodation for
    victims was not sustainable as  they  were  severely  understaffed  and
    funding was not only limited but unpredictable and in short there  were
    simply not enough shelters.  In the absence of detailed information  on
    this point I accept the report of Ms Vickers.

42. With regards relocation, as Ms Vickers stated within her report:

         "A major barrier to the internal migration is a person's  religious
         and cultural background.  It would be very  difficult  for  someone
         from the appellant's northern Muslim religion to relocate to  towns
         in southern Albania with its vastly different cultural,  historical
         and religious background.  Due to the small size of Albania and the
         development of very localised migrant  suburbs  in  its  towns  and
         cities I believe it would be extremely difficult for the  appellant
         to find shelter or set up home in  any  Albanian  town  and  remain
         anonymous.  If she returned to any  town  in  northern  or  central
         Albania she would easily be  located  because  she  will  encounter
         people from her own district of Librazhd."

43. The Country of Origin Information Report set out at 2.6 a report by the
    U.S. Department of State, Trafficking in Persons Report 2014:

         "The government increased anti-trafficking  protection  efforts  by
         increasing identification and referral of  trafficking  victims  to
         appropriate services, and  by  providing  financial  assistance  to
         victims during the reporting period; however, bureaucratic  hurdles
         prevented  victims  from  accessing  free   healthcare   that   had
         previously been approved by the government.  The government did not
         provide funding to NGO shelters.  During the reporting period,  the
         government reported that 95 victims of trafficking were  identified
         in Albania; 92 were identified in 2012.  Of these, 55 victims  were
         identified and referred by the government in 2013, compared with 42
         victims referred by the government in 2012.  A total of 93  victims
         received care in  state-run  and  NGO  shelters;  27  victims  were
         accommodated in the state-run shelter exclusively  for  trafficking
         victims.  Of the 95 victims identified, 43 were  child  victims  of
         trafficking.   21  identified  victims  were  subjected  to  labour
         trafficking."

44. It went on to state:

         "The state-run shelter received  the  equivalent  of  approximately
         $182,000 in government funding.  It provided limited services."

45. Taking into account the social state and the economic standing  of  the
    trafficked person, this is an appellant from  the  northern  region  of
    Albania, which is a small country, and it is acknowledged in AM and  BM
    at 187:

         "Albania is a country where there is a real fear  that  traffickers
         might well be able to trace those who have  escaped  from  them  or
         indeed those whom they fear might expose them.  ... To that  should
         be added the difficulties for a single woman to reintegrate into  a
         society where the family is the  principal  unit  for  welfare  and
         mutual support as well as, it appears, the  channel  through  which
         employment is most often obtained."

    This appellant was from a family from the North with an  average  level
    of education but with traditional views  as  found  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

46. It is also clear that she has a poor state of mental health and she has
    the presence of an  illegitimate  child  which  will  render  her  more
    vulnerable, AM and BM.  She cannot return to her family.

47. Despite the improvement that there have been to the protection  efforts
    which have increased for victims of trafficking in Albania the  Country
    of Origin Information Report at 2.6.7 detailed the USSD TIP  Report  of
    2014 which stated:

         "Yet  because  of  the  prevalence  of  engrained   corruption   in
         conjunction with cultural familism there appear, so far, to  be  no
         alternative forms of societal  or  state  protection  and  security
         options available to  trafficked  persons  after  their  return  to
         Albania - other than family reintegration.  This  is  seen  by  all
         Albanian stakeholders in the anti-trafficking fight, as well as  by
         the women themselves, as  the  only  long-term  option  apart  from
         remarriage or success in the asylum system."

48. On this basis I find that the appellant is a  member  of  a  particular
    social group  who  is  at  risk  of  persecution  on  account  of  that
    membership and that with her  particular  circumstances,  she  will  be
    unable to access sufficiency of protection from the authorities.

Notice of Decision

I therefore allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 6th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 6th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
