
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06944/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th July 2016                             |On 2nd August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                     Hn
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Sellwood, Counsel; instructed by Rashid &
Rashid Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hussain dismissing the Appellant's  appeal  against
    the Respondent's decision to refuse to grant asylum and remove  him  by
    way of directions and to refuse to grant leave to remain on  the  basis
    of his human rights.  The Appellant appealed against  the  decision  of
    Judge Hussain and was granted permission to appeal by Designated First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald.  The grounds upon which  permission  was
    granted may be summarised as follows.

         "It has to be said that the judge's findings on  the  asylum  claim
         are very limited.  It does appear that the evidence of  Ms  Drammeh
         has been ignored.  I doubt there is merit under Ground 3 but  there
         is no explanation for the delay in  promulgation  under  Ground  4.
         The judge set out clear reasons why he was not granting the  appeal
         under Article 8 ECHR.   Nevertheless  it  appears  that  there  are
         arguable errors of law in the decision particularly under Grounds 1
         and 2 and for the sake of clarity permission to appeal  is  granted
         on all grounds."

 2. The Respondent provided a Rule 24 reply that was duly considered by all
    parties before the hearing commenced.

Error of Law

 3. At the close of submissions I indicated I  would  reserve  my  decision
    which I shall now give.  I find that there was an error of law  in  the
    decision such that it should be set aside.  My reasons for  so  finding
    are as follows.

 4. In relation to Ground 1 and the  allegation  that  the  judge  arguably
    erred in failing to make findings of fact on material matters. I accept
    the grounds as pleaded that Judge Hussain  has  taken  account  of  the
    previous decision of the Upper Tribunal (namely the decision of  Deputy
    Upper Tribunal Judge Drabu of 6 December 2011)  as  a  starting  point;
    however, in so doing the judge has not  given  consideration  to  facts
    accepted by the Upper Tribunal, namely that:

         "(i) the  Appellant's  claim  was  consistent  with  the  objective
             evidence in that the Taliban regularly engage in activities of
             this kind;

         ii) there was an express statement  from  the  Taliban  that  they
             would be coming back for the Appellant; and

        iii) the Appellant's father was assaulted by the Taliban  by  being
             hit with a rifle butt."

 5. Given those accepted facts alongside the  other  agreed  facts,  namely
    that the Appellant's village is in an area controlled by  the  Taliban,
    that he left Afghanistan when he was aged 14 and has never lived  alone
    in Afghanistan; these facts cumulatively considered formed bases  which
    should have been the starting point for Judge Hussain's  assessment  of
    the evidence pursuant to the decision in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT
    00282.  Consequently I find that the judge erred  in  failing  to  make
    findings of fact pursuant to the agreed and accepted starting point.

 6. In respect of Ground 2 and the allegation that the judge arguably erred
    in failing to take into account the evidence of Ms Drammeh, in  harmony
    with  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Macdonald  in   granting
    permission, I find that the evidence of Ms Drammeh  has  been  ignored.
    This is clearly so because whilst Ms Drammeh's evidence is mentioned at
    paragraphs 16 to 17 there  are  no  findings  based  upon  her  witness
    evidence in paragraphs 19 to 22 where  the  judge  has  considered  the
    Appellant's protection claim.  Consequently, even though  her  evidence
    is that of a third party and potentially of limited weight,  that  does
    not negate the duty of a judge  to  consider  and  make  findings  upon
    witness evidence at a hearing.

 7. In respect of Ground 3, I do not find that there was an error in  terms
    of the Article 15C Qualification Directive Assessment.   The  level  of
    indiscriminate  violence  against  the   background   information   for
    Nangarhar Province has not been sufficiently set out that I can  see  a
    clear error of law in the judge's decision.

 8. In respect of Ground 4, previous counsel who  drafted  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal relied upon the decision of Sambasivam v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [1999] All ER(D) 1168, in particular paragraphs  16
    to 17 where Potter, LJ stated as follows:

         16.  In my view the decision in Mario was no more and no less  than
             a useful statement of guidance to practitioners upon the usual
             attitude and likely decision of the IAT in  a  case  where  an
             issue essential to the disposition of  the  claim  for  asylum
             depends upon a careful weighing  of  the  credibility  of  the
             applicant and yet  it  appears  that  the  delay  between  the
             hearing date and the preparation of the determination  exceeds
             three  months.   In  the  absence  of  special  or  particular
             circumstances, that is plainly a useful  and  proper  rule  of
             thumb which in the experience of the Tribunal, it  is  broadly
             just to apply, for the twin  reasons  that  substantial  delay
             between hearing and preparation of the  determination  renders
             the assessment of credibility issues unsafe, and that  such  a
             delay  tends  to  undermine  the  loser's  confidence  in  the
             correctness of the decision once delivered (para 16)...

         17.  In cases of delay of this kind, the matter is best  approached
             from the  starting  point  that,  where  important  issues  of
             credibility arise,  a  delay  of  over  three  months  between
             hearing and determination will merit remittance for re-hearing
             unless, by reason of particular  circumstances,  it  is  clear
             that the eventual outcome of the application, whether  by  the
             same or a different route, must be the same (para 17).

 9. Given  that  the  appeal  was  heard  on  2nd  December  2015  but  the
    determination was not promulgated until 9th May 2016 there was a  clear
    delay of five months between the hearing and the  promulgation  of  the
    determination.   No  special  or  particular  circumstances  have  been
    highlighted as to why  there  was  such  an  unusually  long  delay  in
    promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  However  that
    delay  coupled  with  the  paucity  of  reasoning  in  the   First-tier
    Tribunal's determination at  paragraphs  19  to  22  does  in  my  view
    constitute an error of law.

10. In those circumstances I find there was an error of law in the decision
    such that it should be set aside.

11. In light of my findings on the above grounds of  complaint,  I  do  not
    propose to consider the remaining grounds.  I set  aside  the  decision
    and findings of the First-tier Tribunal in their entirety.

Decision

12. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

13. The decision in the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a  differently-
    constituted bench.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
