
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06863/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated|
|On 19th January 2015                      |On 19th February 2015            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     L L
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A De Ruano, instructed by.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Albania  and  his  date  of  birth  was
    initially disputed as being on 26th August either in 1994 or 1996.   He
    claimed to enter the UK on 13th October 2013 and underwent a  screening
    interview on 31st October 2013.   His asylum interview  took  place  on
    5th February 2014.   The Secretary  of  State  refused  his  claim  for
    asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  protection  under  the  European
    Convention on 28th August 2014 and also made a decision to  remove  him
    which the appellant appealed.

 2. In a determination dated 20th October 2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Black refused the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made  contending  that  the
    Tribunal erred in finding that the age assessment was unchallenged  and
    that no further evidence was produced [9].  It was also submitted  that
    the reasoning in relation to sufficiency of protection was  inadequate.
     Permission was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Osborne who stated
    that the Judge arguably erred in law regarding  the age assessment  and
    arguably failed to provide adequate reasons for the findings set out at
    [14].

 4. At the hearing, Ms Isherwood pointed out  that  the  appellant  was  an
    adult at the date of the hearing and  she  relied  on  KS  (benefit  of
    doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC) to demonstrate that the standard of  proof
    is not reduced albeit that the appellant is a child.  The Secretary  of
    State acknowledged that the child was born in 1996 and set out why  the
    claim was not accepted.  The judge referred to the reasons for  refusal
    letter in her decision.  The judge acknowledged his young  age  in  the
    determination.  The claim was in part rejected because of  the  absence
    of his mother and although there was an application to adjourn this was
    not because of the absence of the mother.   The judge had looked at the
    appellant's evidence overall and rejected the claim.

 5. I can appreciate that in a succinct decision the  judge  has  addressed
    various  aspects  of  the  evidence  and   rejected   the   appellant's
    credibility.  Nonetheless the judge states at [9]

         'I place weight on the age assessment report and the  letter  dated
         18th  October  2013.   The  age  assessment  report  has  not  been
         challenged on behalf of  the  appellant  and  no  further  evidence
         produced on that issue'.

 6. This was not entirely correct.  The  age  assessment  report  indicated
    that the appellant was born in 1994.    (It  appeared  that  the  judge
    proceeded on the basis he was born in 1994 and  did  not  enter  as  an
    unaccompanied minor).  The appellant had, however,  subsequent  to  the
    age assessment, produced his Albanian passport showing that his date of
    birth was in 1996 making him a minor  at  the  date  of  his  screening
    interview and his asylum interview.  Indeed the respondent accepted  in
    the refusal letter that the appellant was born in 1996.  The  relevance
    of the factor of age was important not only in the  assessment  of  the
    evidence given whilst he was a minor, it also affected the  credibility
    findings and more crucially the issues of self  confinement.  As  Judge
    Black reasons at [14]

         'The appellant's evidence as to the significance of  attaining  the
         age of 16 years carries little weight  given  that  the  assessment
         establishes that he is older than his claimed age.   Therefore  the
         dates given for leaving school and self confinement  do  not  tally
         and are not credible'.

 7. The evidence must be considered in the round and the assessment of  the
    remaining credibility factors, to my mind, are affected by the critical
    and  central  finding  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  age.  Indeed
    rejecting the appellant's account of his age the judge  also  proceeded
    to reject the appellant's explanation of his mother's absence from  the
    hearing which the judge found to be crucial.

 8. Although, the judge found that the appellant could return and  relocate
    within Albania, the  lack  of  clarity  on  the  age  might  place  the
    appellant more recently in Albania and as there was no expansion of the
    reasoning on relocation, merely a reference to the objective  material,
    the issues on self confinement may be material.  I  therefore  find  an
    error of law.

 9. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement bearing in  mind  the
    nature and extent of the findings to be made.



Signed      Date 19th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

