
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 9th November 2016                         |On: 25th November 2016       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     KE
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And


               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Smith of Counsel instructed by Greater Manchester
                       Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1982.


    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"


    Procedural Background


 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in 2010 with leave to enter
    as a student. He claimed asylum in 2012 on the basis that he had a well-
    founded fear of persecution in Sri Lanka for reasons of  his  political
    opinion. He advanced a long history of family involvement with the LTTE
    in Trincomalee. This had latterly involved the Appellant being arrested
    and tortured whilst facing accusations of  supplying  the  Tigers  with
    oil. He had been held in detention for three and a half  months  before
    being released, apparently because his mother had made a  complaint  to
    the Human Rights Commission.


 4. The claim was rejected by the Secretary of State, and a  decision  made
    to remove him from the country. The Appellant appealed. His appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge White on the 28th September 2012
    and permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused.

 5. On the 17th March 2014 the Appellant's representatives made submissions
    and presented new evidence to the Respondent.   This  included  medical
    and expert reports.  Although the Respondent initially refused to treat
    these submissions as a 'fresh claim' for asylum, the matter was settled
    by consent upon judicial review.

 6. The Respondent took a further decision on the 26th June 2014 in respect
    of the asylum claim. In  essence  it  referred  back  to  the  negative
    findings of Judge White to reject the Appellant's  overall  credibility
    as a witness. The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant faced  a
    real risk of harm in Sri Lanka and refused asylum. He was served with a
    further notification of an intention to refuse to  vary  leave  and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2006.  This gave the Appellant a fresh right of appeal.

 7. The Appellant brought his appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
    dismissed on the 7th January 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Devlin.

 8. It is this decision that is the subject of this appeal.  Permission was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on the 23rd May 2015 and in  a
    written decision promulgated on the  2nd  August  2016  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Davey found the decision of Judge Devlin to contain errors of law
    such that it must,  insofar as it related to the risk  of  suicide  and
    Article 3 ECHR,  be set aside.  His reasons are summarised below.

 9. Judge Davey had intended  to  remake  the  Article  3  matter  himself.
    Unfortunately, logistical difficulties in reconvening that Tribunal  in
    the North-West meant that a transfer to another  judge  was  necessary.
    Principle Resident Judge Dawson signed the relevant order on  the  27th
    September 2016.

10. When the matter came before me there was no Tamil interpreter. Ms Smith
    of Counsel very helpfully took instructions and indicated that she  was
    happy to proceed  by  way  of  submissions  only.  An  interpreter  was
    borrowed from another court who explained what  was  happening  to  the
    Appellant, whom I am told gave his express consent for the matter to be
    settled in this way. I reserved my determination, and  I  now  give  my
    conclusions and reasons.

    Error of Law

11. The Appellant had been granted permission on all  grounds,  but  having
    heard the  argument,  and  after  careful  consideration,  Judge  Davey
    dismissed the challenge on asylum grounds. Although the  Appellant  may
    have good reason to hold his subjective fear (ie due to past events) it
    was difficult to see what the current risks might be. Although the case
    is not cited, I took this to be a reference to  the  'risk  categories'
    set out in the current country guidance of GJ & Others (post-civil  war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).


12. In respect of Article 3 ECHR Judge Davey found  the  reasoning  of  the
    determination hard to understand, in part because of the way  in  which
    the determination was written in  paragraphs  consisting  of  a  single
    sentence. He found it was not possible to  see  what  weight  had  been
    attached to the evidence,  in  particular  the  very  detailed  medical
    reports going to  both  the  physical  and  psychological  sequalae  of
    torture and the fact that the  Medical  Foundation  had  considered  it
    necessary to see this man on a weekly basis for well over a year.   Nor
    was it easy to equate the conclusions reached with the findings of fact
    that had been made.   For  instance,  on  the  one  hand  Judge  Devlin
    appeared to accept that the Appellant had been tortured by  having  his
    fingernails pulled out, but not that he had "any"  subjective  fear  of
    persecution. In his analysis  of  the  risk  of  suicide  Judge  Devlin
    appeared to discount the view of medical  professionals  (that  such  a
    risk did pertain) on the basis the Appellant had been  well  enough  to
    give evidence to the Tribunal.  Of this Judge Davey commented: "I  have
    to say that the ability to give evidence is  a  considerably  different
    consideration to mental ill health or clear plans to kill  himself...".
       Overall Judge Davey found the reasoning on Article 3  to  be  unsafe
    for lack of clarity and a failure to take all  relevant  evidence  into
    account.  The determination was set aside to that extent.


    The Re-Made Decision:


    The Appellant's Case


13. The Appellant relies on Article 3 ECHR in respect of his mental health.
    It is submitted on his behalf that he cannot safely be removed from the
    UK because there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  he  will
    successfully take  his  own  life,  either  upon  notification  of  his
    imminent removal, during the removal process, or  upon  return  to  Sri
    Lanka. The Appellant submits that there are not the facilities  in  Sri
    Lanka to prevent him from doing this.


    The Respondent's Case


14. The Respondent does not dispute the  medical  evidence  supplied  inter
    alia by  Freedom  from  Torture  and  a  Consultant  Psychiatrist.  The
    Respondent submits however that there are protective factors  in  place
    in Sri Lanka such that the risk  feared  by  the  clinicians  would  be
    obviated. In particular the Appellant has his close family in Sri Lanka
    whom he has expressed a desire to see again.  Although the  Appellant's
    past experiences may have given rise to a subjective fear fuelling  his
    current mental health problems, return to Sri Lanka  would  demonstrate
    the fear not to be well founded and the psychological  difficulties  he
    currently experiences may therefore be resolved.


    Legal Framework


15. The legal framework for consideration of this claim is set out  in  the
    decisions of the Court of Appeal in J v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629 and Y and Z (Sri Lanka) v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  362.   In  J  Dyson  LJ
    analysed the jurisprudence on  Article  3  and  mental  well-being  and
    having done so set out six principles to guide decision-makers in  such
    removal cases:
      1. First, the test requires an assessment to be made of  the  severity
         of the treatment which it is said that the applicant  would  suffer
         if removed. This must attain a minimum level of severity. The court
         has said on a number  of  occasions  that  the  assessment  of  its
         severity depends on all the circumstances of the case. But the ill-
         treatment must "necessarily be serious" such that it is "an affront
         to fundamental humanitarian principles to remove an individual to a
         country where he is at risk of serious  ill-treatment":  see  Ullah
         paras [38-39].
      1. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between the  act  or
         threatened act of removal or expulsion and  the  inhuman  treatment
         relied on as violating the applicant's article 3  rights.  Thus  in
         Soering at para [91], the court said:
         "In so far as any liability under  the  Convention  is  or  may  be
         incurred, it is liability incurred by the  extraditing  Contracting
         State by reason of its having taken action which has  as  a  direct
         consequence the  exposure  of  an  individual  to  proscribed  ill-
         treatment."(emphasis added).
         See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the  court  said  that  the
         examination of the article 3 issue "must focus on  the  foreseeable
         consequences of the removal of the applicants to Sri Lanka..."
      1. Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the article 3  threshold
         is particularly high simply because it is a foreign case. And it is
         even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment is not  the  direct
         or  indirect  responsibility  of  the  public  authorities  of  the
         receiving state, but results from some naturally occurring illness,
         whether physical or mental. This is made clear in para  [49]  of  D
         and para [40] of Bensaid.
      1. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in a  suicide
         case (para [37] of Bensaid).
      1. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of  a  breach  of
         article 3 in a suicide case, a question of  importance  is  whether
         the applicant's fear of ill-treatment in the receiving  state  upon
         which the risk of suicide is said to be based is objectively  well-
         founded. If the fear is not well-founded, that will tend  to  weigh
         against there being a real risk that the removal will be in  breach
         of article 3.
         ...
16. I interject to note that this fifth  principle  caused  for  some  time
    consternation amongst decision makers. If the fear of ill-treatment was
    objectively well founded then one did not apparently need  to  look  to
    the health issue at all, since the claimant would succeed on asylum  or
    free-standing Article 3  grounds.  This  led  Sedley  LJ  to  helpfully
    elucidate the conundrum in Y & Z. Y and Z were a brother and sister who
    had suffered atrocious persecution at  the  hands  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    state, as had other members of their family.  They both  suffered  from
    severe trauma-related mental health problems. Their situation had  been
    made worse by the fact that 50 members of their family had been  killed
    in the Boxing Day tsunami.  In assessing their linked Article 3  health
    claim Sedley J said this about the fifth principle in J:


         [at  paragraph  6]  "notwithstanding  the  emphasis  in  the  fifth
         proposition in J on the fear being well-founded, a fear of  renewed
         torture and sexual abuse may sometimes be just  as  real,  and  its
         potential consequences just as grave, when there  is  no  longer  a
         foundation for it.
         ...
         [at 15] The corollary of the final sentence of �30 of J is that  in
         the  absence  of  an  objective  foundation  for  the   fear   some
         independent basis for it must be established if  weight  is  to  be
         given to it. Such an independent basis may lie in trauma  inflicted
         in the past on the appellant in (or, as  here,  by)  the  receiving
         state: someone who has been  tortured  and  raped  by  his  or  her
         captors may be  terrified  of  returning  to  the  place  where  it
         happened,  especially  if  the  same  authorities  are  in  charge,
         notwithstanding that the objective risk of recurrence has gone.


         [at 16]  One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in  J  that
         what may nevertheless be of equal importance is whether any genuine
         fear which the appellant may establish, albeit without an objective
         foundation, is such as to create a risk of suicide if there  is  an
         enforced return".


17. Returning to Lord Justice Dyson's principles, the sixth and final point
    related to the ability of the receiving state to prevent harm:
         Sixthly, a further question of considerable  relevance  is  whether
         the removing and/or the receiving state has effective mechanisms to
         reduce the risk of suicide. If there are effective mechanisms, that
         too will weigh heavily against an applicant's  claim  that  removal
         will violate his or her article 3 rights.
    In respect of  this  principle,  Ms  Smith  places  reliance  upon  the
    findings of the Upper Tribunal in GJ & Others  at  paragraphs  454-455.
    There the panel reviewed the objective material on the availability  of
    psychiatric and psychological treatment in Sri  Lanka  and  found  that
    there were not in place the mechanisms to  offer  effective  protection
    against the real risk of suicide.


    The Evidence


18. The medical evidence is extensive and falls into two parts.  There  are
    three  substantive  reports  offering  diagnostic  evaluation  of   the
    Appellant in light of his clinically observable  symptoms:  the  latest
    are the reports  of  Consultant  Psychiatrist  Dr  Stanway  and  Senior
    Psychological Therapist Emma Roberts, both dated 21st  September  2016.
    An earlier report dated 30th July 2013 from a Dr  McKenzie  formed  the
    basis of the 'fresh claim' submissions and remains  before  me.   These
    reports form the core of the Appellant's evidence and I summarise  them
    below. There is in addition a substantial body of evidence  which  goes
    to establishing the long-term nature of the Appellant's  mental  health
    problems.  It is not necessary to set this evidence out in detail  save
    to  note  that  the  records  held  by   the   Appellant's   GP,    and
    correspondence from Freedom From Torture,  confirm  that  he  commenced
    counselling treatment there on the 4th March 2013 and that he has  been
    seen on a weekly basis ever since. Each session  lasts  for  one  hour.
    Prior to this he was receiving  treatment  at  'Inclusion  Matters'  in
    Sefton, Liverpool.  The only 'gap' in this  treatment  was  during  the
    period when the Appellant  was  detained,  when  Freedom  From  Torture
    maintained contact through daily telephone calls and visits.


19. I begin with the 2013 report of Dr McKenzie.  Dr McKenzie is  a  doctor
    of some thirty-five years standing. He has received specialist training
    with  the  Medical  Foundation  in  the  effective  identification  and
    documentation  of  torture,  and  avers  to   his   understanding   and
    application  of  the  Istanbul  Protocol.   His  report  addresses  the
    physical scars borne by the Appellant.   Dr  McKenzie  records  several
    areas of scarring which are not attributed by  the  Appellant  to  ill-
    treatment. His primary findings relate to the Appellant's  hands  which
    are described as being  of  "significantly  abnormal  appearance".  The
    deformities to the Appellant's fingers are attributed by him to  having
    had his fingernails pulled out under  torture.  Dr  McKenzie  concludes
    that the appearance of the nail beds and fingers are "typical of"  them
    having been deliberately injured.  This  is  the  second  from  highest
    categorisation  under  the  Istanbul  Protocol,  meaning  "this  is  an
    appearance that is usually found with this type of  trauma,  but  there
    are other possible causes". Of these other possible causes Dr  McKenzie
    considers, and rules out, diseases such as lichen planus, psoriasis  or
    fungal infection. That is because other  clinical  features  associated
    with those conditions are absent.   As  to  the  possibility  that  the
    Appellant may have inflicted this damage himself, or willingly  allowed
    another to do so, Dr McKenzie says this:


         "The pain of trauma to fingers is exquisite and I do  not  consider
         that a reasonable explanation is that he has self  inflicted  these
         injuries or allowed someone else to remove  them  at  his  request.
         Also fabrication of assault  evidence  usually  takes  a  different
         form, with injuries being superficial and of uniform appearance and
         methodology and without psychological symptoms"


It was this evidence which led to the undisturbed findings of Judge Devlin
that the Appellant had indeed been tortured by having his fingernails
forcibly removed.

20. As to the Appellant's mental condition at the date  of  examination  in
    April 2013, Dr McKenzie found him to be suffering from PTSD and  severe
    depression. He records his symptoms as recurring nightmares,  intrusive
    memories,   avoidance   behaviour,   insomnia   and    difficulty    in
    concentrating.  The Appellant reported feeling consistently low in mood
    and having recurrent thoughts of death.


21. The evidence  of  Emma  Roberts  consists  of  correspondence  and  two
    reports, dated 14th August 2014 and 21st September 2016. Ms Roberts  is
    a Senior Psychological Therapist at Freedom From Torture. She qualified
    in 2004 and has received specialist in-house training from FFT. She  is
    now a national trainer  for  the  charity.  She  has  been  seeing  the
    Appellant on a weekly basis since February 2013.  These  sessions  have
    been supplemented by consultations with other colleagues at FFT,  whose
    opinions she has taken into account in the preparation of her evidence.

22. Ms Roberts had, since the beginning of her contact with the  Appellant,
    agreed with Dr McKenzie's diagnosis that  the  Appellant  is  suffering
    from PTSD and depression. Her most  persistent  concern  has  been  his
    preoccupation with his own death as a means to keep his family safe, to
    end his own suffering and to relieve others of  the  responsibility  of
    looking after him.  In her most recent report Ms Roberts  explains  his
    current state of mind but also describes the Appellant's condition upon
    his  release  from  immigration  detention  in  August  2014.  He   was
    demonstrating a high level of distress. His  breathing  was  rapid  and
    shallow and he was constantly crying  throughout  their  first  meeting
    after he was granted  bail.    In  the  weeks  which  followed  he  was
    consistently assessed as being at a high  risk  of  suicide.   By  mid-
    October the  intensive  therapy  he  had  undergone,  and  his  use  of
    distracting  techniques,   had  reduced  his  suicidal  thoughts  to  a
    manageable level.  Although this  period  marked  an  improvement,  the
    Appellant continued to experience high levels of anxiety. For instance,
    in late October 2014 a  scheduled  appeal  hearing  was  adjourned.  Ms
    Roberts was with the Appellant when this news was communicated to  him:
    "he collapsed and vomited,  taking  approximately  an  hour  to  regain
    composure".  He repeatedly told her that it was his  wish  to  die  and
    asked her if she could help arrange for him to die  peacefully  in  the
    United Kingdom. That way he could avoid being sent to  Sri  Lanka,  and
    would stop being a "burden" to others.  Given all  that  she  has  seen
    through her close contact with him, Ms Roberts is of the clear  opinion
    that the risk of completed suicide should the Appellant be  faced  with
    removal would be high.

23. Dr Tania Stanway is a Consultant Psychiatrist of sixteen years standing
    who writes her report of 21st September 2016 under the auspices of  the
    Medical Foundation.  Before writing her report she had regard to all of
    the Appellant's medical and counselling records, his asylum  interviews
    and statement, and  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    White. She based her  clinical  assessment  of  the  Appellant  on  his
    reported symptoms, the  applicable  diagnostic  criteria  and  her  own
    observations of him during their meeting. In respect of the latter  she
    noted that his affect was "flat", his mood low and  he  was  unable  to
    demonstrate normal emotional response during conversation.  Dr  Stanway
    observed that at certain points of their dialogue the Appellant  became
    distressed, "notably agitated" and his breathe became laboured.

24. Dr Stanway records that the Appellant expressed feelings of great guilt
    relating to his family in Sri Lanka. He perceived them still to  be  in
    danger because of their association with him.  He expressed his  belief
    that the only way to keep them safe would be to die  himself  [at  54].
    She writes [at 20]:

         "He can see no way out of his predicament  and  thinks  of  killing
         himself on most days. I explored this with [the Appellant] and  was
         able to establish that at this moment in time he has not got as far
         as making concrete plans as to how he might do this. My  impression
         was that this was because of lack of energy and ability to plan  as
         a  consequence  of  low  mood,  rather  than  because  of  lack  of
         intent..."

25. As to  his  current  symptoms  he  continues  to  experience  insomnia,
    nightmares, low mood and flashbacks. Dr Stanway connects the latter  to
    his ongoing issues around low weight [at 22] :


         "More recently flashbacks are precipitated predominantly  by  sight
         of his hands. He has deformities of his fingers cause by having his
         nails removed during torture. When he catches sight if his hands he
         experiences the distressing emotions he had when this happened. For
         instance he has uncontrollable feelings of fear that he is about to
         be killed. He becomes  agitated,  and  can  find  it  difficult  to
         breathe or control his shaking. He manages this by trying to  avoid
         catching sight of his hands. This results in  his  avoiding  eating
         much of the time.  He  told  me  he  has  limited  appetite  anyway
         (another symptom of depression) but he also finds it  difficult  to
         put food in his mouth as this involves having to bring his hands up
         to his face where it is difficult to avoid catching  sight  of  his
         fingers"


26. Dr Stanway records that the Appellant had initially been given  'first-
    line'  anti-depressant  medication  but  had  not  responded.  He   was
    consequently changed to  'second  line'  but  had  continued  to  prove
    unresponsive.  In these circumstances  NICE  guidelines  are  that  the
    patient must be treated using psychological therapy.  He  has  received
    this at Freedom From Torture, however "psychological therapy is  seldom
    successful  when  a  patient  is  in  a  situation  of  insecurity  and
    fear...[His] uncertain asylum status has rendered him  in  a  state  of
    constant fear  for  the  future  and  therapeutic  sessions  have  been
    focussed on helping him to cope with this. As I would  expect,  it  has
    not  been  possible  to  explore  and  resolve  the  underlying  issues
    contributing to his depression" [at 27].  In  this  respect  she  notes
    that the  Appellant's  mental  health  was  observed  to  significantly
    deteriorate when he was detained, with both  his  PTSD  and  depression
    getting worse [at 35]. She cites the evidence of Ms Roberts about  that
    period [at 36-37]:


         "His suicidal thinking was  very  prevalent  at  the  time  of  his
         release from detention and it took many weeks  of  therapy  at  FFT
         before  his  agitation,  low  mood  and  suicidality  became   more
         manageable.


         It is likely that his agitation was caused by flashback experiences
         precipitated by being in custody and that his poor memories of  the
         events are consequences of emotional  detachment  at  the  time,  a
         symptom typical of someone experiencing an  exacerbation  of  their
         post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms"


27. Returning to the issue of  the  Appellant's  psychological  therapy  Dr
    Stanway notes that notwithstanding her reservations about  its  utility
    in the Appellant's present circumstances  (see  above)  it  has  had  a
    positive effect in that it has enabled him to manage some of  the  more
    troublesome aspects of his symptoms, in particular it has in  her  view
    "managed to keep  his  suicidal  thinking  from  escalating  to  actual
    attempts on his life" [at 38].  She concludes  that  the  dismissal  of
    this appeal would have a detrimental effect on the  Appellant's  mental
    health. He is subjectively fearful of return to Sri Lanka to the  opint
    of being "terrified". It is likely that his flashbacks  and  associated
    anxiety and agitation would become worse and the risk of suicide  would
    increase. These feelings will increase the closer he gets to Sri  Lanka
    and "once there, it is highly likely that he will see death as the only
    solution  to  protect  him  and  his  family  from  further  harm.  The
    protective factor of  being  too  depressed  to  act  on  his  suicidal
    ideation will be gone if he is returned"  [59].   As  to  the  risk  of
    completed suicide Dr Stanway notes that suicidal ideation  has  been  a
    consistent feature of the Appellant's presentation for the  four  years
    that he has been in regular contact with clinicians.  Everyone involved
    in his care has commented upon the prominence of suicidal thinking. The
    risk of completed suicide fluctuates over time  with  a  clear  inverse
    relationship to how secure he is feeling.    At  present,  when  he  is
    receiving support from Freedom From Torture, that support  constituting
    the principle  protective  factor,   the  risk  is  assessed  as  being
    "moderate". Should that therapy be denied to him,  the  risk  would  be
    "significantly increased" [77]. There would also be an  increased  risk
    of self-neglect and physical illness due to the correlation between the
    Appellant's  anxiety  levels  and  his  ability  to  eat.   Dr  Stanway
    specifically considers whether the  Appellant's  family  in  Sri  Lanka
    could constitute a protective factor. Taking into account his  profound
    feelings of guilt and anxiety for their safety, she  does  not  believe
    that to be the case.


    My Findings


28. I reiterate that  none  of  the  medical  evidence  produced,  not  the
    expertise of the witnesses, is challenged  by  the  Respondent.  It  is
    accepted that the Appellant has been receiving intensive  psychological
    therapy for a period of approximately four years, and that he has  also
    been prescribed  various  anti-depressant  medication  throughout  that
    time. I apply the facts as found, and the information set  out  in  the
    reports set out above, to the framework set out in J.


29. First, I am satisfied that the feared harm attains the minimum level of
    severity to engage Article 3.  The feared harm is suicide, which  would
    undoubtedly meet that test. I have also taken into account Dr Stanway's
    concerns about the Appellant's likely self-neglect in the  event  of  a
    significant deterioration in his mental health.  I  am  satisfied  that
    what would in effect be self starvation as a result of mental breakdown
    would constitute 'inhuman and degrading' treatment such that Article  3
    would  be  engaged.   In  either  case  it  would  be  an  affront   to
    humanitarian principles to remove the Appellant if these  feared  harms
    occurred as a result.

30. Second, I am satisfied that there would be a direct causal link between
    any deterioration in the Appellant's mental health and the act  of  his
    removal to Sri Lanka.  The clear evidence of Dr Stanway and Ms  Roberts
    is that at present the Appellant is managing to eat, and  to  keep  his
    suicidal thoughts at bay, because of the  therapeutic  intervention  by
    Freedom From Torture, administered in the relative safety of the United
    Kingdom[1]. Removal of that protective factor, coupled with removal  to
    the very place that causes him his "terror" would, in  the  opinion  of
    the clinicians, lead to a "high" risk of suicide.  Nothing I have  seen
    causes me to doubt this opinion.  I note in particular the evidence  in
    respect of 2014, when the Appellant  spent  some  time  in  immigration
    detention.   The specialists at Freedom From Torture  then  observed  a
    clear correlation  between  the  fear  of  removal  and  a  significant
    deterioration in the Appellant's mental well-being.

31. Third, I pay due regard to the fact that this is  a  foreign  case  and
    that the Article 3 threshold  is  therefore  particularly  high.  I  am
    satisfied that death, whether by direct action or  simply  by  starving
    through self-neglect would reach that threshold.  This is the basis  of
    the fourth principle in J: that an Article 3  claim  can  in  principle
    succeed in a suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).

32. Fifth, I bear in mind the accepted evidence that the Appellant has  had
    his fingernails pulled out. I am satisfied, having had regard  to  Lord
    Justice Sedley's understanding of the 'objectivity' test in J that Lord
    Justice Dyson did not mean  to  suggest  that  there  needs  to  be  an
    externally well-founded fear of harm for the claim to be made  out:  "a
    fear of renewed torture and sexual abuse may sometimes be just as real,
    and its potential consequences just as grave, when there is no longer a
    foundation for it".  I am satisfied that on the accepted facts there is
    an independent basis for the Appellant's fear of return to Sri Lanka.

33. Finally, I must consider whether  there  are  in  the  receiving  state
    effective mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide.  Mr Bates was  here
    in some difficulty given the findings of the  Tribunal  in  GJ  to  the
    effect that such mechanisms were strikingly absent in Sri Lanka. He did
    not seek to persuade me that the Tribunal were in that case  wrong,  or
    that the situation on the ground had  markedly  changed:  indeed  there
    would have been no evidential foundation for such a submission.  He did
    submit that the Appellant's family members in Sri Lanka were capable of
    offering him protection.  Recognising  the  Appellant's  reluctance  to
    return to his family  Mr  Bates  asked  me  to  consider  whether  this
    reluctance could reasonably be relied  upon  in  order  to  found  this
    claim. He likened it to an  unjustified  refusal  on  the  part  of  an
    applicant to hand over medical records: see for instance NA  (Sudan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1060.   I
    have considered this submission carefully, but must reject it  for  the
    following reasons. First of all, there is no evidence to  suggest  that
    the love of a  mother  or  sister,  valuable  as  it  would  be,  could
    substitute specialised  medical  intervention  dispensed  on  a  weekly
    basis.  There is no evidential foundation upon which I  could  conclude
    that these family members would  be  able  to  replace  the  protective
    mechanism provided by  Freedom  From  Torture.    Secondly,  Mr  Bates'
    rather optimistic view that the Appellant would  feel  better  once  he
    realised that no-one was coming to torture  him  rather  overlooks  the
    clear findings of Dr Stanway and Ms Roberts that he has developed  very
    fixed ideas and that it has not been  possible  thus  far  to  dislodge
    them. He firmly believes that he is putting his family in  danger  just
    by still being alive. Those treating  him  accept  that  this  fear  is
    immeasurably heightened by the thought of returning to the family  home
    - and thereby bringing trouble with him.  Although  the  Appellant  has
    clearly expressed a desire to see his family again, he does not in fact
    wish to do so, because he firmly believes that to do  so  would  be  to
    place them in harm's way. This case  is  therefore  factually  distinct
    from NA.  This may be a belief  without  objective  foundation,  but  I
    accept that it is one that is strongly held, and I accept that this  is
    not something that the Appellant has a choice about.   He may be acting
    unreasonably, but it is as a result of his mental illness, which is  of
    course an involuntary response.   With  those  factors  in  mind  I  am
    unable to accept that the presence of the  Appellant's  family  in  Sri
    Lanka would provide any sort of protection at all.  It follows  that  I
    need not delve into the practicalities of how the Appellant  might  get
    from the United Kingdom to Colombo and  then  to  his  family  home  in
    Trincomalee without suffering mental anguish such that Article 3  would
    be breached.


34. I am satisfied, having regard to the tests in J, that there is  a  real
    risk that the Appellant would take his own life should he  be  forcibly
    removed to Sri Lanka.


    Decisions


35. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal in respect  of  Article  3
    ECHR is set aside. The decision in respect of Article 3 is  substituted
    with "the appeal is allowed".


36. There is an order for anonymity in place.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           24th November
                                    2016
                           -----------------------
[1] I say 'relative' because it remains a feature of the medical opinion
that the Appellant's uncertainty about his immigration status is preventing
further recovery.

