
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 30 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             AHMADZIA STANIKZAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Ruddy, of Jain, Neil & Ruddy, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan,  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 1 January 1979.  He sought  asylum  on  10  July  2009  but
    failed to attend an interview or to observe reporting conditions  until
    27 September 2013.  He then put forward a claim as follows.  He is from
    Mughalkhail in  Muhammad  Agha,  Logar  Province.   In  2005  he  began
    teaching at a local school in the mornings.  In 2006 he began  teaching
    a group of illiterate women at his home in the afternoon.  He  received
    2 threatening letters from  the  Taliban  warning  him  to  cease  that
    activity.  The local elders, who had encouraged him  in  his  teaching,
    firstly advised him to continue but on receipt  of  the  second  letter
    advised him to report to the  local  government.   Having  received  no
    reassurance there, he went to  police  headquarters  in  Kabul.   After
    speaking to the police, he decided that he had  to  leave  Afghanistan.
    After staying for a week with  his  father-in-law  in  Kabul  he  left,
    travelling through many other countries until he reached the UK.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's claim for reasons explained in a
    letter dated 20 March 2015.  The respondent found that he  was  not  in
    need of international protection,  largely  because  of  the  delay  in
    putting forward his claim.  Paragraphs 4 -10 of the letter  survey  the
    evidence regarding threatening letters from the  Taliban  to  perceived
    government sympathisers, who may include teachers,  and  the  Taliban's
    attitude to girls' education.  Paragraph 11 acknowledges clear evidence
    of intimidation of teachers such as they may have to resettle in a safe
    environment, usually in an urban area such as Kabul.  It  is  therefore
    accepted that the appellant "could not have continued teaching in Logar
    Province".  Nevertheless, the authenticity of the  threatening  letters
    is doubted.  There is found to be no reason  why  the  appellant  might
    still be at risk in Kabul, and no reason why it would be  unduly  harsh
    to expect him to relocate.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Wallace heard the  appellant's  appeal  on  7
    July 2015.  In her determination, promulgated  on  21  July  2015,  the
    judge noted the appellant's case that  he  had  explained  why  he  had
    absconded, that instances of targeting of teachers should be dealt with
    according to their specific  individual  circumstances,  and  could  be
    continuous, and that relocation to Kabul was not a viable option.   The
    respondent argued that there was no evidence that the appellant was  of
    any ongoing interest to the Taliban, that he  had  complied  with  what
    they required him to do, and that he could relocate to  Kabul  being  a
    city with which he was familiar, where he had lived  for  a  number  of
    years, and which was his wife's  place  of  origin.   (It  appears  she
    presently lives in Pakistan, although some at least  of  her  relatives
    live in Kabul.   The appellant's family appears to live in  Mugalkhail,
    having returned there from Pakistan at the same time as the  appellant,
    although the judge refers to them as living in Pakistan.)  Both parties
    based their submissions on AK Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163.

 5. The judge treats the threatening letters from the Taliban are  genuine,
    although she does not expressly state that conclusion.  She goes on  to
    note the background evidence regarding the Taliban and  education,  and
    continues:

    " 60   ... The respondent's position is not that the teachers  are  not
         attacked, but that the appellant could  stop  teaching  and  go  to
         Kabul ... that ignores the reason why the appellant went to  Kabul.
         The appellant went to Kabul ... to police headquarters to see if he
         could get advice regarding protection ... against the  Taliban  ...
         he wanted to see if protection would be extended to him so that  he
         could continue his teaching.

     61. The appellant admittedly has lived in Kabul, he  is  familiar  with
         the city, but his circumstances have changed ... at  that  time  he
         was  a  student  ...  at  the   university,   living   in   student
         accommodation.

     62. AK talks about the sliding scale ... and  the  need  to  take  into
         account the specific individual circumstance of a  claimant.   This
         appellant obviously has a  vocation  and  felt  it  incumbent  upon
         himself to teach women.  This became very apparent in oral evidence
         as the appellant's face lit  up  when  he  was  talking  about  his
         teaching and his work with the village women in particular.  He was
         visibly animated.

     63. Teaching is a vocation  and  to  ask  him  to  stop  would  ...  be
         particularly harsh.  The appellant believes in what  he  was  doing
         and it is not so easy to give up something in which you believe and
         which you believe can make a difference for good in  the  lives  of
         others.

     64. On the basis of the evidence presented  and  the  low  standard  of
         proof required, I accept the appellant's  account  as  an  accurate
         finding in fact.

     65. As to relocation to Kabul, he would have  minimal  family  support,
         his wife is not in Afghanistan, neither are his siblings,  nor  his
         parents.  In these particular circumstances, I believe it would  be
         unduly harsh to require him to go and live in Kabul  especially  as
         he could only go there if he abstained from teaching women."

 6. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal do not challenge the
    credibility finding, which was  more  favourable  than  the  assessment
    reached by the respondent.  The respondent:

         "... rather takes issue with the  way  the  judge  dealt  with  the
         alternative submission that  internal  relocation  to  Kabul  would
         provide safety from the Taliban and would not be unduly harsh.

         The judge finds at paragraph 65 that the appellant could only go to
         live in Kabul if he gave up teaching women, and this  is  the  core
         reason for finding that it would be unduly harsh to expect  him  to
         live there.  The judge proceeds on the assumption that the  Taliban
         would be willing and able to target the appellant in Kabul just  as
         easily as ... in the heavily disputed area of Logar ...  The  judge
         refers to no background evidence to show that the  appellant  would
         be unable to continue teaching in Kabul without serious issue.

         Even if the judge were entitled ... to find that somebody  teaching
         women in Kabul would face a risk of ill-treatment from the Taliban,
         she has not adequately explained why it is unreasonable  to  expect
         the appellant to choose a different profession to avoid that  harm.
         While the judge refers at paragraph 63 to teaching being a vocation
         ... the desire to work as a teacher  is  not  a  fundamental  right
         protected by the Refugee Convention.  It  is  therefore  reasonable
         (and not unduly harsh) to expect someone to modify their  behaviour
         to avoid harm, the HJ (Iran) principle being inapplicable ...

         All other factors ... point to internal relocation being reasonable
         ... the appellant is 35 years old,  well educated  with  very  good
         employment prospects, travelling  without  women  or  children,  in
         relative good health and is familiar with Kabul having lived  there
         previously.

         It is hard to see how the judge's  conclusion  that  relocation  to
         Kabul would be unduly harsh and sustainable on these facts, when it
         is recognised that the test is a stringent one: Baroness Hale in AH
         (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49."

 7. On 7 August 2015 FtT Judge Lever granted permission, observing that  it
    was arguable that the judge did not address the issue whether in  Kabul
    the appellant could not continue teaching women, or whether he would be
    prevented  from  teaching  generally,  and  that  the  judge  had   not
    adequately explained  even  if  he  could  only  partially  fulfil  his
    vocation how that could meet a threshold of being unduly harsh.

 8. Mrs O'Brien submitted along the following lines.  A desire to work as a
    teacher is  not  a  core  right  protected  in  terms  of  the  Refugee
    Convention.  The  judge  decided  that  the  appellant  should  not  be
    expected to relocate to Kabul, where he had an uncle and his father-in-
    law, where his wife's relatives lived, and where he had  lived  before.
    It was clear that but for the specific issue of pursuing his employment
    of choice, the judge would not have come to the decision she  did.   It
    was an error of law to give that element  such  decisive  significance.
    In MSM (journalists, political opinion, risk) Somalia [2015]  UKUT  413
    the Upper Tribunal found that return to Somalia would  involve  a  real
    risk of persecution on  the  ground  of  actual  or  imputed  political
    opinion where the appellant would seek and find employment in the media
    sector, and that he was not to be denied refugee status on  the  ground
    it would be open to him to seek other employment.  That  was  the  most
    relevant comparison in a reported case, but the present case fell  well
    short.  There was no similar finding that the appellant would seek  and
    find employment as a teacher.  The present case was not allowed because
    it fell within the  Refugee  Convention,  but  on  the  alternative  of
    internal relocation.  This case did not involve forfeiture  of  a  core
    protected right.  There was no evidence which supported a finding  that
    the appellant would be at risk in Kabul as a teacher, even if  teaching
    women.  There was no reason why he would have to abstain  from  working
    as a teacher.  The high threshold for an internal flight was simply not
    met.

 9. The submissions for the appellant were as follows.   The  Secretary  of
    State had not taken the line in the First-tier Tribunal which  was  now
    pursued in the Upper Tribunal.  It had not been argued there  that  the
    appellant could not properly contend that he  had  a  right  to  resume
    teaching on return.  There was background evidence of the  difficulties
    for teachers not only in provincial and disputed  areas,  but  even  in
    Kabul.  The respondent sought to portray this as a new point introduced
    by the judge, but the case had been put by the appellant  on  just  the
    basis on  which  it  was  allowed.   The  submission  was  recorded  at
    paragraph 39 of the determination, "The appellant displayed  a  passion
    for teaching which could not be denied."  The  evidence  was  that  the
    appellant might be safe if he ceased teaching, but not if he carried on
    doing so, even in Kabul.  He  fell  into  the  category  of  protection
    identified in AK  at  paragraph  26(i)  and  at  208-209.   The  judge,
    although she had not mentioned  HJ  (Iran),  had  in  effect  correctly
    applied its principles.  The determination should stand.

10. I observed that in this case there  did  not  appear  to  have  been  a
    finding on what the appellant would do on return (unlike in  MSM).   Mr
    Ruddy submitted that it was implicit  in  the  determination  that  the
    judge thought that he would  teach.   Mrs  O'Brien  said  that  to  the
    contrary, the assumption in the determination was that the appellant on
    return to Kabul would not teach, and that was the  very  feature  which
    led her to find that return would be unduly harsh  -  a  finding  which
    could not be justified.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. In general, on country guidance and  background  evidence,  it  is  not
    unduly harsh to expect a fit educated adult male Afghan citizen to  re-
    establish himself away from an  area  of  risk  in  Afghanistan,  which
    usually but not always means in Kabul, even without family  connections
    in the area of relocation.

13. Although both representatives and the judge referred to the requirement
    (derived from AK and elsewhere)  to  take  into  account  the  specific
    individual circumstances of a claimant, I do not think that either  the
    parties or the judge focused on what those circumstances were.

14. The appellant says in the statement which he provided to the First-tier
    Tribunal that  in  2005  he  started  teaching  in  the  local  school,
    Mughalkhail Girls Lycee, which  is  both  a  high  school  and  primary
    school.  He worked in the primary department, "teaching girls  subjects
    like geography, history and Pushtu.  I always taught in the mornings in
    that primary school."   The  problems  he  describes  arose  only  from
    further and separate work which he began in 2006,  teaching  illiterate
    women at home.  The  Taliban's  objections  were  only  to  the  latter
    element.  Their letter complains that the appellant is:

         "... taking female fellow villagers out of  their  homes  with  the
         pretext of education  ...  arranged  by  the  Americans  and  their
         puppets.  And you teach them American and pagan culture  ...  using
         every avenue to eliminate Islam and our religious legal system.  As
         you come from an Islamic religious family it doesn't suit you  well
         and you shouldn't be doing it ... close the school down or ... face
         the consequences."

15. The Taliban had no issue with the existence of a local girls school and
    with  the  appellant's  employment  there  as  a  male  teacher.    The
    particular evidence did not suggest that the appellant would be at risk
    if he resumed teaching, including the teaching of girls,  even  in  his
    home area.  There was nothing to stop him from teaching boys  or  girls
    (or even women) in Kabul.

16. I think that having to renounce a vocation and make a living in another
    way might legitimately be pleaded as an element in judging the  balance
    between internal relocation being acceptable, and being  unduly  harsh.
    It is not a factor which by itself establishes  a  protection  need  or
    which shows internal relocation to be unduly harsh.

17. Taking together the background evidence and the appellant's account  of
    his 2 year teaching career in his home village, there  was  nothing  to
    justify the conclusion reached.  The  appellant  could  teach  boys  or
    girls, at home or elsewhere.   The  only  problem  which  realistically
    might arise in Kabul would be from the teaching  of  adult  women.   At
    highest, his case was that his pursuit of his vocation would be limited
    to that extent.

18. The parties made only passing reference to HJ (Iran) and did not go  to
    the case report.  I think it is sufficient to say  that  there  was  no
    citation of any authority for a rule that vocational preferences are to
    be protected to an extent that would  benefit  this  appellant  on  the
    facts of his case, properly examined.  Nor  am  I  aware  of  any  such
    authority.

19. The judge was not entitled to allow the appeal on the  basis  of  undue
    harshness arising from a partial restriction on the range of pupils the
    appellant might be able to teach.  There is nothing else in the case to
    justify a grant of protection.

20. The determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
    following decision is substituted: the appeal by Ahmadzia Stanikzai, as
    originally brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

21. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




                    [pic]


                    Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
                    30 October 2015


