
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: AA/06940/2013

                                   AA/06942/2013

                                AA/06945/2013

                                AA/06946/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Date Sent                    |
|On 20 March 2013                              |On 3 April 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                               r u and others
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Sowerby instructed by Lawland Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    The  appellant  was  granted  anonymity  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Although no application was made I nevertheless consider  it  desirable
    that this continues in the Upper Tribunal.  Consequently no  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of this family.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

INTRODUCTION

 1. The appellant is Sri Lankan and he is of Sinhalese ethnicity.   He  was
    born in 1975 and he came to the United Kingdom on  9  July  2010  on  a
    student visa.  He was joined by his  wife  and  a  child  (another  was
    subsequently born in the United Kingdom) in December 2010.  Their leave
    to remain expired on 8 June 2011.  After making an appointment  in  the
    proceeding month, the appellant made his application for asylum  on  12
    March 2012.  He was substantively interviewed about that  claim  on  15
    August 2012 and for reasons given in a  refusal  letter  dated  5  July
    2013, the appellant and his family members were served with notices  of
    decision to remove them as illegal entrants on the same day.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim to asylum was a fear  from  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities whom he contended were adversely interested  in  him
    because of his support for General Fonseka and the Democratic  National
    Alliance (DNA).  The appellant had been in  the  army  and  on  leaving
    worked as a co-ordination officer for the DNA.  In  January  2010  that
    party was defeated in the general election.  The following  month,  the
    appellant with nine others and General Fonseka were  arrested.   It  is
    the  appellant's  case  that  he  was  taken  to  the  military  police
    headquarters and held for ten days during  which  he  was  ill-treated.
    After ten days, he was able to escape with the assistance  of  an  army
    major and four soldiers. He thereafter stayed in his cousin's house.  A
    search was put out by the civil police during which his  wife  and  his
    father were questioned and the latter detained for four  days.   Whilst
    in hiding, the appellant made contact with  someone  who  was  able  to
    obtain a visa by May 2010.  The agent accompanied the appellant to  the
    airport and he left Sri Lanka on a direct flight to the United Kingdom.

 3. The respondent accepted the appellant had been  a  member  of  the  Sri
    Lankan Army.  But it was not accepted he had resigned from the army  to
    pursue a political career.  This was in part due  to  an  inconsistency
    between the evidence provided as to when and under  what  circumstances
    this resignation had taken place.  Inconsistencies over the  date  also
    led the respondent to reject the claim  that  the  appellant  had  been
    arrested in February 2010.  The appellant had relied on  scarring.   In
    this regard the respondent contended  that  he  had  not  provided  any
    medical evidence in support of how he  had  obtained  those  scars  and
    consequent injuries.  As to evidence  regarding  the  interest  by  the
    civil police following the appellant's claimed escape,  the  respondent
    rejected the reliability of a police message relating to his wife.  The
    respondent was concerned that the appellant had been able to leave  Sri
    Lanka using his own  passport  whilst  the  authorities  were  actively
    pursuing him.

 4. On 16 December 2013 First-tier Tribunal Judge C J Lloyd heard  evidence
    from  the  appellant  and  his  wife  and  for  reasons  given  in  her
    determination concluded the appellant had  not  been  credible  in  his
    claim to be at real risk in Sri Lanka.  The appeal was  also  dismissed
    on Article 8 grounds on the basis that the  family  would  leave  as  a
    unit.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
    in  a  decision  dated  21  January  2014.   The   challenge   to   the
    determination was two-fold.  The first was that the judge had failed to
    set out the burden and standard of proof.  It was argued  that  nowhere
    in the determination did the judge set out the approach she was  taking
    as to the standard  of  proof  she  was  applying  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's  account.   The  reference   towards   the   end   of   the
    determination to whether there was a 'real  risk'  did  not  assist  in
    establishing whether the correct approach to precedent facts  had  been
    taken.  That standard is necessarily lower than the civil standard  and
    it was not reflected in the language of the determination.

 6. The second ground is that there had been an  inappropriate  application
    of the country guidance  decision  in  GJ  &  Others  (post  civil  war
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  It  is  asserted  that  the
    judge had apparently concluded that because the appellant did  not  fit
    within any of the categories of risks set out in that case he  was  not
    at risk on return to Sri Lanka.  This was not apt in the light  of  the
    appellant's ethnicity  and  thus  the  judge  had  taken  into  account
    irrelevant factors in her assessment.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Lewis observed that to apply an
    incorrect burden or standard of proof is an error of law;  to  omit  to
    state them is not.  He went on to observe

         "there is nothing in the judgment, including the  use  of  language
         like 'believe', 'accept' and 'find', which suggest to me  that  the
         judge did not apply the correct burden and standard of proof".

 8. As to the second ground, the judge noted the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal by the Court of Appeal in MP (Sri Lanka) & NT (Sri Lanka) v SSHD
    referred to the observation made when granting permission that  pending
    final determination  of  that  appeal  or  further  order,  individuals
    falling outside the GJ risk of categories should not  for  that  reason
    alone have their asylum claims rejected.

 9. Mr Sowerby was not aware that the appeal in MP and NT  had  been  heard
    earlier in the week but it was not until the conclusion of  submissions
    that he decided to make application  for  adjournment  on  that  basis.
    This was opposed  by  Mr  Saunders  and  I  decided  that  it  was  not
    justified.  The judge had not dismissed the appeal simply  because  the
    appellant did not come within the risk categories identified in GJ  and
    Others but had given detailed reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    credibility.  Even before turning to GJ & Others, she had found in [20]
    of her determination that the appellant would be safe.  She  was  alive
    to the focus of the Tribunal's decision in GJ and which  she  addressed
    in [22] of her determination.





Did the Tribunal err in law?

10. The Tribunal determining the appeal in the First-tier is  a  specialist
    one and it can be assumed that it will apply the  correct  standard  of
    proof when undertaking fact-finding in asylum  appeals.   As  correctly
    observed by Judge Lewis, the absence of a specific direction as to  the
    standard does not of itself amount to an error of law.  Where in a case
    such as this there has been no specific direction by the Tribunal,  the
    determination needs to be considered as a whole to ascertain  from  the
    language used and the reasons given for the findings  indicate  that  a
    more demanding standard than was  permissible  had  been  applied.   In
    other words, can it be discerned from the language of the determination
    that the factual findings were  reached  on  other  than  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood.

11. Mr Sowerby argued that the determination was flawed because it was  not
    until the judge reached [23] of her determination that  there  was  any
    reference to a standard which he did not  accept  reflected  the  right
    approach:

         "For all the reasons given above I do not accept the credibility of
         the appellant's core claim to be at real risk now in Sri Lanka.   I
         do not find a real risk that he would have a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution for a UN Convention reason nor that  he  would  face  a
         breach  of  his  absolute  rights  under  Articles  2/3,  nor  that
         substantial grounds exist whereby he should be granted humanitarian
         protection."

12. He went on to argue that the preceding credibility  findings  had  been
    reached in a vacuum of a reminder as  to  the  standard  of  proof  and
    likewise in respect of the Article  8  considerations.   There  was  no
    challenge to the Article 8 conclusions but he relied on the passages on
    that  ground  to  illustrate  his  point.   Mr  Sowerby  also  candidly
    acknowledged that there was no challenge to the reasons  given  by  the
    judge for rejecting the truthfulness of  the  appellant's  account  and
    that as a consequence, the challenge was simply as to the  basis  which
    those conclusions had been arrived at.

13. From my reading of the determination as a whole, I  am  satisfied  that
    there is nothing to indicate that the judge strayed  from  the  correct
    standard.  Such error is sometimes evidenced  by  terms  such  as  "not
    convinced", "on balance ...", "highly inconsistent ..." or "there is no
    compelling evidence that ...".  It is clear from the language  used  in
    [23] quoted above that the judge's mind was focused on the task  before
    her which was to determine whether there was a real risk. There  is  no
    reason to believe that before directing herself, she had embarked on  a
    fact finding exercise applying the  wrong  standard.  The  reasons  for
    rejecting aspects of the claim were supported by the evidence  and  are
    cogently expressed.  They all point to the correct  standard  of  proof
    having been used.  I am not persuaded that this ground is made out.

14. I turn to the second ground.  This requires an analysis of the facts as
    found. The judge accepted as conceded  by  the  Home  Office  that  the
    appellant had previous army service but not that  he  was  a  political
    activist. The ground does not challenge this finding.  The  appellant's
    political activities formed the core his claim and are the reason given
    for his claimed fear. In reaching her negative conclusions,  the  judge
    noted the issue as to when the appellant left the army.  His claim  had
    been that this was in November 2009  to  support  the  General  in  his
    political ambitions.  The judge explained that she did not accept  this
    in the light of the production of a document dated  6  May  2010  which
    expressly stated the appellant was compulsory retired  on  a  specified
    pension and thus did not support the claim  of  voluntary  resignation.
    It was open to the judge to observe that the president had approved the
    granting of the pension to the appellant which  contradicts  his  claim
    that he was at risk from the government.

15. As to why she did not believe the appellant was a political activist in
    the DNA, the judge explained  that  in  the  asylum  interview  he  had
    displayed little knowledge of the party's  policies.   Furthermore  she
    was concerned about the vague and inconsistent evidence  regarding  the
    appellant's claim that he was responsible for  papers  implicating  the
    government in war crimes.  As to the claimed arrest and  detention  for
    ten days in February 2010, the judge noted it was clear General Fonseka
    had been detained but the appellant had claimed to have  been  arrested
    at a hotel where a DNA conference was taking place but  the  background
    evidence showed that the General had  been  arrested  at  his  offices.
    Correctly the judge explained that she could not speculate the cause of
    the marks on the appellant's body.   There  was  no  challenge  to  her
    observation that he had been a soldier for many years which could  have
    resulted in injuries.

16. The judge noted that on his own account the appellant had  remained  in
    Sri Lanka until  leaving  in  July  2010.   During  these  five  months
    although he said he had been in hiding, he had also spoken of  working.
    The judge found it incredible for the appellant  to  say  that  he  was
    hiding and yet also to say that he was working.

17. The judge also turned her attention to the documentary evidence  relied
    on.  She found it incredible there should be an arrest warrant for  the
    appellant issued two years after  he  had  left  Sri  Lanka  and  after
    General Fonseka himself had  been  released.   She  explains  that  the
    advocate's letter takes matters a little further and did not  know  how
    the appellant had got a copy of  his  wife's  police  information  book
    entry which was issued on 28th September 2012.  She found it incredible
    the authorities would assist in this way if the appellant was a  wanted
    man.

18. The judge then proceeded to observe in her  conclusions  at  [20]  that
    General Fonseka had been released in May 2012 and that  the  party  had
    been registered with the election department concluding "I do not  find
    it credible that Fonseka can now pursue his political ambitions in  Sri
    Lanka but the appellant, underling even if he had supported and  worked
    for Fonseka in the past, would not be safe for political reasons."

19. All that was left of the claim was that the appellant had served in the
    army. In my view the judge was correct to refer  to  GJ  &  Others  and
    indeed had she not done so it would be arguably  have  been  an  error.
    She was alive to the differences between the risk categories identified
    in GJ  &  Others  and  the  appellant's  circumstances  which  she  has
    demonstrated in [22] of her determination:-

         "The case identified current categories of person at  risk  in  Sri
         Lanka.  Clearly the appellant was not a journalist  and  I  do  not
         accept he was a human rights activist.   Nor  was  he  involved  in
         Tamil  separatism  or  the  lessons   learned   in   reconciliation
         commission.  I do not accept the  appellant's  name  appears  on  a
         computerised 'stop' list accessible at the airport, that is a  list
         of people against whom there is a court  order  or  arrest  warrant
         outstanding nor on a 'watch' list, that is a person  likely  to  be
         monitored by the security services after return (I  do  not  accept
         there is an arrest warrant; he passed through the  airport  on  the
         way - although I recognise there could still be a risk on return  I
         do no accept there would be in this case.)"

20. There was no evidence before the judge that only Tamils were capable of
    appearing on either the  stop  or  watch  list.   Having  given  cogent
    reasons for rejecting the claim that the appellant was  wanted  by  the
    authorities it was entirely appropriate for her to  complete  the  risk
    assessment by reference to the most up-to-date country guidance.

21. Accordingly I am not persuaded the appellant is able to  make  out  the
    second ground of challenge and accordingly his appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date 2 April 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson


