
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA062512015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 May 2016                                |On 9 June 2016                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                              MK (Afghanistan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Lagunju, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Haria  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  23
    September 2015) dismissing his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him as  a  refugee  as  being
    eligible for  humanitarian  protection  under  paragraph  339C  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission

 2. On 26 February 2016 Judge Pooler gave  his  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

         "2.  The application for permission was made in  time  and  submits
             that the judge erred in law by failing to make findings as  to
             the credibility [sic] of  documents  on  which  the  appellant
             relied or as to the weight which she attached to them; and  by
             failing to give reasons for adverse credibility findings.

         3.    Having  found  that  the  appellant  had  given  a  plausible
             explanation for how he had obtained documents relating to  his
             father's involvement in Hizb-i-Islami, the  judge  appears  to
             have given her overall conclusion at [52] and to have followed
             that by her reasons.  She later found that the  appellant  had
             not proved that there was no sufficiency of protection or that
             internal relocation was not an option open to him.   In  these
             circumstances there is no reasonable prospect that  any  error
             of law alleged in the grounds of  appeal  could  have  made  a
             difference to the outcome."

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. On 12  April  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Nadine  Finch  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal on a renewed application for  permission
    to the Upper Tribunal for the following reasons:

         "2.  In paragraph 52 of her  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             Haria said that, for the reasons given,  she  found  that  the
             Appellant had not substantiated his claim that his  father  is
             an active commander of the Hizb-e-Islami Gulbadeen  Hikmatyaar
             Group and that he wanted the  Appellant  to  join  the  group.
             However, in earlier paragraphs the Judge  appeared  to  accept
             that the Appellant had provided  evidence  to  show  that  his
             father had been a commander in Hizb-e-Islami in the  past  and
             in paragraph 46 she went no further than saying that a witness
             statement from the Appellant's mother about how the  documents
             came into his  possession  would  have  added  weight  to  the
             reliability of the documents.

         3.   She then  noted  that  the  Appellant  had  not  produced  any
             documentary evidence to substantiate the photographs, which he
             also relied upon, and that,  when  applying  for  his  student
             visa, he had said  that  his  father  was  a  cloth  merchant.
             However, nowhere did she consider the evidence provided by the
             Appellant in  the  round  and  give  due  weight  to  all  the
             different pieces of evidence which he relied upon.

         4.   Her failure to do so meant that there was no lawful basis upon
             which she could proceed  to  consider  future  risk,  internal
             flight or sufficiency of protection.

         5.   As a consequence, I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Haria
             did make arguable errors of law in her decision."

Relevant Background

 4. The appellant was born  [  ]  1992.   In  2012  he  made  a  successful
    application from Pakistan for entry clearance as a student.  He arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 29 November 2012 on a valid student visa.   On
    1 August 2013 he was arrested on suspicion of working in breach of  the
    conditions of his student visa, and he  claimed  asylum  on  9  October
    2013.  He was part of a large family that had moved  to  Pakistan  from
    Afghanistan when he was aged 3 or 4.  He had relatives in  Afghanistan,
    but he had never met them.  He had travelled to the UK because  he  had
    problems in Afghanistan.  His father was  an  active  commander  and  a
    fighter for the Hizb-e-Islami Gulbadeen Hikmatyaar Group.  He had  last
    seen his father three or four years ago.  His father wanted him to join
    him and become a fighter.  He travelled to the  UK  to  pursue  further
    studies and because he did not want to join his  father  and  become  a
    fighter for the Hizb-e-Islami Gulbadeen Hikmatyaar Group.   If  he  was
    returned to Afghanistan, he feared that the authorities in  Afghanistan
    would kill him because of his father's activities.

 5. On 19 March 2015 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    the appellant's  asylum  claim.   His  nationality  and  identity  were
    accepted, but it was  not  accepted  that  his  father  was  an  active
    commander of the Hizb-e-Islami Gulbadeen Hikmatyaar, and  it  was  also
    not accepted the authorities, civilians and other  militant  groups  in
    Afghanistan would seek revenge  on  his  father  by  killing  him  (the
    appellant).   Reliance  was  also  placed  on  paragraph  339O  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which provided that a grant of asylum would  not  be
    made if in a part of the country of origin, a person would not  have  a
    well-founded fear of being persecuted, and the person could  reasonably
    be expected to stay in that part of the country.  During his interview,
    he stated he could not be expected to live in  Afghanistan  because  he
    did not know a lot about the country as he had lived in  Pakistan  from
    the age of 3; that he was scared to go there; and  because  his  father
    did not want him and his  family  going  to  Afghanistan.  He  had  not
    substantiated any  threat  from  any  individual  or  state  entity  in
    Afghanistan, and it  was  considered  that  Kabul  city  was  a  viable
    internal  relocation  alternative,   following   AK   (Article   15(c))
    Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC).

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Both parties were legally  represented  before  Judge  Haria.   In  her
    subsequent decision, the structure of the judge's reasons mirrored  the
    structure that had been adopted in the refusal letter,  save  that  the
    judge began her discussion with a citation from the headnote in AK  and
    her observation  of  how  the  appellant  had  performed  in  his  oral
    evidence.  On the whole, he had given a consistent  account.   Although
    she considered him to be  a  generally  honest  person,  she  had  some
    concerns as to the credibility of his account.

 7. The first specific topic which she addressed was  the  documents  which
    the appellant had submitted in  support  of  his  asylum  claim,  which
    included an original copy of a letter from Hizb-e-Islami,  an  original
    copy of a membership card for MA, son of MO, and  nine  photographs  of
    the appellant's (claimed) father amongst other men.

 8. The judge reminded herself that, in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed,  the
    decision maker should consider whether a  document  was  one  on  which
    reliance should properly be placed after looking at all the evidence in
    the round.

 9. The judge discussed the documents at paragraphs [41] to [51], and  made
    the following statement at paragraph [52]:

         "For  the  reasons  given,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  not
         substantiated his claim to the lower standard  of  proof  that  his
         father is  an  active  commander  of  the  Hizb-e-Islami  Gulbadeen
         Hikmatyaar Group and  that  he  wants  to  take  the  appellant  to
         Afghanistan to join them as a fighter"

10. The judge then went on to address the topic of  revenge  killings.   At
    paragraph [54], the judge said that  whilst  living  in  Pakistan,  the
    appellant had attended school up to year 10 and thereafter he  attended
    college for two years before completing his studies in  2011.   He  had
    not given an account of any incidents or attacks suffered by him  which
    amounted to persecution.  He had not stated his  father  had  tried  to
    take him to Afghanistan but had said when he last saw his  father  some
    three to four years ago, his father stated that the next time he  would
    take him.  Since the appellant last saw his father in  June/July  2012,
    and the appellant completed his studies in  2011,  the  fact  that  his
    father did not force the appellant to go with him  to  Afghanistan  was
    inconsistent with his claim that his father was insistent on taking him
    to Afghanistan to fight with the Hizb-e-Islami.  The  appellant's  fear
    was based on speculation.

11. At paragraph [56], the judge said in response to a question as  to  how
    he  would  be  associated  with  his  father  if  he  is  returned   to
    Afghanistan, the appellant stated that this would  be  known  from  his
    name on all his  documents.   But  the  name  on  all  the  appellant's
    documents was stated in full, including his family  name,  whereas  his
    father's name was not stated in full on the letter  from  Hizb-e-Islami
    or the membership card.  Earlier, at  paragraph  [49],  the  judge  had
    drawn attention to the fact that the letter and membership card did not
    refer to the  appellant's  father's  family,  whereas  the  appellant's
    passport and his certificates of education all quoted the  family  name
    of K.

12. Finally, the judge moved on to the third specific topic raised  in  the
    refusal letter, which was Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's delay in claiming  asylum,  together  with  the  misleading
    information provided in  his  student  visa  application,  damaged  his
    credibility under Section 8.  Earlier, at paragraph [51], the judge had
    commented on the  information  given  by  the  appellant  when  he  was
    interviewed for his student visa.  According to the  interview  record,
    he had told the interviewing officer that his father was paying for his
    course of study in the UK, and when asked what his  father  did  for  a
    living, the appellant replied that he was a cloth merchant.  The  judge
    held at paragraph [51] that the fact that  the  appellant  by  his  own
    admission was dishonest  in  his  Visa  Application  Form  damaged  his
    credibility  because  he  had  intentionally  misled  the   immigration
    authorities.

13. On the issue of risk on return, the judge  made  reference  to  Horvath
    [2000] UKHL 37 and to RQ (Afghan National Army,  Hizb-i-Islami,  risk).
    The judge found that the appellant was  not  "wanted"  by  the  Hizb-e-
    Islami or the Taliban, and so it was both safe and reasonable  for  him
    to relocate to Kabul.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out,  Ms  Lagunju  developed  the  arguments  raised  in  the   renewed
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In  reply,
    Mr Tufan took the same line as that taken  by  his  colleague  Mr  Tony
    Melvin in a Rule 24 response dated 27 April 2016.  If the determination
    was read as a whole, it was clear that the judge had considered all the
    evidence including the very old documents produced,  the  student  visa
    application, the fact that the appellant had not  been  in  Afghanistan
    since he was a small child and the lack of any witness statement as  to
    how the documents arrived in the UK, and she had made findings  on  all
    these pieces of evidence.

Discussion

15. Ms Lagunju's core submission is that the judge did  not  make  a  clear
    finding on an essential question, which  was  whether  the  appellant's
    father  was  an  active  commander  in  the   Hizb-e-Islami   Gulbadeen
    Hikmatyaar Group.  I consider the judge made a clear  finding  on  this
    question at paragraph [52].   The  issue  is  whether  the  finding  is
    adequately reasoned.

16. The judge has made herself vulnerable to an error of law  challenge  by
    making two crucial findings of fact at paragraph [52]  before  she  has
    overtly considered all the evidence bearing on them, in particular  the
    evidence which she goes on to address in the context  of  a  discussion
    about revenge killings and the application of Section  8  of  the  2004
    Act.  However, since this further discussion elucidates further reasons
    for disbelieving the core claim,  the  ultimate  outcome  is  that  the
    findings at paragraph [52] are reinforced, rather than undermined.

17. Looking back at the reasoning which preceded the finding  at  paragraph
    [52], it is undoubtedly the case that some of the judge's findings were
    supportive of the case that the documents were  prima  facie  reliable,
    and thus supportive of the claim that the appellant's father had been a
    member of the group in the province of Kapisa in 1982, (as evidenced by
    a membership card dated [ ] 1982) and that he had been promoted to  the
    rank of major general on [ ] 1993 as a result of his  honest  and  hard
    work during the struggle against the Russian and communist regime.  The
    judge found that the appellant had given a plausible explanation as  to
    why these documents were not in his father's possession, because  given
    the age of the documents, it was reasonable to infer that his father no
    longer needed them.  The judge also  gave  no  adverse  weight  to  the
    discrepancy between the date on the membership card (1982) and the date
    on the letter confirming the promotion (1993).

18. Nonetheless, it was open to the judge to find, for  the  reasons  which
    she gave in paragraphs  [46]  to  [51],  that  these  documents,  taken
    together with other documents, did not reliably establish, even to  the
    lower standard of proof, that the appellant's father is (present tense)
    an active commander in the group who wants to  take  the  appellant  to
    Afghanistan to join the group as a fighter.

19. The first reason given is that a witness statement from the appellant's
    mother, her cousin, and the person who delivered the documents  to  the
    appellant, would have added weight to the reliability of the documents.
     The second reason is that the appellant had last seen his father about
    four years ago, and had not explained why he was not  able  to  produce
    more up-to-date photographs showing him with his father (for example in
    or about 2008).  The photographs which he had produced were old, and it
    was difficult to be certain that the boy in  the  photographs  was  the
    appellant or that the man in the  photographs  was  the  same  man  who
    appeared in other photographs.  He had  not  produced  any  documentary
    evidence to substantiate his claim that the photograph of the person on
    the membership card was a photograph of his father.

20. Thirdly, the nine photographs which  the  appellant  submitted  showing
    various men in different unknown locations holding weapons did not show
    that his father was amongst them, or that he was a member of a militant
    group.  The judge referred to background evidence and  the  Country  of
    Origin Information Report for Afghanistan  dated  15  January  2013  at
    paragraph 12.38.  This stated that the massive inflow of weapons during
    nearly three decades of continuous conflict had left Afghanistan  awash
    with small arms, and the estimates suggested that every adult  male  in
    rural areas possessed or had access to a weapon.

21. Fourthly, the judge noted the letter and membership card did not  refer
    to the appellant's father's family, whereas  the  appellant's  passport
    and his certificates of education all quoted the family name of K.

22. Fifthly, the appellant  relied  on  a  copy  of  the  Daily  (Shahadat)
    newspaper dated 13 September 2012, which had been downloaded  from  the
    internet, as containing a photograph of his father attending a  funeral
    or memorial service at which various named people had given speeches in
    the grieving commemoration of the late Dr Hanif, the  former  chief  of
    the military committee of the Hizb-e-Islami.  It is not  clear  whether
    Dr Hanif was part of the breakaway Hikmatyaar faction,  and  the  point
    made by the judge was that his father was  not  named  in  the  caption
    accompanying the photographs and so it was difficult to  be  sure  that
    the person indicated in the various  photographs  was  the  appellant's
    father as claimed by the appellant.

23. Finally, at paragraph [51] the judge referred to what the appellant had
    said in his interview when applying for a student visa.

24. I consider that  cumulatively  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    reaching the conclusions stated in paragraph [52], but insofar  as  she
    had not at that stage considered  all  the  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant in the round, there was no prejudice to the appellant as  the
    remaining pieces of  evidence  that  she  went  on  to  consider  after
    paragraph [52] only served to reinforce the findings made at  paragraph
    [52].  So there was a lawful basis upon which the judge  could  proceed
    to consider future risk, internal flight and sufficiency of protection,
    and no error of law is made out.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 9th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
