
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06136/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Stoke                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 July 2015                       |On 10 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                         vijayarasa kanapathepillai
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 10 March  1965.  He  arrived
in the United Kingdom on 28 April 2013 and claimed asylum on  20  May  2013.
His claim was refused on 13 June 2013 and a decision was made to remove  him
to Sri Lanka.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 13 September 2013 and  was  dismissed  by  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Coates in a determination issued on 24  September  2013.
Following a grant of permission to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal  Judge
Hanson upheld that decision in  a  determination  promulgated  on  13  March
2014. However on 20 February 2015 the Court of Appeal ordered,  by  consent,
that UTJ Hanson's decision be quashed and the case  remitted  to  the  Upper
Tribunal. Thus the appeal came before me.

The relevant error of law identified by the Court of Appeal  concerned  four
documents which had been before  FTTJ  Coates,  consisting  of  magistrates'
court records from Sri Lanka setting out court proceedings from 24 May  2002
to 25 March 2013, a magistrates' court  summons  dated  24  March  2002,  an
arrest warrant dated 18 February 2013 and an open arrest  warrant  dated  25
March 2013. The documents were said by  the  appellant  to  corroborate  his
account and to demonstrate that he remained of adverse interest to  the  Sri
Lankan authorities and at risk on return to Sri Lanka. The Court  of  Appeal
found that UTJ Hanson had erred by concluding that there  was  no  error  in
FTTJ's Coates' consideration of the documents.

At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety accepted that  the  Court  of  Appeal's
decision, whilst stating that the UTJ had erred in law, was also in  fact  a
statement that the FTTJ had erred in law in his failure properly to  address
the documentary evidence. He therefore conceded that FTTJ  Coates'  decision
had to be set aside. Accordingly I set aside Judge Coates' decision.

It was noted that directions issued by the Upper Tribunal  on  9  June  2015
indicated that in the event of the First-tier Tribunal's decision being  set
aside, the matter could proceed to  a  re-hearing  immediately.  However  Mr
McVeety was in some difficulty in that he had not  been  provided  with  all
relevant papers and, furthermore, indicated the  respondent's  intention  to
seek verification of the documents. Ms Harris was also  in  some  difficulty
given my indication  of  apparent  discrepancies  in  the  documentation.  I
pointed out to her that the documents referred to proceedings instigated  in
2002 when the appellant was stated to have been arrested  and  detained  and
placed on reporting conditions, whereas he had never  claimed,  in  his  own
account, to have been arrested at that time  and  had  referred  only  to  a
period of detention in 1992. In those  circumstances,  and  given  also  the
lack of adequate court time to  hear  the  case  de  novo,  as  was  plainly
required, all parties agreed that the appropriate course would  be  for  the
matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with  afresh,  pursuant  to
section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge Coates.


Signed:
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:
