
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06264/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Sent         |
|On 19th June 2014                               |On 28th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Sara Hagose
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Khan of Counsel instructed by Blavo & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, HOPO

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Kelly made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 17 March 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant made a claim for asylum on 29th May  2013  on  the  basis
    that she was a citizen of Eritrea and  a  Pentecostal  Christian.   The
    Secretary of State refused the application on 21st June 2013  rejecting
    the Appellant's account in its entirety.

 3. The Respondent did not accept that she was a national  of  Eritrea.  It
    was believed that she was a national of Ethiopia.

 4. The judge agreed with the Secretary of State  finding  the  Appellant's
    evidence to be wholly implausible.  He concluded that she had failed to
    adduce credible evidence to  substantiate  that  she  was  an  Eritrean
    national or that she had resided  in  Eritrea  or  that  she  held  any
    genuine religious conviction or  that  she  had  experienced  religious
    persecution  in  the  past  and  rejected  her  account  of  having   a
    relationship with a Mr Weldmaryam.

 5.  He  recorded  that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  to  disprove   the
    Respondent's assertion that she was an Ethiopian national  and  it  was
    for the Respondent to adduce credible evidence that she was.  He wrote

         "The sole reason why the Respondent  appears  to  assert  that  the
         Appellant is an Ethiopian national is  the  fact  that  she  speaks
         Amharic and does not speak Tigrinya.  However as Amharic is  not  a
         language that is spoken exclusively in Ethiopia I find this  to  be
         an insufficient basis for discharging the  evidential  burden  that
         rests upon the Appellant in relation to this discrete issue."

 6. He recorded that the evidence from the Ethiopian Embassy neither proved
    nor disproved  the  Respondent's  claim  that  she  was  a  citizen  of
    Ethiopia.

 7. He said that he was not satisfied that the Appellant had a well-founded
    fear of persecution in either country and dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 8. The Appellant did not seek to challenge any of the credibility findings
    in the determination.  However it was submitted that Judge Kelly  erred
    in law in failing to consider the Appellant's position as  a  stateless
    person.  The grounds state:

         "Judge Kelly made the finding that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
         adduce any credible evidence that she was an Eritrean  national  or
         had ever resided in Eritrea.  Judge Kelly further  made  a  finding
         that the Respondent had not discharged the evidential burden placed
         upon her to show the Appellant is  an  Ethiopian  national.   Judge
         Kelly then jumps to the conclusion that the Appellant would not  be
         at risk in either country.  The two conclusions do not  necessarily
         follow.  Judge Kelly's own findings show that the Appellant has  no
         nationality and he should have considered the Appellant's  position
         as a stateless person."

 9. Permission to appeal was granted for the reasons stated in the  grounds
    by Designated Judge Appleyard on 22nd April 2014.

10. Miss Khan  relied  on  her  grounds  and  Mrs  Pettersen  defended  the
    determination.

Findings and Conclusions

11. The grounds  are  misconceived.   The  judge  did  not  find  that  the
    Appellant was stateless as asserted.  He did what he  was  required  to
    do, namely to assess whether the Appellant had made out her claim to be
    at risk on return to Eritrea.  Since she had never asserted a  risk  in
    Ethiopia he was perfectly entitled to conclude that she did not have  a
    well-founded fear of persecution there either.

12. His comment that the Respondent had not discharged the burden of  proof
    to  show  that  the  Appellant  was  Ethiopian  is  not  a  finding  of
    statelessness.  It is irrelevant to the issues under appeal.  The judge
    was not concerned with the practicalities of removal  but  whether  the
    Appellant had made out her claim to be at risk on return to Eritrea.

13. There is no challenge to his findings that she was not.

Decision

14. The judge's decision stands.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

