
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06765/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th September 2015                |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    m s a
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Saleem of Malik & Malik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a male  Afghan  citizen  born  10th  August  1988  who
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hands
    promulgated on 5th November 2014.

 2. The Appellant claimed asylum on 21st January 2014, following his arrest
    by the police, having been in the United Kingdom since 2006.  His claim
    was based on the fact that he is a Sikh.

 3. The Respondent refused  the  application  on  1st  September  2014  not
    accepting that the Appellant had given a credible account.

 4. The appeal was heard by Judge Hands (the judge) on  13th  October  2014
    and dismissed on all grounds, the judge concluding at paragraph  24  of
    her decision;

         "24. Based on the facts as I have found them at paragraphs 19 to 22
             above, the inconsistencies in the Appellant's recollection  of
             events and the illogicality of his entire claim  leads  me  to
             find that he is not a credible witness and that his account of
             events cannot be relied upon.  I find that he  has  fabricated
             the story in order to substantiate  his  erroneous  claim  for
             asylum and that he has in fact travelled to the United Kingdom
             for economic reasons.  He was  successful  in  remaining  here
             undetected for eight years before coming to the  attention  of
             the police and it was only at this stage  he  claimed  asylum.
             The Appellant has indicated throughout his  evidence  that  he
             constantly took the advice of friends  and  I  find  that  his
             claim has been concocted by him, and possibly his friends  and
             the witness he called to give evidence before me in  order  to
             create an asylum claim where none exists."

 5. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In summary it was contended that the judge  had  erred  by  failing  to
    consider DSG and Others (Afghan Sikhs: departure from  CG)  Afghanistan
    [2013] UKUT 00148 (IAC).  This  decision  specifically  considered  the
    appropriateness of departing from the country guidance in SL and Others
    (returning Sikhs and Hindus) Afghanistan CG [2005] UKIAT 00137.  It was
    submitted that the Upper Tribunal in DSG upheld the conclusions of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which were that Sikhs are  generally  at  risk  in
    Afghanistan.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Macdonald in the following terms;

         "The judge found that the Appellant was not a credible witness  for
         clear reasons given and referred to country guidance  in  paragraph
         26.  It is not clear if the judge was referred to the reported case
         of DSG and if not, she could not be expected to rehearse its terms.



         Nevertheless given the well-known position of Sikhs in  Afghanistan
         it is arguable that the judge should have referred to  the  country
         guideline case in some depth and that not to do so and address  the
         present background material in more detail was an arguable error in
         law.  On this basis permission to appeal is granted."

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  contending  in  summary  that  the  judge  had  directed  herself
    appropriately, and provided  sound  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    Appellant had not given a credible account.

 8. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.



Submissions

 9. Mr Saleem relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal, pointing out that the judge  had  not  considered
    either SL or DSG and that new country guidance in relation to Sikhs  in
    Afghanistan was awaited from the Upper Tribunal,  following  a  hearing
    that had taken place in March 2014.  Mr Saleem submitted that the judge
    had failed to consider the Appellant's account  in  the  light  of  the
    objective evidence, and specifically in light of the evidence  referred
    to in DSG.

10. Mr McVeety relied upon the rule 24 response, though  he  accepted  that
    the judge had not referred to DSG, and there was  no  consideration  of
    the objective evidence that had been discussed in DSG.

11. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

12. The judge did summarise some of the background material that was before
    her in paragraph 12, but did not make any reference to  DSG,  which  is
    not a country guidance decision.

13. However reliance was placed upon DSG by the Appellant,  and  there  was
    extensive reference to that case in the skeleton argument  produced  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant.   The  skeleton  argument  at  paragraph  7
    reproduces paragraphs 9-13 and 24-26 of DSG.

14. Reliance was placed upon this case because the Upper Tribunal found  in
    DSG that the First-tier Tribunal had not erred in law in departing from
    the country guidance that had been given in SL.  The guidance in SL was
    summarised stating that there was no evidence to support the claim that
    Afghan Sikh and Hindu  minorities  in  Afghanistan  are  persecuted  or
    treated in breach of Article 3,  but  following  UNHCR  Guidance  their
    status as Afghan Sikhs and Hindus is a factor to be taken into  account
    in assessing individual claims on a case-by-case basis.

15. The Upper Tribunal in DSG recorded the submissions made  on  behalf  of
    the Afghan Sikhs in paragraph 18 which is set out below;

         "18. As to whether all Afghan Sikhs were  at  risk  it  had  to  be
             accepted that potentially there might be  rare  exceptions  to
             the general position on risk, but it could  properly  be  said
             that the generality of Afghan Sikhs and Hindus were at risk on
             return."

16. The Upper Tribunal found no error of law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and found that departure from the existing country guidance in
    SL was justified and stated, inter alia, in paragraph 25;

         "25. In the circumstances it seems to us entirely  clear  that  the
             judge was entitled to depart from the country guidance in this
             case.  Inevitably the remaining numbers of Sikhs and Hindus in
             Afghanistan must be to some extent a  matter  of  speculation,
             but it is clear if one looks at the evidence  as  a  whole  in
             such documents as Dr Ballard's report, Dr Giustozzi's  report,
             the earlier UNHCR report and a more  recent  UNHCR  report  of
             July 2012 handed up by Mr Bazini that  the  remaining  numbers
             are  in  the  region  of  a  thousand  or  two.   Indeed   the
             Respondent's Operational Guidance Note on Afghanistan of April
             2012 states at paragraph 3.9.2 that  there  are  an  estimated
             2,200  Sikhs  and  Hindus  remaining  in  Afghanistan.   This,
             together with the evidence set out in Dr  Giustozzi's  and  Dr
             Ballard's reports, clearly justified the  judge  in  departing
             from the existing country guidance.

         26.  This has clear implications for other cases involving  claimed
             risk on return to Afghanistan for  Hindus  or  Sikhs,  in  the
             period between now and such time as further  country  guidance
             on the subject can be issued."

17. No further country guidance has been issued since DSG was published.

18. Because extensive reliance was placed upon DSG by  the  Appellant,  and
    the judge failed to make any reference to it, I find that this  amounts
    to a material error of law.   The  judge  should  have  considered  the
    conclusions reached by the Upper Tribunal in DSG, and made findings  as
    to whether those conclusions were relevant in this appeal.  Failure  to
    make those findings is a failure to take into account a material  issue
    and means that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  must  be  set
    aside.

19. I have decided that the failure to consider DSG means that the findings
    of fact and credibility findings made  by  the  judge  are  unsafe  and
    therefore no findings are preserved.

20. Both representatives agreed that if an error of law was  found  and  no
    findings preserved, it would  be  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

21. Paragraph 7.2 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th
    September 2012 states;

         '7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make a decision, instead of remitting the  case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be re-made is such that, having regard to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'

22. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(b) are met, in  that  this
    appeal requires extensive judicial fact-finding.

23. The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  determined
    afresh with no findings of fact preserved.

24. The parties will be advised of the date of hearing in  due  course  and
    the appeal is to be heard by a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
    Judge Hands.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal  made  an  anonymity  direction.   I  continue  that
direction pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008.


Signed   Date: 15th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Upper Tribunal makes no fee award.  This must be decided by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.


Signed   Date: 15th September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
