
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06461/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th February 2016                 |On 15th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                    [P T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Denholm of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a Sri Lankan national who was born on [ ] 1973.

2.   The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal with  permission  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Bruce who, on 5 October 2015, thought it  arguable  that
    the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) had failed  to  consider  adequately  the
    cumulative risk to the appellant of forced return to Sri Lanka.

Background

3.   The appellant first came to the UK on 29 September 2013 using a  German
    passport which he claimed belonged to him.  He claimed  asylum  on  the
    first day.  A screening interview was conducted on 18 November 2013 but
    following a full interview on 12 March 2015 the appellant's application
    for asylum was refused.

4.   The appellant appealed the refusal to the FTT on the  grounds  that  in
    her decision dated 24 March 2015 the respondent had  failed  adequately
    to consider the Sri Lankan government's likely pursuit of  Tamils  such
    as the appellant who would be at real risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm
    requiring international protection if he were returned  to  Sri  Lanka.
    The appellant claims to have been tortured and  when  looked  at  as  a
    whole the appellant's previous role in the LTTE would give rise to  the
    significant risk identified.

5.   The FTT heard the appellant's appeal on 21 July 2015 and Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Birk (the Immigration Judge) decided to dismiss the
    appeal on 24 July 2015.  He also dismissed the  claim  to  humanitarian
    protection and for protection under the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights (ECHR).

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

6.   The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal  following  service  of  a
    notice of appeal dated 9 September 2015.  In his grounds the  appellant
    claimed that the Immigration Judge had accepted the appellant had  been
    involved in activities against the Sri Lanka government,  for  example,
    he had a Facebook page showing himself at a demonstration  against  the
    president of Sri Lanka.   The  Immigration  Judge  was  criticised  for
    reaching the view that because the appellant had not  been  visited  at
    home since September 2013 this meant that the appellant was  not  on  a
    "stop list".  The appellant's sur place activities were  sufficient  to
    bring him to the attention of the authorities.

7.   Standard directions were sent out indicating that  the  Upper  Tribunal
    would not receive new evidence which was not before the FTT  unless  it
    was served no later than 21 days prior to the hearing indicating why it
    was not produced below.

8.   The respondent  issued  a  response  under  Rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, indicating that  the  respondent
    considered  the  decision  of  the  FTT  to  be   "appropriate".    The
    Immigration Judge had made appropriate  findings  including  a  finding
    that there was no warrant or court order against the appellant.   There
    was no reason for overturning the decision which contained no  material
    errors of law.

9.   At the appeal hearing submissions were made  by  both  representatives.
    The appellant's representative, Mr Denholm, said that  the  Immigration
    Judge had misunderstood or misapplied the test in the case of GJ.   The
    grounds relied on the appellant's activities since he arrived in the UK
    as well as the fact that the appellant  had  been  detained  for  anti-
    government activities in the past and had failed  to  report/absconded.
    These were risk factors for the purposes of the country  guidance  case
    law.

10.  The appellant also argued that most of his account  had  been  accepted
    and 339K of the Immigration Rules found that the fact that a person had
    been subject to past persecution or serious harm or had received direct
    threats of such persecution or harm would  be  regarded  as  a  serious
    indication of a "well-founded fear of persecution" or the real risk  of
    suffering harm in the future.

11.  I was then taken to a number of  passages  in  the  decision.   It  was
    submitted that paragraphs 16 onwards found the appellant's  account  to
    be broadly  credible.   Paragraph  18  of  the  decision  accepted  the
    appellant's account of bribing his way out of  a  camp.   Paragraph  20
    noted the findings of scarring on the appellant from intentional  burns
    and other signs of torture.  Paragraph 23 contains a finding  that  the
    appellant was detained and questioned in 2013 for assisting the LTTE in
    2007.  Paragraph 25 contained  a  finding  that  the  appellant  had  a
    Facebook page making reference to attending a demonstration against the
    Sri  Lankan  president  Mr  Srisena.   Paragraph  28  found  that   the
    photographic evidence produced showed that the appellant  had  attended
    at least one demonstration since coming to the UK.

12.  I was then referred to  GJ.   Although  the  individuals  targeted  are
    those perceived to be a threat to  the  integrity  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    state, past harm was a serious indication of that.  I was also referred
    to a case called Demirkaya [1999] 0144.  Paragraph 20 of that  decision
    indicates that the past ill-treatment of the appellant had been a  very
    material factor  in  deciding  the  "well-foundedness"  of  the  claim.
    Unless the claim was manifestly  ill-founded  it  ought  to  have  been
    accepted by the respondent and by the Immigration Judge.  The  payments
    of bribes were  highly  relevant  factors  along  with  the  sur  place
    activities in the UK.  The judge  had  been  wrong  to  find  that  the
    appellant was not on a "stop list".  The fact that  the  appellant  had
    not been "there" when the authorities had visited his home did not mean
    he was not on a stop list.  I was also referred to paragraph 13 of  the
    renewed grounds which state that the appellant would  be  targeted  for
    his sur place activities if not his activities in Sri Lanka.

13.  I  then  heard  from  the  respondent,  who  argued  that  the  grounds
    summarised by Mr Denholm were mere  disagreements  with  the  findings.
    The Immigration Judge had given full consideration to the  GJ  decision
    but rejected the appellant's account  that  he  would  be  at  risk  on
    return.  Mere Tamil ethnicity was not enough.  There was no court order
    against the appellant and no evidence of any visits by any authorities.
     The possibility of interference or interest from the  authorities  was
    not enough.  The determination of the Immigration Judge  accepted  that
    the appellant had been of interest but that did not mean  he  would  be
    regarded as a threat.  Paragraph  29  of  the  decision  made  a  clear
    finding that the appellant was unlikely to be detained on return.   The
    Immigration Judge fully engaged with the GJ decision but following  his
    findings it followed that the  appeal  should  be  and  was  correctly,
    dismissed.

14.  By way of reply Mr  Denholm  reiterated  a  number  of  points  he  had
    already made and submitted that his client would be at  risk  from  his
    past activities.

15.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law in the decision of the FTT and if  so  what
    steps should be taken to rectify this.

Discussion

16.  The Immigration Judge reached her decision on 24 July 2015 and  it  was
    promulgated on 30 July 2015.  There were  two  subsequent  applications
    for permission to appeal, the second  of  which  was  successful.   The
    respondent opposes the appeal on the grounds that the Immigration Judge
    reached appropriate findings having ascertained  that  the  appellant's
    profile was insufficient to pose a threat to the security  of  the  Sri
    Lankan state.

17.  The grounds allege that the Immigration Judge misapplied  the  case  of
    GJ and failed to appreciate the full extent of the  risk  factors.   In
    granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce said that  the
    cumulative effect of the favourable findings made  by  the  Immigration
    Judge may have been enough to show that the appellant did in fact  have
    a significant role in Tamil separatism which may lead  to  a  different
    result if these facts are properly analysed.

18.  As well as giving an  account  which  was  partially  accepted  by  the
    Immigration Judge it is noteworthy that the  appellant's  story  is  to
    some extent corroborated by scars found on him which were found  to  be
    consistent with the  account  he  had  given.   The  Immigration  Judge
    accepted that he had been released from custody following  the  payment
    of a bribe and that following his release from custody there  had  been
    at least one visit to his house in  September  2013.   The  Immigration
    Judge found that the appellant may be on a watch list  and  this  meant
    that he might be subject to face recognition technology.  However,  the
    Immigration Judge's overall conclusion was that the  authorities  would
    not trouble with the appellant to any greater extent than that they may
    put him on a watch list.  He would be unlikely to be  detained  in  the
    airport and it was not likely, in the Immigration  Judge's  view,  that
    the appellant would be regarded as a person who had a significant  role
    in Tamil separatism.

19.  I have considered very carefully  the  submissions  made  and  consider
    this case to be finely balanced.  I would highlight some key points  in
    the Immigration Judge's decision:

    (1)   that there was no court order  or  warrant  for  the  appellant's
         future arrest;

    (2)  that the authorities did not discover any weapons in the box  that
         the appellant was required to carry - any other conclusion, as  the
         Immigration Judge pointed out, would be "speculative";

    (3)  the authorities had made only one visit to the appellant and  that
         was more than two years ago;

    (4)  it was also speculative to think that the authorities  would  have
         taken any further interest in the appellant following the one visit
         referred to;

    (5)  the Immigration Judge found significant discrepancies as to  dates
         and did not accept all the visits referred to;

    (6)  whilst the appellant may be monitored in the future he  would  not
         be likely to be subject to arrest, detention or ill-treatment.

Conclusions

20.  It is only if the Upper Tribunal were to find a material error  of  law
    in the decision of the FTT that it would be able to interfere with  it.
    The Immigration Judge made careful and comprehensive fact-findings  and
    considered the risk factors identified by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    case of GJ.  She  also  fully  considered  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities in paragraphs 28 and 29 of her decision. These findings were
    open to the Immigration Judge who had the opportunity to fully evaluate
    the evidence. She reached clear conclusions which  cannot  properly  be
    the subject of attack in this Tribunal.  It would be fair  to  describe
    the appellant as a person of no more  than  "passing  interest"  rather
    than a threat to the unitary state.  As paragraph 9 of the head note of
    GJ makes clear, "a person whose name appears on a 'watch' list  is  not
    reasonably likely to be detained but will be monitored".

21.  In the circumstances, the decision of the  FTT  does  not  contain  any
    material error of law such as would justify interfering with it.

Notice of Decision

I find no material error of law in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.


This appeal is therefore dismissed.  The  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
asylum/human rights protection and to  remove  the  appellant  from  the  UK
stands.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FTT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
