
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
AA/06221/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 March 2018                           |On 16 April 2018                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                             MR MD KHALED AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Frantzis, counsel instructed by Kabir Ahmed
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  date  of  birth  10  November
    1989, appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 1  April  2015,
    to refuse an asylum claim.  The matter came before First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge L Mensah (the Judge) who, on 4 August 2017, dismissed the  appeal
    on all grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was given on 19 December 2017 and  the  Respondent
    made a Rule 24 response on 17 January 2018.  In  giving  permission  to
    appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on 19 December 2017 said:

         "2.  I give  permission  on  each  ground  but  I  am  particularly
             concerned that the Judge may have given an unlawful reason for
             disregarding the psychiatric evidence and particularly without
             inviting the appellant's representative  to  make  submissions
             directed to difficulty.


         3.   That said, the appellant will have to show that any error  was
             material and his representatives must  be  astute  to  address
             that point".


3.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  was  represented  by
    counsel, Mr Ell, who did not  settle  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    Tribunal, which was done by a solicitor called A  Parikh  of  Schneider
    Goldstein Immigration Law.  Ms Frantzis and Mr McVeety  make  at  least
    common cause to this extent that there is nothing to suggest  that  the
    evidence,  whatever  the  Judge's  doubts,  particularly  the   medical
    evidence provided concerning the Appellant's  psychiatric  health,  had
    not been challenged either as to the veracity of the report or  to  its
    contents or to the extent to which it might have been said.  The  Judge
    was concerned that the interpreter for the  purposes  of  both  medical
    assessments had been  Mr  Reaz  Ali,  a  UK  national  related  to  the
    Appellant. Ther judge found Mr Reaz Ali an unreliable witness  and  for
    that reason was extremely concerned that the interpreting given to  the
    psychiatrist, Dr Saima Latif, which  might  equally  be  unreliable  in
    terms of the history  that  the  doctor  was  given.   Of  course,  the
    assessment that the doctor makes is based in part upon the history  but
    also the doctor's own analysis and so  to  that  extent  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that Dr Latif had either misunderstood this  matter
    in terms of the way the case was being put, as translated  by  Mr  Ali,
    either at the first assessment made in January 2015 or when the  second
    assessment was made in October 2016.

4.   Mr  McVeety  essentially  argued  that  the  Judge  made  a  number  of
    unchallenged sustainable and damning criticisms of the Appellant and Mr
    Ali's credibility and that even if the Judge had not expressed  herself
    in the way she did, the decision would not in  all  likelihood  be  any
    different were another Tribunal to have considered this matter.

5.   The basis of the Appellant's claim was  that  his  sexuality,  being  a
    homosexual and that he faced a real risk  of  proscribed  ill-treatment
    and persecution both from the authorities and society on  a  return  to
    Bangladesh.  It was also the Appellant's case that he had at least been
    able to live his life without fear in the United Kingdom  based  around
    his claimed sexuality. It was, as I understand it, the Appellant's case
    that were he to be returned to  Bangladesh  that  his  sexuality  would
    again present a risk because  he  would  not  effectively  be  able  to
    conceal it and thus avoid  discrimination,  persecution,  ill-treatment
    and face the reality of no sufficiency of protection to which he  could
    have recourse nor would internal relocation be an option.

6.   It is sufficient to say the reasoning of Judge Mensah is  very  limited
    in relation to the analysis of the claimed sexuality other than by  way
    of criticising, no  doubt  in  many  respects  for  good  reasons,  the
    credibility of the Appellant, Mr Ali and the second report particularly
    of Dr Saima Latif.  It is trite law to  say  that  the  parties  to  an
    appeal are entitled to sufficient and adequate reasons  why  the  claim
    has failed.  The thrust of the  medical  evidence  was  essentially  to
    buttress  the  claims  that  the  Appellant  had  been  ill-treated  in
    Bangladesh because of his sexuality. Dr Saima  refers  to  an  analysis
    that she makes as to PTSD and the effects of depression  and  the  like
    associated with that condition.  The first report is not  substantively
    criticised in any way by the Judge.  The second report  is  essentially
    rejected because the doctor's analysis  was  partly  reliant  upon  the
    translation done by  Mr  Reaz  Ali  whose  credibility  the  Judge  had
    rejected.

7.   It is, at a distance, difficult to know on what basis the  Judge  truly
    assessed this  matter  for  the  reasoning  is  extremely  limited  for
    rejecting the claimed sexuality, independent of the  Judge's  disbelief
    of the Appellant's claim for other reasons.  It  is  true  to  say  the
    Appellant has a poor immigration history but  ultimately  that  is  not
    determinative of the issue. Looking at the evidence  in  the  round,  I
    find that whilst there are damning findings of fact, the matter was not
    addressed in the round and the assessment of the medical  evidence  may
    make a difference to that overall assessment.  It is of course trite to
    say that the evidence is looked at in the round and  in  the  light  of
    such cases as Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367. The impression given by  the
    Judge was that the rejection of medical evidence was a  consequence  of
    the adverse taken upon the Appellant and Mr Ali: Therefore the  medical
    evidence was not considered as a part of the whole.  For these  reasons
    I am satisfied that the original Tribunal made a material error of  law
    and the matter needs to  be  remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  No
    findings of fact to stand.

DECISION

    8. The appeal will be allowed to that extent that  the  matter  will  be
       returned to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 28 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
