
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06242/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                              Mr Richard Nifah
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, Counsel instructed via Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the  Appellant  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Munonyedi dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision of 11 August 2014 in which the
    Respondent dismissed the Appellant's claim for asylum.

2.   The Appellant is a national of Ghana who, it is accepted,  was  in  the
    armed forces from around 1996 until 2002, from which point in  time  he
    has been present in the United Kingdom.  He attended an ASU appointment
    at Lunar House on 30 May 2014.  His screening interview was on  9  June
    2014 and the full SEF interview on 30 July.  I will refer in due course
    to other applications that the Appellant has made to the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant claimed asylum on the  grounds  that  he  feared  serious
    harm in Ghana in the form prolonged military detention  as  an  alleged
    deserter from the army, and being killed.  It is appropriate to set out
    some of the evidence that the Appellant  relies  upon  to  support  his
    claim for asylum.

4.   The Appellant was an acknowledged  athlete.   It  is  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant was on military service for the  Ghanaian
    forces in the Middle East in 2001 and that he was due to participate in
    one or more athletics events in the United  Kingdom.   In  the  refusal
    letter there is some confusion as to whether he arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom first in August 2001 or in December 2001.  In  the  Appellant's
    witness statement of 14 September 2015 he says that he  first  came  to
    the UK on 26 August 2001 for the purpose of taking  part  in  a  cross-
    country race.  That event was delayed due to a security  alert  and  he
    went back to Lebanon.  He then returned back to the United  Kingdom  in
    December 2001 to participate in the same event.  It is my understanding
    from the Appellant's evidence  that  that  event  was  again  postponed
    although I have to say that that element of his account is not entirely
    clear.

5.    The  Appellant  relies  on  the  postponement  of  the  December  2001
    athletics event to explain what happened next.  He was, he says in  his
    evidence, initially given permission by the Ghanaian army to remain  in
    the United Kingdom for three weeks  to  participate  in  the  athletics
    event, but in the light  of  it  being  cancelled  he  applied  to  the
    Respondent in or around January 2002 for further leave to remain  as  a
    visitor.  During the process of that application  the  Respondent  lost
    his Ghanaian passport.  That is accepted, and  there  is  documentation
    that I have seen which establishes that the  Respondent  did  lose  his
    passport.

6.   I refer in particular to Annexes B1 and C1 of the  Respondent's  bundle
    being letters from the Respondent dated 8 March  2002  confirming  that
    the Appellant had submitted  his  passport  to  the  Respondent  on  13
    February 2002 and unfortunately the Home Office was  unable  to  locate
    the passport within the Directorate.  One such letter was addressed  to
    the Appellant; another of the same date, 8 March 2002, was addressed to
    the Office of the High Commission for Ghana saying that the above-named
    person, the Appellant, had submitted their passport to the Home  Office
    to vary their leave to remain:

         "We  have  been  advised  of  the  imminent  travel  needs  of  the
         applicant, who has been informed that their passport is not readily
         obtainable  within  the  Directorate  at  this  time,  despite   an
         extensive search having been undertaken.   The  applicant  has  now
         been advised to approach their national embassy/High Commission  in
         order  to  obtain  a  replacement  document  and   we,   therefore,
         respectfully  request  your  most  urgent  consideration   in   its
         subsequent issue."

7.   The Appellant made efforts through  the  Ghanaian  High  Commission  to
    obtain a replacement passport and indeed returned  to  Ghana  in  April
    2002.  The Appellant's account is that as a result of his return to his
    unit in Ghana being delayed, he was recorded as being  a  deserter,  or
    'AWOL'. He was aware of this even before his return to Ghana.

8.   He must, I anticipate, have expected at least  to  be  arrested  if  he
    knew at that time that he was being treated as a deserter and had  been
    marked as absent  without  leave.   However,  we  are  aware  that  the
    Appellant definitely did return to Ghana at that time; his presence  in
    the United Kingdom is known of in  March  2002  when  the  Respondent's
    letters of 8 March 2002 were written; and it is also recorded  that  in
    June 2002 he made a subsequent application in Ghana for entry clearance
    to return to the UK, such entry clearance being issued on 24 June 2002.
     So it is known that he was back in Ghana during that period.

9.   What the Appellant says in his witness statement at paragraphs 9 to  12
    is as follows:

         "9.  In April 2002 I managed to get  a  travel  document  from  the
             Ghanaian Embassy and went to Ghana.  When I went to report  to
             my unit 5th Battalion of Infantry I was  arrested  to  put  in
             jail as a deserter.  I protested my  innocence  and  with  the
             help of my friends in the force I was released on bail pending
             court martial.

         10.  I did not expect anything bad to happen  to  me  and  believed
             that I would be released from all charges.  Later I found  out
             that the army had added several other charges against  me  and
             Major Sampson [that is a reference to a Major  Sampson  Adjet,
             with whom the Appellant had had some dealings in 1997 or 1998]
             was behind the plot to send me to jail and discharge  me  from
             the force.

         11.  I spoke to my friends and associates in the army and found out
             Major Sampson was friendly with many higher  ranking  officers
             and politicians and if he wanted he would somehow send  me  to
             jail and get me discharged from the army.

         12.  The lawyer who was appointed by the army  to  defend  me  also
             failed to see me several times and my attempt to  get  another
             lawyer was refused by the  court  martial.   By  this  time  I
             realised that I would definitely go to  jail  and  decided  to
             leave the country."

10.  In her decision letter of 11 August  2014  the  Respondent  took  issue
    with the credibility of  the  Appellant's  account  for  the  following
    reasons.  It was said at paragraph 15 that if the  Appellant  had  been
    granted an extension to his leave from the army until  after  March  by
    the platoon leader then it was not consistent that the  platoon  leader
    would already have booked the Appellant as a  deserter  in  March.   At
    paragraph 17 it was observed that:

         "17. You claim that when you left Ghana on 31 July 2002  you  could
             not go through the airport because your life was in danger  so
             you went through the Ivory Coast border (SAI questions 24, 25,
             59).  However, your visa dated 26 June  2002  to  24  December
             2002 has been stamped and dated in Accra on 31 July 2002.

         18.  You have provided a document that you claim is an enquiry into
             your absence without leave.  It is a copy and not an original,
             the emblem is not visible and  the  document  is  dated  April
             2003.  When you were asked about this document in your SAI you
             said that it is a document that is not supposed to come out of
             the military because it is restricted but your friend  got  it
             for you (questions 59 to 61).  Due to this document not  being
             an original and having an indistinguishable emblem  no  weight
             will be placed on it in the consideration of your claim."

11.   Under  the  title  "general  credibility"  the  Respondent  made   the
    following observations:

         "25. In your SCR you claimed that your brother is dead.  However in
             your SAI you claim that you have contact with your brother who
             lives in Ghana.

         26.  In your SCR you were asked how many children you had  and  you
             said none.   However  in  an  interview  that  took  place  at
             Stevenage police station you claimed that you have a  daughter
             who is a British national who lives in Australia."

12.  The Respondent then considered under  a  heading  entitled  "Section  8
    credibility" at paragraph 28 the fact that the Appellant had failed  to
    claim asylum when he reached the airport in the UK upon returning here.



13.  It was also noted elsewhere in the refusal letter  that  the  Appellant
    had made applications for leave to remain in 2003  and  an  application
    for an EEA residence card in 2009 neither of which had been  successful
    but on neither occasion had the Appellant raised any claim to fear harm
    in Ghana. The application for asylum was refused.

14.  In hearing the Appellant's appeal the judge made a number  of  findings
    of fact as follows.  At paragraph 12 the  judge  held  the  Appellant's
    evidence to be contradictory, inconsistent and lacking in  credibility.
    At paragraph 13 he finds as follows:

         "13. The Appellant claims that when he returned to Ghana  in  April
             2002 he knew that he had been listed as a  deserter  and  that
             Major Adjet wanted revenge for his failure to support  him  in
             his claims in respect of a military campaign.  In my  view  if
             the Appellant genuinely feared Major Adjet and  believed  that
             he had power and access to important  and  influential  people
             who would persecute him or  wrongly  prosecute  him  then  the
             Appellant would have  claimed  asylum  whilst  in  the  United
             Kingdom in April 2002.

         14.  The Appellant claims that he was well-known in  Ghana  because
             of his sporting achievements.  In my view it would  have  been
             impossible for a  well-known  personality  to  arrive  at  the
             airport without attracting some form of  attention.   Had  the
             Appellant been listed as a deserter it is  inconceivable  that
             he would not have been detained or apprehended at the  airport
             by the authorities." (Emphasis added to para 13)

15.  At paragraph 17 the judge finds:

         "17. On the whole I found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  lacked
             credibility.  In my view had the Appellant been  listed  as  a
             deserter he would have had documents in  his  possession  that
             would have been issued to him."

    On the issue of documentation the judge also held as follows:

         "23. I have considered the supporting  documents  provided  by  the
             Appellant from his friend at the barracks.  I have applied the
             principles established in the case Tanveer  Ahmed  IAT  [2002]
             UKIAT 00439 and taking the evidence in the round, I am  forced
             to conclude that the documents were knowingly obtained for the
             purposes of supporting a false asylum claim."

16.  The Judge also held at paragraph 20:  "There  are  other  discrepancies
    set out in the refusal letter."  At paragraph 24 the judge referred  to
    the Section 8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act
    2004 issues of delay in making the claim for asylum and also stated  as
    follows at paragraph 25:

         "25. The Appellant has not in my view given any  evidence  of  ill-
             treatment by the  authorities  or  others  which  crosses  the
             threshold of severity so as to  constitute  persecution.   The
             test of persecution must be  kept  at  a  high  and  demanding
             level.  There should be strong and credible elements but  this
             is lacking in the Appellant's account."

    Overall the judge did not believe the Appellant's account and  rejected
    the claim for protection.

17.  In the judge's consideration of the Appellant's claim to remain in  the
    UK on human rights grounds, Article 8 ECHR, the judge directed  himself
    in law as to the relevant  authorities  and  had  regard  to  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and Sections 117A and B in  Part  5  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   He  held  that  the
    Appellant was not entitled to leave to remain on private  life  grounds
    under  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule  and  that  his   removal   was
    proportionate under Article 8.

18.  The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  in  grounds  of  appeal
    dated 2 December 2015 prepared by Mr Turner, who appears before me.  At
    paragraph 15 the well-known authority of Chiver [1994] UKIAT  10758  is
    relied upon in support of the  proposition,  I  believe,  that  certain
    elements of an Appellant's account may be found by a judge  to  not  be
    true but that does not necessarily affect the core reliability of their
    claim.

19.  At paragraph 16 the grounds  assert  that  the  Immigration  Judge  has
    proceeded under a mistake of fact by misunderstanding the chronology of
    the Appellant's account in that it was not correct to say that in April
    2002 the Appellant was aware both  that  he  was  wanted  for  being  a
    deserter and that Major Adjet wanted revenge against him.   Rather,  Mr
    Turner argues, the Appellant was only aware of the latter  issue  after
    he arrived back in Ghana and so the judge, in  finding  it  implausible
    that the Appellant did not claim asylum in April  2002  in  the  United
    Kingdom, proceeded under a material mistake of  fact  or  had  not  had
    sufficient regard to the Appellant's evidence.

20.  Further, paragraph 18 of the grounds assert that  the  judge's  finding
    at   paragraph   14   of   the    decision    that    it    would    be
    impossible/inconceivable for the  Appellant  to  have  arrived  at  the
    airport without attracting some sort of attention, was  not  a  finding
    which could properly be made in the absence of evidence supporting that
    analysis, eg evidence about what procedures are used at the airport  in
    Ghana. It could not be said to be impossible or inconceivable that  the
    Appellant would have been able to pass  through  the  airport  on  that
    occasion.

21.  In that respect I agree with the grounds  of  appeal;  the  Appellant's
    return to Ghana  could  on  another  view,  potentially  have  occurred
    without incident at the airport, and it would  have  required  positive
    evidence undermining  the  Appellant's  account  for  it  to  be  found
    impossible or inconceivable. No such evidence  was  identified  by  the
    judge.  It is the rejection of that part  of  the  Appellant's  account
    with  such  apparent  certainty,  but  in  the  absence   of   evidence
    establishing what is certain or  not  certain,  which  causes  me  some
    concern.

22.  Paragraph 18 of the grounds similarly assert that the  judge's  finding
    at paragraph 17 of the decision, that the  Appellant  would  have  been
    given paperwork by the authorities as a deserter, and  would  not  have
    needed his friends who were still in the army  to  send  him  paperwork
    after he had returned to the United Kingdom, was not  a  finding  which
    could properly be made in  the  absence  of  evidence  supporting  that
    analysis.

23.  I do not find that criticism made out.  Where a person is  detained  in
    a military setting, I find that it was  within  the  judge's  range  of
    possible findings to have come to the conclusion that it was likely, in
    Ghana, that the Appellant would have been given some sort of  paperwork
    by the authorities at that time.  The Appellant  has  not  demonstrated
    that it was unlikely that he would have been given  any  paperwork  and
    has not otherwise demonstrated that the judge's finding in that  regard
    is vitiated by any error of law.

24.  Paragraph 20 of the grounds  suggest  that  the  judge  has  failed  to
    properly consider or give any weight to the Appellant's claim that  the
    Home Office had  lost  his  passport  in  2001  or  2002,  causing  the
    Appellant's return to Ghana to be delayed.  I find that the  judge  was
    clearly aware that the loss of the Appellant's passport was  the  cause
    of the delay in his return, and it cannot be said that that is a matter
    that has been left out of account.  I do not find any material error of
    law raised by paragraph 20 of the Appellant's grounds of appeal.

25.  It can be noted that I have not  yet  returned  to  the  first  of  the
    Appellant's challenges, that  is  that  the  judge  proceeded  under  a
    mistake of fact.   I  have  found  this  a  finely  balanced  issue  to
    determine, noting that in proceedings such as these  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal it is for the Appellant to establish that a material error  of
    law is made out. I find that such an error has not  been  disclosed  by
    the grounds of appeal.

26.  The Appellant had said at paragraph 6 of  his  witness  statement  that
    when he contacted the army  from  the  UK  in  around  March  2002  the
    operational officer, Major Adjet, did not  believe  the  Appellant  and
    said that the army had listed him as a traitor.  His evidence  was:  "I
    pleaded my case and he told me that when I returned to Ghana  he  would
    look into it."

27.  I accept that at paragraph 10 of his witness statement,  the  Appellant
    gave further detail as to how, after returning to  Ghana,  he  came  to
    believe that Major Sampson Adjet was behind a plot to send him to jail.

28.  However, the Appellant describes having had to plead with Adjet  before
    his return to Ghana in April in 2002, and the Appellant had known since
    1997 or 1998 that Major Adjet was no friend  of  his;  the  Appellant's
    account being that they had both been involved in a battle in which the
    Appellant had been injured.  Major Adjet, it is said, had tried to take
    credit for certain heroic acts during the fighting, but this  had  been
    denied by the Appellant in his own report of events. It was  said  that
    Major Adjet had borne a grudge against the Appellant ever since.

29.  I do not find, in the light of all the evidence  that  was  before  the
    judge, that he  misdirected himself in law, or has  misapprehended  the
    evidence that was  before  him,  when  finding  at  paragraph  13  that
    Appellant knew when he returned to Ghana in April 2002 both that he had
    been listed as a deserter, and that Major Adjet wanted revenge  against
    him, and thus that if the Appellant was aware of both of those matters,
     he would have claimed asylum when he was  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
    April 2002.

30.  As I have indicated, the Appellant has always known that Adjet  held  a
    grudge against  the  Appellant  and  I  cannot  see  that  Mr  Turner's
    directing my  attention  to  the  evidence  in  the  witness  statement
    discloses a clear error of law or error of approach on  behalf  of  the
    judge.

31.  What I also find significant is that at paragraph  20  of  the  judge's
    decision the judge refers to the other discrepancies as set out in  the
    refusal letter.  I have already set those discrepancies out above.  The
    Appellant, however, did nothing within his witness statement before the
    First tier to address those discrepancies. There is no ground of appeal
    before this Tribunal  challenging  the  issues  taken  in  the  refusal
    letter, or arguing that the judge has failed to take into  account  any
    evidence of the Appellant given in response to the  credibility  issues
    raised in the refusal letter. Significant amongst those issues  is  the
    almost twelve year wait between the Appellant returning to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2002 and his claim for asylum in 2014 which I  note  in  any
    event only took place because he  was  apprehended  in  a  car  by  the
    police.

32.  In all the circumstances I find that the grounds  of  appeal  have  not
    disclosed a material error of law in the present  appeal.   Although  I
    have found that there was an error  of  approach  in  relation  to  one
    matter only (regarding the Appellant's passage through the  airport  on
    arrival in Ghana), that error is not material in the light of  all  the
    other adverse credibility findings made by the Judge, and  those  which
    were adopted from the refusal letter.

33.  I do not set aside the First-tier decision; I uphold it.




    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 5.2.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 5.2.16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
