
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06647/2014
                                                               AA/07897/2014
                                                               AA/05884/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2015                    |On 24th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                      Mr Naseer Asher (first appellant)
                    Miss Meerub Asher (second APPELLANT)
                     mr Arphaxad Asher (third APPELLANT)
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Afzal
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first Appellant was  born
    on 26th August 1958.  The second and third Appellants are his  children
    born respectively on 9th November 1992 and 5th June 1986.  The children
    are therefore adults.  The Appellants had all  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that if returned to Pakistan they would face mistreatment due  to
    their religion in that they feared Islamic fundamentalists  on  account
    of  being  Christian.   Those  applications  were  dismissed  in  three
    separate Notice of Refusals dated respectively 26th August  2014,  16th
    September 2014 and 30th July 2014.

 2. The appeals were consolidated and came for hearing  before  Immigration
    Judge Herwald on 9th February and 23rd February 2015.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 3rd March 2015  the  Appellants'  appeals  were  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 6th March 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  In those Grounds of Appeal it was accepted by  the
    Secretary of State that the Appellants were  Pakistani  and  Christian.
    It was however submitted that the determination failed  to  make  clear
    its findings on the appeal at  paragraphs  17  to  22  to  support  the
    overall finding at paragraph 22 that the appeal is  allowed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and that that was a material misdirection of law.

 4. On 16th March 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge Shimmin noted that the grounds argued that the  judge
    had erred in making inconsistent findings and that it was arguable that
    the judge had made findings which are not mutually  sustainable  as  to
    the  Appellants'  claim  as  a  refugee  and  in  respect  of  internal
    relocation (paragraphs 19, 21 and 22).  It was also considered arguable
    that the judge had erred in failing to follow the country guidance case
    of AK and SK (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569.

 5. On 9th June 2015 the Appellant's solicitors filed a  Rule  24  response
    contending that the errors on behalf of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    were not material.  Within that Rule 24 response firstly it was pointed
    out that it was not disputed that at paragraph 21 of the  determination
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge said that in this case he  was  satisfied
    that the Appellant may reasonably be expected to relocate within  their
    homeland and  secondly  that  he  had  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  It  was  contended  that  they  were  typographical
    errors and that what was stated was that the judge must have  meant  to
    say "not reasonably expected to relocate" and also that  when  he  held
    that the appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules  he  must  have
    meant under the Refugee Convention.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    legal representative Mr Afzal.  Mr Afzal is familiar with  this  matter
    having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.  I note that
    this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  but  for  the  purpose  of
    continuity about the appeal process the Asher family are named  as  the
    Appellants and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.





Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Harrison  indicates  that  the  Secretary  of  State  maintains  his
    position pointing out that it is not possible  to  be  certain  of  the
    intention of the judge.  He takes me to  the  three  main  areas  where
    there is concern.  Firstly he points  out  the  inconsistencies  to  be
    found at paragraph 19 and paragraph 22 namely that the  Tribunal  found
    that the Appellant had not  established  any  subjectively  genuine  or
    objectively well-found fear of persecution by the state, or its  agents
    or any  other  person  and  is  not  a  refugee  and  not  entitled  to
    humanitarian protection under the Immigration Rules and  that  that  is
    inconsistent with the findings at paragraph  22  that  the  appeal  was
    allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 8. Secondly, having then considered the issue of  internal  relocation  in
    line with the authority of Januzi & Others and AH &  Others,  paragraph
    21 goes on to state that the Tribunal is satisfied that the  Appellants
    may reasonably relocate within their  homeland  which  is  inconsistent
    with the subsequent finding at paragraph 22 that the appeal is  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules.

 9. Finally it is noted that even if the Tribunal accepts  the  credibility
    of the Appellants' account it is incumbent upon the  Tribunal  to  then
    make findings with reference to the country guidance case of AK and  SK
    (Christians: risk) Pakistan CG [2014] UKUT 00569 and that the  Tribunal
    had failed to do so despite drawing both representatives' attention  to
    this case which is noted at paragraph 15(d).

10. Mr Afzal accepts what is set out at paragraph 90 that the events do not
    constitute state persecution but that it is non-state persecution  that
    the  Appellants  have  suffered  but  that   notwithstanding   systemic
    sufficiency of state protection the claimant may  still  have  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution if the authorities know or  ought  to  know
    the circumstances particular to his or her case giving rise to the fear
    but are unlikely to provide the additional  protection  the  particular
    circumstances reasonably require.  He  submits  that  on  any  rational
    explanation the judge when considering paragraphs  21  and  22  of  his
    determination came  to  the  decision  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    reasonably relocate and that the correct  interpretation  would  be  to
    conclude that the Appellants may not reasonably be expected to relocate
    within their homeland and  that  there  is  a  typographical  error  at
    paragraph 21.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

13. It is essential in a judicial determination that there is clarity.  The
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge in this matter has been given
    the very closest of scrutiny  by  both  legal  representatives  and  by
    myself and we are all in agreement that it is impossible  when  looking
    at the relevant paragraphs to extrapolate the intention  of  the  judge
    and that in itself must constitute a material  error  of  law.   It  is
    important that I set out where the difficulties arises.  These  are  to
    be found at attempting to reconcile the findings in  paragraphs  19  to
    22.  At paragraph 19 the judge has quite clearly stated  the  Appellant
    has not established  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  that  the
    Appellant is  not  a  refugee  and  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.  At paragraph 21 he states that the ill-treatment  suffered
    is of sufficient severity as to cross the threshold of persecution.

14. Thereafter the judge goes on to give consideration to  the  ability  of
    the  Appellant  to  relocate.   He  considers  two  authorities,  quite
    properly, and makes a finding that the  Appellants  may  reasonably  be
    expected to relocate within their homeland as his conclusion  paragraph
    21.  He then goes on to conclude as his decision  that  the  Appellants
    have discharged the burden of proof and have  a  well-founded  fear  of
    persecution for a Convention reason.  Finally he goes on to  allow  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules rather than the Refugee Convention.

15. When looked at as a whole it is not possible to construe whether  there
    are or are not typographical errors in the determination.   If  it  was
    just a matter of one word missing then that would almost certainly,  it
    is accepted by the legal representatives, be a  matter  that  could  be
    adjusted under the slip rule and be agreed between the  parties.   That
    is not the case here as there are fundamental contradictions which need
    clarification and explanation by the judge.  Further albeit that it  is
    a far minor consideration it is incumbent upon  the  Tribunal  to  make
    findings with reference to AK and SK  (Christians:  risk)  Pakistan  CG
    [2014] UKUT 00569 and the Tribunal has failed to  do  so  despite  that
    authority being drawn to the intention of the legal representatives the
    authority rather than they referring it to him.

16. In such circumstances the correct approach is to find that there  is  a
    material error of law.  However it is the agreed approach by both legal
    representatives, which I endorse, that the appeal should be  sent  back
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  not   for   rehearing   but   for
    clarification on the  papers  and  that  thereafter  the  judge  should
    produce a further decision which will form the finding  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  It may well be once that decision is set out  with  due
    clarity that both the Secretary of  State  and  the  Appellant's  legal
    representatives will be satisfied with the outcome and if they are  not
    they will then on the basis of that determination be entitled  to  give
    due and proper consideration as to whether that decision  is  one  that
    has any merit for making an appeal.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a material  error  of  law
and is set aside to the following extent.

 1) That the appeal be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  reserved  to
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald sitting at Manchester  on  the  first
    available date 28 days hence.

 2) That the remitted decision is to be considered by  the  learned  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge on the papers.

 3) That the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is  requested  to  consider  the
    discrepancies,  as  described  above,  in  his  original  decision  and
    thereafter to provide a written revised  decision  taking  account  and
    correcting the discrepancies therein.

 4) One hour is to be allowed for judicial consideration  at  the  remitted
    hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

