

                                                  [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal number:
AA/06251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Determination Promulgated     |
|On January 16, 2015                     |On January 19, 2015           |
|                                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                        MS TSETSEGSUREN CHULUUNBAATAR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born January 5, 1980 is a citizen of Mongolia. She  last
    entered the United Kingdom on September 26, 2009 as a Tier  4  student.
    On January 30, 2007 she applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student  and  this  was  granted  until  February  29,  2008.   Further
    extensions as a Tier 4 student were granted  until  June  7,  2014.  On
    March 11, 2014 she attended at the asylum-screening unit and  on  March
    25, 2014 she applied for asylum. The respondent refused her application
    on May 21, 2014 and on August 11, 2014 a  decision  to  remove  her  to
    Mongolia was taken.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on August 28,  2014
    and on  October  1,  2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Wyman
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "FtTJ")  heard  her  appeal  and  in
    determination  promulgated  on  October  7,  2014   she   refused   the
    appellant's claims on asylum and human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal  on  October  21,  2014  and  on
    October  31,  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ransley  gave
    permission to appeal finding there were arguable reasons the  FtTJ  had
    erred in her approach to both the asylum and human rights claim.

 4. The matter came before me on December 5, 2014 and on that date I  found
    there had been a material error of law in that the FtTJ had  failed  to
    have regard to a bundle of evidence filed  after  the  hearing  but  in
    accordance with her directions. However, I dismissed the other  grounds
    of appeal and I issued directions that confirmed the adjourned  hearing
    would be confined to article 8 issues.

 5. Both the appellant and her partner were present in court on  the  above
    date and I agreed to deal with the matter by taking submissions from Mr
    Walker and the appellant herself.

 6. Mr Walker accepted that the appellant and her partner were in a genuine
    and subsisting relationship and had been since 2011. They had one child
    who was born in May 2014. I have  also  had  regard  to  the  documents
    submitted by the appellant prior to this hearing in compliance with  my
    directions.

 7. Mr Walker agreed that removal would be to Mongolia because firstly that
    was where the removal directions were set and secondly the  appellant's
    partner had lodged an asylum claim.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Walker submitted the earlier findings that  there  was  no  risk  in
    Mongolia for the appellant remained and this was simply an issue  about
    family and private life.  The appellant, partner  and  child  were  all
    healthy and lived together as a family. The  child  was  too  young  to
    attend school and when old enough would be able  to  attend  school  in
    Mongolia where there is an education  system.  The  child  would  learn
    Mongolian but would also be able to  speak  English  because  both  his
    parents also spoke English. The appellant's application for asylum  had
    been rejected and she had come here as a student with no expectation of
    being allowed to remain. She had knowingly entered into a  relationship
    with her partner and become pregnant at a time when she knew he had  no
    immigration status here. Whilst there was some discrimination this  did
    not reach a level that merited intervention as evidenced by the  FtTJ's
    upheld decision. It would  not  be  disproportionate  or  unjustifiably
    harsh to require the family to leave the United Kingdom.

 9. The appellant responded to these submissions and stated:

     a. If she returned to Mongolia with her son and husband there would be
        problems for her husband because inter-racial marriages are frowned
        upon. If he remained here then they  would  be  separated  and  her
        family life would be interfered with and her son would not have his
        father in his life.


     b. If the child  were  raised  in  Mongolia  he  would  have  problems
        conversing with his father because his father spoke English and the
        schools only taught Mongolian. Although English would be spoken  in
        the house this would only be basic for the appellant's son.

     c. Her partner was Christian and attended church regularly.  There  is
        evidence that Christians are discriminated against and  this  would
        interfere with their private life.

     d. She was unable to live in the capital, Ulan Bator, and in the rural
        areas her son would be unable to obtain proper medical treatment if
        he fell ill. She could not live in the capital because it only  has
        a population of one million and there would be a  chance  that  she
        would come into contact with her  family  who  disapproved  of  her
        relationship.

     e. She was still doing her CCA course and she wanted to complete it so
        she could find work here afterwards.

10. I reserved my decision.

ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE

11. I remind myself that this is an application outside of the  Immigration
    Rules under article 8 ECHR. Mr Walker accepted the appeal  fell  to  be
    considered outside of the Rules  and  I  have  approached  this  appeal
    having regard to the guidance in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027  and  I  have
    also  had  regard  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.

12. The best interests of the child is paramount and recently the Court  of
    Appeal in EV (Phillipines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 stated:

        "35. A decision as to what is in the  best  interests  of  children
        will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
        length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
        been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
        to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
        it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
        with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
        medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
        and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
        their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
        citizens."

13. The child was born in May 2014 and was conceived at  a  time  when  the
    appellant knew her partner's immigration status was precarious and  her
    own status was limited in nature because she was here on Tier  4  visa.
    There was an expectation she would return home after she completed  her
    studies. She did not apply to extend her stay but instead sought asylum
    shortly before she gave birth.

14. In considering the "best interests of the child" I note:

     a. The child is now eight months old.
     b. The child was born here but is not a British citizen.
     c. The child has not been educated.
     d. The child has never been to Mongolia.
     e. The child is young and is able to adapt to his surroundings.
     f. The child does not speak but would learn both Mongolian and English
        either at school or within  his  family.  Both  his  parents  speak
        English and the appellant speaks Mongolian having lived most of her
        life there.
     g. The child has no health  issues  and  there  is  no  evidence  that
        medical facilities are not available in Mongolia.
     h. The child would be with his family if they left the United  Kingdom
        as a family unit.

15. I have also taken into account the appellant's immigration  status  and
    in particular that she has always been here  legally  albeit  she  came
    here for the sole purpose of study. She met her  partner  in  2010  and
    they began living together in August 2011 and they have child  who  was
    born on May 21, 2014. She was aware that  her  partner  had  overstayed
    after his student visa expired in 2012 and that until very recently  he
    had not applied for asylum. His reason was he did not know about asylum
    albeit  he  accepted  that  he  had  been  to  the  Tribunal  when  his
    application for an extension was refused.


16. The appellant asked me to have regard to a  number  of  documents.  One
    document (UK Government travel advice) referred to the fact  that  some
    Mongolian men do not like seeing Mongolian women in relationships  with
    foreign men and if in such a relationship  then  discretion  should  be
    considered. A US State department advice document also made reference t
    o the fact that inter-racial couples are sometimes targeted for attack.
    Neither of these reports departs from the FtTJ's  findings.  There  are
    problems but they do not reach a level of persecution or serious harm.

17. The appellant  also  provided  an  article  on  Mongolia's  "millennium
    development goals". The report is concerned  with  single  parents  and
    children from poor families. Both the appellant  and  her  partner  are
    educated and there would appear to be no reason why one or  both  could
    not obtain work. There is nothing in this report that would suggest the
    child would not be educated or obtain health care,  if  necessary.  The
    appellant described there was a lack of material on  the  Internet  but
    that does not mean there  is  a  problem.  In  fact,  the  contrary  is
    arguable because if there were problems  then  the  Internet  would  be
    awash with such articles.

18. The appellant raised religion in her recent letter  (January  5,  2015)
    and her submissions albeit this was not raised at the original hearing.
    I did not take any oral evidence on this subject but took into  account
    the appellant's submission although her claim was  unsupported  by  any
    evidence at all. There was no letter from the minister or any  document
    in support. I attach no weight to this part of her  claim  but  in  any
    event I have had taken into account the report provided  which  states,
    "There is a small but growing population of  Christians.  According  to
    the 2010 national census 2% of the  population  is  Christian.  A  2011
    government  study  ...  indicates  4.7%   are   ...   Christian."   The
    constitution protects religious freedom and explicitly  recognises  the
    separation of religion and the state. I am satisfied there is no  merit
    to this aspect of the claim.

19. The appellant mentioned that she was in the middle of her  studies  for
    an ACCA qualification and that she wanted to  finish  her  studies  and
    obtain a job here. The appellant did not apply to  extend  her  Tier  4
    visa when it expired and I also have to have regard to the decision  in
    Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC). At paragraph [20]
    the Tribunal stated in that case-

         "We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others is
         a significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  re-focus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
         reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
         controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."

20. The appellant had no personal expectation to be allowed  to  remain  to
    further her studies or obtain work. She came as a student with  limited
    leave to remain. The fact she wants to continue her  studies  and  work
    here does not amount to private life.


21. The only private life established has  been  the  appellant's  studies.
    There may be other elements  of  private  life  but  these  were  never
    advanced either before the FtTJ or myself. Their  life  appears  to  be
    together as a family. I do not  find  there  is  a  private  life  that
    engages article 8.

22. There is family life between the family unit and I have considered  the
    child's best interests and am satisfied the child should  be  with  his
    mother and preferably his father. There is nothing in this child's life
    that persuaded me that he would be better off in  the  United  Kingdom.
    His mother is Mongolian and his father Nigerian. He is  not  a  British
    citizen and has no personal entitlement to live here.  The  Immigration
    Rules were not met.

23. He can be educated in Mongolia and language would not be  an  issue  in
    light of his age. The fact his father does not  speak  Mongolian  would
    not be an issue because his parents speak English and he would be  able
    to talk to him in English. His mother  speaks  Mongolian  having  lived
    there for most of her life.

24. There  is  no  evidence  the  child  would  not  be  granted  Mongolian
    nationality and nothing has been placed before  me  that  suggests  the
    father would be unable to  accompany  the  appellant  and  his  son  to
    Mongolia.

25. I have had regard to all of the above matters and taking  into  account
    the child's best interests I am satisfied it would be proportionate  to
    remove the appellant from the United Kingdom and consequently I  refuse
    her appeal under article 8 ECHR and the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal disclosed an error. I  find  as
    follows:

     a.  I  uphold  the  decision  to  dismiss  the  asylum,   humanitarian
        protection and articles 2 and 3 claims.
     b. I dismiss the appellant's claim under the Immigration Rules.
     c. I dismiss the appellant's article 8 human rights claim.


27. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    such order was made in the First-tier and I see no reason to make  such
    an order now.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I revoke the earlier fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

