
[pic]


Upper Tribunal


(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06661/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2015                   |On 13 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     SP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Turner, counsel  instructed  by  Greater  London
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. This is an appeal  against  a  decision  of  FTTJ  McIntosh,  dated  24
    December 2014, in which she dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a
    decision to refuse to grant her asylum.

Background


 2. The appellant left Sri Lanka during February 2013,  remained  in  India
    for 5 weeks before travelling to the United Kingdom with the assistance
    of an agent. The basis of the appellant's asylum claim is that  two  of
    her  siblings  were  members  of  the  LTTE.  In  February  2014,   the
    appellant's sister was abducted by soldiers and returned to the  family
    home. Two days later, the appellant and her  sister  were  abducted  by
    soldiers. The appellant was separated from her sister  and  an  attempt
    was made to rape her. The appellant heard  a  gunshot  and  her  sister
    returned armed with a gun and thwarted the  soldier's  assault  on  the
    appellant. The appellant saw the soldier who abducted her sister  lying
    dead on the ground. Her sister urged the appellant to flee,  which  she
    did immediately with the  assistance  of  her  uncle.  The  appellant's
    application was refused  on  credibility  grounds.  An  earlier  appeal
    against that decision was dismissed by FTTJ Brennells  on  27  December
    2013; however that decision was set aside and the  matter  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

 3. During the  course  of  the  de  novo  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, FTTJ McIntosh heard evidence  from  the  appellant  alone.  A
    psychological report was also submitted on the appellant's behalf along
    with other evidence including that of a witness, SA. The FTTJ dismissed
    the appeal on credibility grounds as well as concluding  that  none  of
    the requirements of the Rules, in relation to the  appellant's  private
    life had been met and that Article  8  was  not  engaged,  outside  the
    Rules.

Error of law


 4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on the basis that
    it was arguable that the FTTJ applied an  excessively  high  burden  of
    proof; failed to have regard to the expert psychological report  of  Dr
    Halari in reaching her findings and  overall  decision;  erred  in  her
    assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility  and  failed  to  provide
    sufficient reasons.

 5. FTTJ Pooler granted permission on the basis that it was  arguable  that
    the FTTJ misdirected herself in failing to take Dr Halari's report when
    assessing credibility. The other grounds were said not to  disclose  an
    arguable error of law, however permission was not expressly refused  in
    relation to those grounds.

 6. The Secretary  of  State's  response  of  25  September  2015  robustly
    defended the FTTJ's decision, describing it as "carefully  crafted  and
    well reasoned' and containing "adequate sustainable reasons."

The hearing


 7. This appeal was initially listed before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Zucker on 23 October 2015, who heard partial submissions on  the  error
    of law issue before recusing himself.  I obtained a transfer order from
    the Principal Resident Judge and therefore proceeded to hear  the  case
    myself. There was no objection to this course  of  action  from  either
    representative.

 8. Mr Turner argued that the appellant was a vulnerable woman who had made
    a suicide attempt. There was a need for a comprehensive  decision.  The
    FTTJ's  decision  was  not  properly  reasoned   or   structured.   The
    credibility findings made no reference to the evidence in  the  witness
    statements before the FTTJ; the law was poorly expressed and there  was
    reference to irrelevant or non-existent case law.

 9. Mr Avery submitted that the FTTJ had regard to Dr  Halari's  report  at
    [10] of the decision,  where  a  reasonable  summary  of  the  doctor's
    findings could be seen. The FTTJ's citation at [13] was  an  immaterial
    typographical error in a case  where  the  fundamental  issue  was  the
    appellant's credibility. It was apparent from [14] of the decision that
    the FTTJ had taken into account submissions  made  on  the  appellant's
    behalf. She had correctly directed herself regarding the  case  of  JL.
    The FTTJ made legitimate points regarding credibility issues present in
    the original evidence and the challenge amounted solely to disagreement
    with her findings. The FTTJ did not err at [16] in finding  that  there
    would not be a record of the appellant's details given  her  case  that
    she was not officially detained. With regard to the FTTJ's reference to
    the former country guidance case of LP, Mr Avery stated that it did not
    matter, because the appellant would not meet any of the criteria in GJ.
     Finally, the FTTJ did not err  in  finding  that  Article  8  was  not
    engaged, given the judgment in GS, regarding the need  for  some  other
    basis to an Article 8 claim in addition to a medical claim.

10. In reply, Mr Turner stressed that LP was decided in  2007;  that  there
    was no known case of "Hogarth" referred to at [13] of the decision;  if
    the former was a reference to Horvath, it was misplaced and that JL was
    an irrelevant authority in that the  headnote  is  directed  at  report
    writers rather than decision  makers.  In  any  event,  Dr  Holari  had
    followed the guidance in JL.

Decision on error of law

11. The FTTJ made material errors of law. Her decision is set aside, in its
    entirety, for the following reasons.

12. The decision of the FTTJ is 5-pages long and only a page, in total,  is
    devoted  to  the  FTTJ's  "Decision  with  Reasons,"  relating  to  the
    protection claim. While the FTTJ summarised Dr Halari's report at [10],
    she failed to assess that report or indicate whether  or  not  she  was
    prepared to accord any weight to it.

13. Dr Halari's report  is  21-pages  in  length  and  concludes  that  the
    appellant suffers from symptoms of PTSD and makes reference to her  re-
    enactment of the memory of her  trauma  while  recalling  it.  In  that
    report, Dr Halari devotes several paragraphs to addressing whether  the
    appellant could be attempting to bolster her claim or  was  malingering
    and provided a number of reasons for concluding that she was not.

14. Dr Halari was of the view that the appellant's symptoms  of  PTSD  were
    impacting on her concentration and memory in terms of  her  ability  to
    accurately  recall  events.  Reference  was  made  to  the  appellant's
    overdose and the view of the author that the appellant's removal  would
    "significantly" impact her mental health, negatively and would increase
    the risk of suicide. The FTTJ did not indicate whether she accepted the
    diagnosis of PTSD; that  the  appellant's  mental  state  affected  her
    recall of events or that the appellant was suicidal. Nor did  the  FTTJ
    indicate whether she accepted that the appellant's mental  state  would
    deteriorate if faced with removal.

15. The FTTJ's lack of adequate consideration of the  psychological  report
    amounts to a material error of law.

16. In addition, the FTTJ provided wholly inadequate reasons in support  of
    her negative credibility findings and further erred in this regard.

17. At [14] the FTTJ finds that it would be implausible that the  appellant
    would know whether her sister had been  raped.  However,  this  finding
    does not take into account the appellant's acceptance, at [15]  of  her
    witness statement that she made an assumption regarding  the  soldier's
    treatment of her sister and accordingly she did not  know  for  a  fact
    whether her sister had been raped.

18. At [15] the FTTJ criticised the appellant for leaving it to the son  of
    an associate to confirm her safe arrival in the United Kingdom. Putting
    aside the question of whether this amounts to an issue which  could  be
    said to be central to the appellant's  claim,  this  finding  makes  no
    reference to the witness statement of SA, which was contained  at  [S5]
    of the appellant's appeal bundle and which at paragraph  [7]  addressed
    this particular issue as well as the appellant's mental  state  at  the
    time of her arrival. In addition, the appellant's witness statement, at
    paragraph [17] also provided an explanation regarding this  matter  and
    again the FTTJ did not take this explanation into consideration.

19. At [17] the FTTJ points to an  apparent  discrepancy  as  to  when  the
    appellant left Sri Lanka, but neglects to take into  consideration  the
    fact that the appellant corrected that account and  promptly  clarified
    the matter in response to questions posed  during  the  course  of  her
    asylum interview.

20. Finally, the  FTTJ's  definition  of  a  refugee  was  incomplete;  she
    erroneously referred to a case of "Hogarth" for which no  citation  was
    provided and she relied upon the previous country guidance case  of  LP
    instead of GJ. Mr Avery's submission was that it was  irrelevant  which
    Country  Guidance  decision  was  applied  given  the  facts   of   the
    appellant's case. However, if the appellant's account were accepted, it
    would mean that she was a close relative of two LTTE  members  and  was
    implicated in the death of army personnel, which would arguably carry a
    risk of  her  coming  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

21. In these circumstances I am satisfied that there are errors of law such
    that the decision be set aside, to be remade. None of the  findings  of
    the FTTJ are to stand.

22. I considered listing this matter to be heard in the Upper Tribunal,  in
    view of  practice  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010 (as amended), however the appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of her asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  her  of   such
    consideration.

23. Further directions are set out below.

24. An anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ. I consider it  appropriate
    for  anonymity  to  be  continued  and  therefore  make  the  following
    anonymity direction:

    "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings. "

Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision to be re-made.

Directions


       . This appeal is remitted to be heard  de  novo,  by  any  Designated
         Judge  or  experienced  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  (except   FTTJ
         McIntosh).

       . The appeal is to be listed for a hearing at Taylor House.

       . An interpreter in the Tamil language is required.

       . Time estimate is 4 hours.


Signed      Date: 1 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

