
[pic]
IAC-PE-sW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06839/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th November 2015                |On 29th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                          MR Chiyamathan Rasathurai
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Rothwell - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Mr Chiyamathan Rasathurai, a citizen of Sri  Lanka
    born on 5th April 1985.  He appeals against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Row  issued  on  12th  August  2015  dismissing  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human  rights  grounds  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent  made  on  17th March  2015  to
    refuse to grant asylum and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 2.  On  6th  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  granted
    permission.  He said:

         "4.  To a large extent this appeal was dismissed on the basis of  a
             series of points ('credibility points') that the judge took as
             undermining the Appellant's core asylum account  (the  judge's
             paragraphs 20 onwards).  The grounds on  which  the  Appellant
             seeks permission to appeal are in effect an attack on each  of
             the judge's credibility points.

         5.   Without restricting this grant, I  record  my  suspicion  that
             there is little substance in at least some of  the  complaints
             made in the grounds.  For example I  do  not  think  that  the
             judge had an obligation to put the Appellant on notice  as  to
             parts of his account that might not be accepted (at  paragraph
             17 of the grounds).  But it may be that the judge did  err  in
             some of the ways alleged.  In particular it is  arguable  that
             the  judge  may  not  have  assessed  the  likelihood  of  the
             Appellant having been tortured in detention or the  likelihood
             of him having left Sri Lanka on his own passport  against  the
             relevant country information and the guidance in GJ and Others
             (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319."

 3. There is a response under Rule 24  from  the  Secretary  of  State  who
    maintains that the decision does not contain  any  material  errors  of
    law.  At paragraph 4 of the response it is stated:

         "4.  More pertinently the Immigration Judge was  rightly  concerned
             with the presence of scars on an Appellant who had  apparently
             seen Dr Lingham two weeks prior to  his  appointment  with  Dr
             Lawrence but Dr Lingham had not  noted  the  presence  of  any
             scarring such that he was unable to produce a report.

         5.   The Appellant's solicitors in their Grounds of Appeal seek  to
             argue that there was no mention of any  previous  consultation
             with Dr Lingham.  They seek to complain about the  Appellant's
             former solicitors' conduct.  At this  stage  this  remains  an
             unsubstantiated assertion and in any event paragraph 31 of the
             determination reveals that Counsel for the Appellant made  the
             disclosure to the Immigration Judge and yet his new solicitors
             have not sought  to  approach  Counsel  who  appeared  at  the
             hearing.  Given that Counsel was clearly aware of the issue at
             the hearing it  is  respectfully  submitted  that  the  latest
             written statement and the correspondence in  relation  to  the
             same, submitted with the Grounds of Appeal  ought  not  to  be
             admissible in line with Ladd v Marshall principles;  evidently
             the fact that this issue was clearly in Counsel's knowledge at
             the date of hearing meant documentary  material  and  evidence
             relating to the same  ought  to  have  been  adduced  on  that
             occasion and certainly no adjournment application was made  on
             that basis."

 4. At the hearing before me Miss  Rothwell  appeared  for  the  Appellant.
    First of all it became clear that  neither  I  nor  Mr  Avery  had  any
    substantial  papers  relating  to  this  appeal.   The  Appellant   had
    submitted two bundles previously and neither  was  in  the  file.   She
    advised me that the Appellant's instructing solicitors have been  found
    by the Law Society to have been guilty of dishonesty.  She had evidence
    of this.  It was the solicitor who had said that the Appellant had gone
    to Dr Lingham but Dr Lingham had found no scars.  The position is that
    the Appellant has never seen Dr Lingham.  The new representatives  have
    been trying  to  get  the  Appellant's  file  but  it  is  not  in  the
    solicitors' office.  They have been unable to recover it.

 5. She said that as far as she is concerned the errors of  law  made  were
    that the judge failed to look at the scarring; he  failed  to  consider
    the evidence of the Appellant's escape in the light of  the  background
    information on that and he failed to consider the Appellant's sur place
    activities in the UK.

 6. I discussed this with Mr Avery.  I expressed the view that in light  of
    the  fact  that  we  have  literally  no  idea  what  elements  of  the
    Appellant's evidence came from the Appellant and  what  came  from  his
    solicitor,  who was apparently guilty of giving false information,  the
    decision of Judge cannot stand and must be set  aside.  It  was  agreed
    that the best course of action would be to  remit  the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo.

Notice of Decision

I find that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is  flawed  because
of the established dishonesty of the Appellant's  representatives  who  gave
false information to the court.  I direct that the  appeal  be  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal to be heard anew.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 26th November 2015

N A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
