

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal No AA/06035/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 17 May 2016                                |on 19 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                ESSAY TOURAY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co., Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals against a determination by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge D'Ambrosio, dismissing his appeal against refusal of asylum.

   2. The first ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal is subdivided into 10
      points,  which  principally  criticise  the   judge's   reasoning   as
      speculative and illogical.

   3. The second ground of appeal insists that the appeal should  have  been
      granted under article 8 of the ECHR.

   4. Ground 1(iv) complains that the  judge  embarked  on  his  own  online
      activities, including investigations on Facebook, which was an  unfair
      basis on which  to  reach  adverse  credibility  conclusions,  without
      giving the appellant the opportunity to respond.

   5. That was an error of principle. The  judge  seeks  to  correct  it  by
      emphasising that he records the matter only incidentally, and  not  to
      support his adverse finding.  However,  he  says  that  his  enquiries
      disclosed numerous identities in the same name as the  appellant,  and
      the fact that he has an apparently common name in the Gambia is one of
      the reasons for the eventual outcome.

   6. The error is compounded by the judge's statement  that  the  appellant
      "failed to claim (far  less  provide  evidence)"  that  his  name  was
      "unique or very rare" in the Gambia. That is, at least,  unfortunately
      expressed. There was nothing wrong in principle about noting that  the
      appellant's name is a common one, and drawing conclusions  from  that;
      but it should not have been hinted that  there  was  an  onus  on  the
      appellant to assert or prove to the contrary.

   7. Mrs O'Brien fairly and correctly conceded that there  had  been  legal
      error, that it was material, and  that  the  appropriate  outcome,  as
      sought by the appellant, was to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.

   8. The decision of the first-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  None  of  its
      findings are to stand. The nature of the  case  is  such  that  it  is
      appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of the  2007  Act  and  of
      Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to  the  first-tier  Tribunal
      for an entirely fresh hearing.

   9. The member(s) of the first-tier Tribunal chosen to consider  the  case
      or not to include Judge D'Ambrosio.

  10. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            17 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




