

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
                     Appeal Number:
Immigration and Asylum Chamber
      AA/06424/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Promulgated on:          |
|On 9 October 2013                         |On 10 October 2013       |
|                                          |                         |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                     A A
                                       Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                        Respondent


                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:               Mr S Muquit, Counsel
For the Respondent:            Ms A Holmes, Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.         An anonymity order was made in respect of the appellant by the
      First-tier Tribunal and in the absence of any request for that  to  be
      set aside, it is continued.

   2.       The Secretary of State challenges  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Blum to allow this appeal by  way  of  a  determination
      promulgated on 20 August 2013. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
      Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 31  August  2013.  For  convenience,  I
      shall continue to refer to the Secretary of State  as  the  respondent
      and to AA as the appellant.

   3.       The appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  born  on  4  November
      1992. He came here relatively recently on  25  May  2013  and  claimed
      asylum on arrival when he was refused leave to enter. One of  his  six
      siblings, a sister, lives here and she gave evidence on his behalf  at
      the hearing before  Judge  Blum.  The  appellant  did  not  give  oral
      testimony. Medical evidence relating to various physical  injuries  he
      had sustained during two periods of determination in 2009 and 2013 was
      adduced. Both the appellant and respondent were represented before the
      First-tier Tribunal.

   4.       At the hearing on 9 October I heard submissions from  Ms  Holmes
      and Mr Muquit. It was argued for the Secretary of State that the judge
      had been selective in his reliance  on  certain  parts  of  GJ  (post-
      conflict war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319.  Ms  Holmes
      took me through several paragraphs of the  country  guidance  judgment
      and submitted that had these been considered by the judge he would not
      have found that the appellant  would  be  seen  as  a  threat  by  the
      government of Sri Lanka  and  he  would  not  have  reached  the  same
      decision.

   5.       In response Mr Muquit  pointed  to  various  factors  which,  he
      argued, showed that the judge had been entitled to rely on in  support
      of his conclusion that the appellant would be at risk on return.

   6.       At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  determination
      which I now give.

   7.       Having heard the submissions made and  having  considered  Judge
      Blum's determination as well as GJ, I am satisfied that no  errors  of
      law were made such as would require me  to  set  aside  the  decision.
      Whilst the judge might have been advised to show more clearly that  he
      had looked at GJ more thoroughly, given the specific circumstances  in
      the appellant's case, which I address  below,  I  cannot  see  that  a
      different outcome would have been reached even if he had.

   8.       The judge  considered  the  credibility  issues  raised  by  the
      respondent finding that some of the discrepancies  were  not  in  fact
      inconsistencies at all (see paragraph 25) and that others  related  to
      dates and periods of time rather than  the  elements  of  the  account
      which remained consistent. He took the medical evidence  into  account
      and  found  that  victims  of  trauma  could  suffer  from   confusion
      (paragraph 24). He considered that the evidence along with the  nature
      of the appellant's  evidence  at  his  interview  suggested  cognitive
      impairment rather than a fabrication of the account (paragraphs 26 and
      35). The judge also  took  note  of  the  scarring  evidence  and  the
      reference  to  older  and  fresher  injuries   which   supported   the
      appellant's claim of ill treatment both in the two year  detention  of
      2009 and the more recent one of four months earlier this year. He gave
      weight to this report (paragraphs 28-29). The  judge  also  considered
      the claim against the background  evidence  (paragraph  30).  For  the
      reasons given at paragraph 31 he did not  find  that  the  appellant's
      ability to leave Sri Lanka using his own passport  damaged  his  claim
      given  that  he  had  travelled  with  an  agent  who  had  bribed  an
      immigration officer to facilitate the appellant's departure.  Evidence
      of corruption in the background evidence and the  Tribunal's  findings
      in GJ assisted the judge in this respect. He found the evidence of the
      appellant's sister to be credible; she had  maintained  that  she  had
      been told contemporaneously about the appellant's arrests.

   9.       Contrary to what was argued by Ms Holmes,  the  judge  did  have
      regard to the fact that past LTTE involvement did not  always  put  an
      appellant at risk (paragraphs 32 and  37).  However,  having  accepted
      that  the  appellant  had  been  detained   on   two   occasions   for
      rehabilitation purposes because of his involvement with the  LTTE  and
      that following his latest release  on  the  payment  of  a  bribe  the
      authorities had been to his mother's house looking  for  him,  he  was
      entitled to conclude  that  the  authorities  still  believed  he  was
      connected to the LTTE and suspected he might be associated with  their
      remnants. Had it been important for the judge to specifically consider
      the sections of GJ referred to by Ms Holmes, one would  have  expected
      the presenting officer at the initial hearing to have drawn  those  to
      his attention.

  10.       The flaw in Ms Holmes' able submissions is that  notwithstanding
      what is said about those who are perceived to be a threat to  the  Sri
      Lankan government and the  intelligence  the  authorities  have  which
      enables them to separate  the  wheat  from  the  chaff,  the  accepted
      evidence is that the authorities re-detained the appellant  after  two
      years of previous detention, continued to severely ill treat  him  and
      are still making enquiries as to his whereabouts. This does not  sound
      as though their intelligence, at least in respect  of  the  appellant,
      has served them well. It would follow from Ms Holmes' submissions that
      someone in the appellant's position would be seen as  a  mere  recruit
      who had been forced into helping the LTTE with  low  level  tasks  and
      would be left alone, particularly after the authorities had two  years
      to make up their  minds  about  the  appellant's  activities  and  the
      threat, if any, he posed, but that is not what has  happened  in  this
      case. Had the appellant's last  detention  been  some  time  ago,  the
      submissions may have had more force but given the  recent  arrest  and
      the continued enquiries into his whereabouts, which are not  disputed,
      the judge was perfectly entitled to make the findings and  conclusions
      that  he  did.    I  do  not  consider  that  there   has   been   any
      misapplication of the country guidance.

Decision

  11.       The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  any  errors  of  law. The
      decision to allow the appeal stands.


            Signed:






      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal

      9 October 2013

