
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06365/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31 March 2016                         |On 19 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                                     en
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Kadic of A de Ruano, Legal Advisors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    C  Ferguson)  who  dismissed  the  appellant's   appeal   against   the
    respondent's decisions made on 4 March 2015  refusing  his  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claims and on 20 March 2015 to remove him under
    s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania born on [  ]  1997.   He  made  a
    clandestine entry into the UK on 22 July 2014 and claimed asylum on  25
    July 2014.  He had left Albania in early July 2014 travelling to  Italy
    and then to France. On 12 July 2014 he was encountered  by  Immigration
    Officers in France, fingerprinted and issued with a Notice to a  person
    liable to removal and returned to Italy but he went back to France  two
    days later. He was then able to make his way to the UK, arriving on  22
    July 2014.

3.   He based his claim for asylum on the fact that he feared  serious  harm
    from a Mr L (L), and L's father who owned a casino and restaurant in  a
    town near the appellant's home village.   The  appellant's  father  had
    started gambling and drinking in 2010 and got into  debt.  He  borrowed
    money from L who kept asking for his money back.  In  August  2012  the
    appellant's father went to Greece to work so that he  could  repay  the
    money but L and his father continued to contact his family asking where
    the appellant' father was. The appellant claimed that on 10 March  2014
    L had been to the appellant's school threatening him, saying that if he
    did not give the money back he would  kill  him.   The  appellant  then
    stopped going to school and stayed at home.  However, on 13 March  2014
    he decided to go to the village to buy some groceries but there  saw  L
    who approached him with a friend. They hit the appellant with  an  iron
    bar on the back of his head and he later woke up in hospital  where  he
    saw his mother and the police,  who  said  they  would  deal  with  the
    matter.

4.   After this incident the appellant's maternal uncle took him  to  Tirana
    where he attended school.  The visits to the family from  L  continued.
    The appellant returned home at the end of the school year in June  2014
    and there was  an  incident  on  21  June  2014  when  L  came  to  the
    appellant's home, dragged him out and said that if he did not  get  his
    money, he would  kill  him.   Following  this  incident  the  appellant
    returned to stay with his uncle for about ten  days  and  there  was  a
    further incident on 1 July 2014 when shots were fired at the  appellant
    at his uncle's home by L and another man.  The  appellant  lay  on  the
    floor for about ten minutes while they fired in his direction and  they
    then drove off. Many people attended the scene and the police came  and
    they said they would do something about it.  On 2 July 2014  his  uncle
    made arrangements for the appellant to leave Albania.

5.   The respondent accepted the appellant's nationality  and  identity  but
    not his account of being threatened by Mr L.  It  was  her  view  that,
    even if the appellant's account were to be accepted, L was a  non-state
    agent and there was no evidence that he  had  a  political  profile  or
    influence over the authorities or that he had power that would preclude
    the appellant from seeking state protection.   For  these  reasons  the
    application was refused.




The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

6.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  gave  oral
    evidence. He said that he had been targeted by L  because  he  was  the
    eldest son. He had not been  in contact with his immediate family since
    coming to the UK because his uncle had told him that his mother did not
    want to make contact with him.  He had, however, been in contact with a
    cousin on his mother's side and had obtained a letter from the hospital
    confirming that he had received treatment there on 13 March 2014 for  a
    cut to his head.  His cousin had told him in June 2015 that  his  uncle
    had taken his mother and siblings to another house but they were  found
    there and threatened and intended to move to another place.  It was the
    appellant's case that the police in Albania could not  offer  effective
    protection as they were weak, inefficient and corrupt and  even  if  he
    moved to a different part of the country, he would inevitably be found.



7.   The judge found, bearing in mind the appellant's  age  and  the  detail
    and consistency of his account, that he was a credible witness and that
    his story was broadly true [23].  She shared some of  the  respondent's
    concerns about the likelihood of the appellant  putting  himself  in  a
    position of danger on two occasions when he went out into  the  village
    and when he returned to the family home at the end of the school  term,
    but said that she would not go so far as to  say  that  this  made  his
    story inherently implausible and  she  considered  that  he  had  given
    reasonable explanations in his oral evidence.

8.   She placed very little weight on the letter from the  hospital  because
    of the oddity in the interpreter's declaration which appeared to  refer
    to  a  different  document  but  confirmed  that  her   conclusion   on
    credibility was based on the fact  that  the  appellant's  account  was
    detailed and consistent and it did not appear that  he  had  sought  to
    exaggerate.

9.      At [25] the judge said that the fact that the  appellant  has  faced
    threats and attacks from a  non-state  individual  is  not  sufficient,
    however, to establish a right to  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or
    protection under the ECHR. She was not satisfied that "being a child of
    a  father  whose  debts  lead  him  to  be  threatened"  constituted  a
    particular social group for the purposes of the  Convention.  She  said
    that she had seen no evidence of this being a wider social issue or  of
    the appellant sharing particular personal characteristics  with  others
    in such a group [26].  She went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
    substantial grounds for believing that the appellant would face a  real
    risk of suffering serious harm if he returned to Albania.  She accepted
    that in the absence of state protection there would be a real  risk  of
    suffering serious harm at the hands of L if he  returned  to  his  home
    village and she identified as the central issue whether  the  appellant
    was unable to or owing to such risk unwilling to avail himself  of  the
    protection of the Albanian authorities.

10.  On this issue, she set out her conclusions at [29] finding  in  summary
    that the appellant had not submitted  any  evidence  to  show  that  in
    general the protection of the authorities in Albania  was  insufficient
    and that the evidence from EH (Blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT  348
    was specifically directed to the issue  of  blood  feuds  and  did  not
    support a conclusion that there was insufficient protection  generally.
    She relied on the Home Office Country Information and Country  Guidance
    document on Albania dated August 2015  (Country  Report  2015)  and  in
    particular para 2.1.5 to  the  effect  that  in  general  the  Albanian
    authorities were able and willing to provide  protection  to  a  person
    fearing non-state agents or rogue state agents but this  was  dependent
    upon the particular circumstances of the case and the  profile  of  the
    individual. She noted that the appellant had not provided any expert or
    other background evidence to cast doubt on that recent summary  of  the
    general position.

11.  The judge found that the appellant's  assertions  about  L's  power  to
    influence the authorities were speculative.  He had no direct  evidence
    of this apart from the possible failure to investigate the attack on 13
    March 2014 but little was known about what the police's involvement was
    on that occasion. He had not claimed that he had reported to the police
    what happened or asked for the matter to be investigated and could  not
    even say that the police  failed  to  investigate  the  later  shooting
    because he left the country immediately after the  incident.  She  said
    she could not place any weight on the appellant's assertion  about  the
    information from his cousin given that it  was  effectively  third-hand
    and he had not provided a statement for the  appeal  so  there  was  no
    evidence of any further threats or attacks on the appellant's family or
    of the family making failed attempts to  seek  the  protection  of  the
    authorities.

12.  For these reasons the judge found the appellant had failed  to  show  a
    real risk of the Albanian authorities failing to protect him from  ill-
    treatment under article 3.  It was therefore not necessary to  consider
    the issue of internal relocation but for the sake of completeness,  she
    said she would not have considered it reasonable to expect a young  man
    of 18 to relocate to an unknown part of the country where he would have
    no family and no means of supporting himself.  Accordingly, the  appeal
    was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

13.  The  grounds  raise  a  number  of  issues  but  they  can  briefly  be
    summarised as follows: the judge was wrong to find that  there  was  no
    Convention  reason  and  that  there  was  no  basis  for  a  grant  of
    humanitarian protection.  She had erred in her assessment of the  issue
    of sufficiency of protection by failing to give sufficient reasons  for
    departing from the findings in the current country guidance in EH.  She
    was wrong to say that the appeal under articles 2 and 3 simply stood or
    fell with the previous conclusions and had been  wrong  to  reject  the
    evidence from the appellant's cousin.

14.  Ms Kadic adopted these grounds, arguing that the  judge  had  erred  in
    law in [25] echoing a  comment  made  when  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal that  this  paragraph  was  arguably
    wrong in law.  She  submitted  that  the  findings  on  sufficiency  of
    protection set out in EH at [70] should apply.   She  argued  that  the
    judge had wrongly assessed the issue of internal protection and  argued
    that when the Country Report  2015  was  read  as  a  whole,  the  view
    expressed at para 2.1.5 that in general the Albanian  authorities  were
    able and willing to provide protection to a  person  fearing  non-state
    agents was not justified.  In the light of the findings of  fact  there
    had not been sufficient consideration, so she argued, of the  issue  of
    sufficiency of protection.  She submitted that  the  appellant  was  in
    fact being targeted because he was a member of his father's family  and
    on this basis there was a particular social group rather than the  more
    opaquely drafted group of "being a child of a father whose  debts  lead
    him to be threatened".

15.  Mr Clarke submitted that the judge had reached a decision open  to  her
    on the evidence.  The country guidance in EH was nuanced and dealt with
    the specific situation of a blood feud involving revenge killing  under
    Kanun Law predominating in northern Albania. The present case  was  one
    of pure criminality and the judge had been  entitled to  conclude  that
    the Albanian authorities would be  able  to  provide  protection.   The
    judge had considered the position of L and whether he  exercised  power
    and influence but  had  found  that  the  appellant's  assertions  were
    speculative.  He  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  were  wholly
    reasonable and properly open to her.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

16.  The issue for me to decide is whether the judge erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.  The  judge  accepted  to  the  lower
    standard of proof that the appellant had given  credible  evidence  and
    that his story was broadly true.  She was not satisfied that he  was  a
    member of a social group  and  therefore  could  not  come  within  the
    Refugee Convention but she went on to consider whether he qualified for
    humanitarian protection.  She found that he had failed to  show that he
    could not look  to  the  Albanian  authorities  for  protection.   This
    finding is criticised primarily on the basis that the judge  failed  to
    take proper account of the country guidance  decision  in  EH  and  was
    wrong to rely on the Country Report 2015.

17.  So far as EH is concerned, it clearly deals  with  the  position  where
    there are active blood feuds under Kanun Law: at [74(c)]  the  Tribunal
    held that whilst the Albanian state had taken steps  to  improve  state
    protection, in areas where  Kanun  Law  predominates  (particularly  in
    northern Albania), those  steps  do  not  yet  provide  sufficiency  of
    protection from Kanun-related blood taking if an active feud exists and
    affects the individual claimant. EH  was  therefore  dealing  with  the
    specific issue of blood feuds under Kanun Law and does not without more
    support an argument that the appellant would not be able to look to the
    authorities in Albania for protection.

18.  I am also not satisfied that the judge erred by relying on the  Country
    Report 2015.  Ms Kadic pointed  to  a  number  of  paragraphs  in  that
    document, in  particular  paras  8.2.2,  8.2.9,  10.1.3,  10.1.6-7  and
    10.1.10 which highlight a number of problems within Albania  but  I  am
    not satisfied that they undermine the conclusion set out at para  2.1.5
    that in general the  Albanian  authorities  are  able  and  willing  to
    provide protection to a person fearing non-state agents subject to  the
    particular circumstances of the case and the profile of the  applicant.
    The judge referred in [19] to the fact that the appellant had submitted
    some country background evidence (at pages 9 - 19) of his bundle.  This
    is a report dealing with the situation of children in  Albania  setting
    out a number of concerns but it does not contain anything to  undermine
    the conclusions of the Country Report 2015.

19.  It is  clear  from  her  decision  that  the  judge  did  look  at  the
    appellant's particular circumstances.  She was entitled  to  point  out
    that he had not provided any expert or any other background evidence to
    cast doubt on the summary at para 2.1.5.  She was entitled to find that
    the  appellant's  assertions  about  L's  power  and   influence   were
    speculative and that he had no direct evidence of  this  apart  from  a
    possible failure to investigate the attack on 13 March 2014 but  little
    was known about what the police involvement was that on  that  occasion
    save for the fact that the appellant said that the  police  were  there
    when he woke up in the hospital.   She noted that he did not  claim  to
    have reported to the police what had happened or asked for  the  matter
    to be investigated and  could  not  say  whether  they  had  failed  to
    investigate  the  later  shooting  because  he  had  left  the  country
    immediately.  In  summary,  I  am  satisfied  that  on  the  issue   of
    sufficiency of protection the judge, having considered the  appellant's
    individual circumstances, reached a conclusion which was properly  open
    to her for the reasons she gave.

20.  Insofar as whether [25] discloses an error of law, I am  not  satisfied
    that it does.  It does not say that threats from a non-state individual
    cannot give rise to a claim for asylum or humanitarian protection.   It
    simply states that the fact that the appellant has faced  such  threats
    is not sufficient (i.e. in itself) to establish such a right. The judge
    made it clear that the issue of sufficiency of protection and  internal
    relocation would have to be considered.  She was not satisfied that the
    appellant had shown that there was no sufficient protection for him  in
    his particular circumstances in Albania.  However, she did accept that,
    had that been the case, she would not have considered it reasonable  to
    expect the appellant to relocate away from the areas where he would  be
    at risk.

21.  The grounds also argue that the judge  was  wrong  not  to  accept  the
    evidence from the appellant's cousin but  the  judge  dealt  adequately
    with that in [29(iv)].  She  said that she could not place  any  weight
    on the appellant's assertion about the  information  from  his  cousin.
    The assessment of that evidence was an issue of fact for the  judge  in
    the light of the evidence as a whole and her finding on that issue  was
    properly open to her.  On the issue of whether there was  a  Convention
    reason, in the light of the  way  the  case  was  put  to  her,  it  is
    understandable why she found that there was no Convention  reason.   It
    appears that she was not referred to the opinions of the House of Lords
    in Fornah [2006] UKHL 46.  Had she been, she may well have decided that
    the appellant being a member of his father's family was  sufficient  to
    amount to membership of a particular social group. However, the  appeal
    would in any event, have been dismissed in the light of her findings of
    fact on the issue of sufficiency of protection.

Decision

22.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  it  follows  that  its
    decision stands.   An  anonymity  order  was  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and no application has been  made to  vary or  discharge  that
    order which accordingly remains in force.




Signed                                  Date: 13 April 2016
                     H J E Latter
H J E Latter
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


