
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
aa/06097/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 September 2016                     |On 19 October 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     VV
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by Loshana and Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is a case where credibility was obviously important  and  part  of
    the judge's credibility evaluation was an  assessment  of  the  medical
    reports, the report of Professor Lingam and the report of Dr Lawrence.

2.   In relation to both of those the point is made in the grounds that  the
    judge drew from his personal experience as a solicitor specialising  in
    child protection and found with regard to Dr Lingam  that  he  had  not
    followed medical best practice and the concern expressed about this  is
    that this was not put to Counsel for the appellant although  the  judge
    had announced his expertise as a child  protection  solicitor  in  open
    court and the appellant had no opportunity to respond  to  the  judge's
    newly announced expertise as it is  put  in  the  grounds,  as  to  the
    reports and the procedures that he favoured.

3.   That was a matter that gave me initial concern when I read  it  in  the
    grounds and when one looks in more detail at the judge's evaluation  of
    the two reports, clearly in both cases he draws on his experience as  a
    child protection solicitor, and of course there is nothing  wrong  with
    the judge having an expertise, it is extremely valuable but there  must
    be a concern I think that if he  had  concerns  arising  from  how  the
    medical reports were prepared and set out and that concern arose  as  a
    consequence of his professional expertise, it was incumbent on  him  to
    give an opportunity to the appellant to comment on  those  matters  and
    that opportunity was not given.

4.   I do not think this can be just said to be  something  that  is  as  it
    were cured elsewhere by his assessment of the evidence.   It  is  clear
    that in each case he attached significance  to  his  experience.   With
    regard to Professor Lingam's report he had a  concern  about  the  fact
    that he had set out his conclusion  first  and  then  considered  other
    possible explanations, the impression conveyed, he said, was of someone
    seeking to justify the conclusion to which he had already  come  rather
    than someone seeking to consider all the possibilities which is quite a
    powerful allegation to make about an expert report.  Again  it  is  not
    something that the judge cannot do but I think it is  something   where
    there has to be care, particularly when the judge is basing himself  on
    an expertise which he has only declared in general  terms  rather  than
    specifically in relation to this report and he said, for example, given
    his experience that medical best practice in preparing reports  dealing
    with the causation of the scars and injuries is  variable  differential
    diagnosis and the structure that he sets out is one that effectively he
    says Professor Lingam should follow.

5.   Then moving on to what he says about Dr  Lawrence's  report,  again  he
    relies on his expertise and expresses  concern  about  the  failure  to
    refer to medical notes, and I think it is not clear whether there  were
    medical notes in this case and  if  Dr  Lawrence  said  anything  about
    medical notes, as Ms Jegarajah says, it may be  the  case  that  asylum
    seekers do not always have access to a GP and have medical  notes.   We
    simply do not know what the position on  that  is,  but  I  think  that
    bringing these matters together and leaving aside the other  points  of
    concern, the judge's views on the credibility of the  medical  evidence
    in relation to this claim were sufficiently  central  and  in  my  view
    sufficiently flawed as to make the decision unsafe.

Notice of Decision

6.   So I think that on that basis alone without  needing  to  say  anything
    about any other points the matter will have to be set aside and I think
    it will have to be reheard in the First-tier as well. So that  is  what
    will be done in this case.

Anonymity direction made.

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              19 October 2016
