
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
AA/06320/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 April 2018                           |On 25 April 2018                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     a r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart (the  judge),  promulgated  on  1  November
    2017, in  which  she  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision of 20 March  2015,  which  in  turn  refused  her
    protection and  human  rights  claims.   The  Appellant  is  a  Latvian
    national.  Her appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was based partly on  a
    claim to have been the victim of trafficking and a consequent  risk  to
    her on return, but also a claim on  human  rights  grounds  by  way  of
    resistance to the  Respondent's  decision  to  deport  her  because  of
    relevant offending history.




The judge's decision

 2. This was a complex case, as recognised in the grant of permission.   In
    addition to the protection and  human  rights  elements,  there  was  a
    jurisdictional argument which appears to have taken up  a  considerable
    amount of time prior to the hearing before the judge and indeed at  the
    hearing itself.  Ultimately, the judge  concluded  that  she  did  have
    jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal,  rejecting  an  argument  from  the
    Respondent that there had  been  no  appealable  decision  against  the
    Appellant.  Having done that the judge goes on to consider the  central
    focus of the Appellant's case, namely the trafficking issue.

 3. Between [98] and [114] the judge makes a number of adverse  credibility
    findings against the Appellant's own evidence and that of her  parents,
    and rejects or places no material weight upon two expert  reports,  one
    from a psychotherapist and the other from an expert on trafficking.

 4. It was concluded that the appeal fell to be dismissed on all grounds.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds make the following complaints.  First, the judge failed  to
    treat the Appellant as a vulnerable witness within the meaning  of  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note, Number 2 of 2010.  This failure had a
    bearing on the assessment of credibility.  Second, the judge  erred  in
    her approach to the expert evidence.  It is  said  that  there  was  an
    absence of clear findings in respect of the reports, there had been  an
    erroneous expectation that  something  amounting  to  a  transcript  of
    questions and answers should have been produced, and that the judge had
    failed to appreciate that the authors were applying their own expertise
    to what the Appellant had said, rather than simply relying on her word,
    without more.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pullig on
    5 December 2017.




The hearing before me

 7. At the outset Mr Tufan accepted that the judge had not dealt  with  the
    issue of vulnerability when undertaking her assessment of the evidence.
     He submitted that the question now was really one of materiality.

 8. Ms Mair relied on the  grounds  and  emphasised  that  the  Appellant's
    vulnerability had been brought to the judge's  attention  both  in  the
    skeleton argument before her, and at the hearing.  Reference  had  been
    made to medical notes which showed that  the  Appellant  suffered  from
    mental health problems.  It was clear from her decision that the  judge
    had  not  considered   vulnerability   substantively   when   assessing
    credibility.  I raised the point that the judge had  clearly  placed  a
    lot of emphasis upon the parent's evidence and that this could be  said
    to be separate from that of the Appellant.  Ms Mair submitted that  the
    only direct evidence of the particular trafficking  issues  would  have
    come from the Appellant herself and it is in respect  of  her  evidence
    that the judge erred.

 9. On the expert evidence it was accepted that neither the  reports  could
    be said to be determinative of any of the issues.  However,  they  were
    relevant and should have been considered properly as part and parcel of
    the evidence as a whole.

10. Mr Tufan noted the importance attached to the evidence of  the  parents
    but did acknowledge that there was nothing to indicate that  the  judge
    had considered the  Appellant's  own  evidence  through  the  prism  of
    vulnerability.




Decision on error of law

11. As I announced to the parties at the hearing I conclude that there  are
    material errors of law in the judge's  decision.   This  conclusion  is
    based upon the following matters.

12. In the first place, the Appellant was, on the face of the  evidence,  a
    vulnerable  individual.  It  is  then  quite  clear  that   issues   of
    vulnerability were brought to the judge's attention,  both  in  writing
    and orally at the hearing (see Ms Mair's skeleton argument and [86] and
    [89]).  Specific reference to the relevant Guidance Note is made at the
    very beginning of the skeleton argument.  It is  equally  clear  to  me
    that no reference is made to the guidance, the  important  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 (which had  been  handed  down  in
    July 2017 some months before the hearing before the judge), or even  to
    the substantive issue of vulnerability, anywhere in the lengthy section
    of the judge's decision dealing with findings and reasons.  In my  view
    this is a clear error of law.

13. In respect of whether the error is material I note what is said at [30]
    of AM. A failure to have regard to the relevant guidance was said to be
    "likely to give rise to a material error of law".  The materiality  is,
    if not presumed, certainly something  that  should  not  be  discounted
    without very good reason.

14. In addition there  are  certain  findings  by  the  judge  relating  to
    specific matters connected to the trafficking issue which  required  an
    application of the guidance in question.  In particular I note what  is
    said in [97]-[100]: whether certain aspects of the Appellant's evidence
    had the "ring of truth" or whether  certain  inconsistencies  could  be
    explained by reason of vulnerabilities was something  that  had  to  be
    adequately considered.  In my view this did not occur.

15. I appreciate that the judge was distinctly unimpressed by the  evidence
    from the Appellant's parents.  I had wondered whether  this  aspect  of
    her findings was sufficient to render the error on vulnerability to  be
    immaterial.  However, I agree  with  Ms  Mair  that  it  was  only  the
    Appellant who was able to give direct evidence on  what  had  allegedly
    befallen her in respect of the trafficking issue.  It is also the  case
    that an Appellant is entitled  to  have  their  own  evidence  properly
    assessed in light of not only the evidence as a  whole,  but  also  all
    other  relevant  considerations:  vulnerability   is   one   of   those
    considerations.  In my view this error  is  sufficient  to  render  the
    whole decision unsafe.

16. I also conclude  however  that  the  judge  erred  in  respect  of  her
    treatment of the expert evidence.  I acknowledge that both reports  are
    not perhaps as detailed as they might have been.  Having said that, the
    expertise of the authors was  certainly  not  disputed  by  the  judge:
    indeed  she  expressly  accepts  that  Mr  Brierley  (author   of   the
    trafficking report) was an expert in his  field.   In  respect  of  the
    trafficking report, the judge in my view erred by appearing  to  attach
    material weight to her view that he relied on the  narrative  given  by
    the Appellant.  It has been said by  the  Court  of  Appeal  that  real
    caution must be exercised in drawing any such  conclusions,  especially
    if that is detrimental to the weight attributable to an expert  report.
    Experts assess what they are told in light of their  experience.   That
    is, in essence, their role.  It is not a question of them simply taking
    everything at face value, reciting it and adding nothing of their  own.
    In addition, the expert was not required to  provide  a  transcript  of
    interviews conducted with the Appellant.  Finally, contrary to what the
    judge has said at the end of [111], Mr Brierley did explain why certain
    answers provided by the Appellant were significant  in  his  view  (the
    type of information provided and the matter in which this was done gave
    credence to the account in the longstanding experience of the  expert).



17. In terms of the report from Ms Benedict,  the  document  itself  stated
    that numerous sessions had been held with  the  Appellant.   Again  the
    judge appears to be reducing the amount of weight attributable  to  the
    report simply on the  basis  that  there  were  no  particular  details
    provided as to the conversations held over the  course  of  the  twelve
    sessions.  There is no requirement to provide such detail and there was
    nothing in the report (or indeed anywhere else)  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant's emotional/mental health difficulties arose from  any  other
    source other than her claimed trafficking some years previously.

18. For these reasons I set the judge's decision aside.






Disposal

19.  This  appeal  must  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Significant, material issues of fact remain  in  dispute,  and  a  full
    reassessment of the evidence needs to be conducted.  I appreciate  that
    the Appellant's appeal took a very long time to get before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in the first instance.  However, it is right  and  proper
    that the matter be looked at again at that level.  I was  urged  by  Ms
    Mair to preserve the judge's conclusion as to jurisdiction.   Mr  Tufan
    rightly acknowledged that this issue had not  been  challenged  by  the
    Respondent by way of  cross-appeal.   I  agree  with  Ms  Mair  and  do
    preserve the judge's conclusion on jurisdiction as set out in  [12]  to
    [20] of her decision.  This issue is no longer live.

20. In respect of the remitted hearing I will set out  relevant  directions
    below.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed   [pic]                  Date: 23 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



    Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a full re-
         hearing as to the facts and legal issues, save that the question of
         jurisdiction is no longer live. There is a valid appeal;

      2. The appeal shall be re-heard at the Taylor House hearing centre,
         but not by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart;

      3. Given the nature of the case and the procedural history, efforts to
         expedite the re-hearing should be made if at all possible;

      4. The re-hearing should be listed for a whole day;

      5. In listing the appeal, the hearing centre must liaise with Ms
         Mair's clerks as to availability. She has had conduct of this
         complex case throughout, and it is imperative that this continues.
