
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: aa/06168/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2016                    |On 14 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               RMZ (Sri Lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Aghawere, Counsel instructed by Lawland
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andonian  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  18
    September 2015) dismissing the appellant's appeal against the  decision
    by the Secretary of State to refuse to recognise him as a  refugee,  or
    as otherwise requiring international or human rights  protection.   The
    First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction, and I consider  it  is
    appropriate that the appellant continues to be accorded  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 5 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox granted the  appellant
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "I have carefully  considered  the  decision  in  relation  to  the
         grounds.  On consideration, I find nothing arguable in grounds 1, 2
         and 5.  However, I would grant  permission  on  3  and  4.   It  is
         arguable that the judge did not consider the case against the CG of
         CJ and Others as to risk  on  return;  and  that  his  reasons  for
         rejecting A's credibility are not clear or adequate."

The Relevant Factual Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose  date  of  birth  is  9
    August 1985.  He flew out of Sri Lanka on 3 July 2011  and  arrived  in
    the UK on the same day using his own national passport endorsed with  a
    valid UK student visa.  A decision was made to curtail his leave  as  a
    student on 28 May 2011 after his college lost its licence as a sponsor,
    and it emerged that he had never  studied  since  entering  the  United
    Kingdom.  The appellant claimed asylum a year later on 14 June 2012.

 4. At his screening interview he was asked to briefly explain why he could
    not return to his home country.  He said he was running a shop and  one
    of his members of staff was a Tamil.  This member of staff was  stopped
    by the police and later on the police raided the shop and found weapons
    in relation to his LTTE activities.  As  he,  the  appellant,  was  the
    owner and manager of the shop, he was suspected of helping the LTTE and
    having links with the LTTE.  He went into hiding  before  he  left  the
    country and his reason for leaving  the  country  was  fear  about  his
    safety.  He did not know why he had not claimed asylum on arrival.

 5. The appellant completed a  preliminary  information  form  (PIF)  on  4
    December 2014, and his substantive asylum interview  took  place  on  4
    March 2015.  He said that he had owned a hardware shop in  Anuradhapura
    from the time when his father had transferred ownership of the shop  to
    him in December 2010.  On 6 March 2011 one of  his  employees,  Selvam,
    was arrested by the police.  The  shop  was  subsequently  searched  by
    police and weapons were found in the  room  in  which  Selvam  used  to
    sleep.  The same evening the police went to  the  appellant's  home  in
    Kandy to look for him.  But he did not go home and instead  went  to  a
    friend's house somewhere else.  The police were rough and rude with his
    parents, and accused the appellant of being  involved  with  the  LTTE,
    which was not true.   His  uncle  subsequently  went  to  Kandy  police
    station to enquire about the shop.  He  was  told  that  Selvam  was  a
    member of the LTTE: CDs,  memory  cards  and  weapons  had  been  found
    amongst Selvam's  possessions  at  the  shop.   For  this  reason,  the
    authorities believed that the appellant  was  also  involved  with  the
    LTTE.  Two other employees had also been arrested.

 6. In May 2011 the appellant was issued with a court summons.  He did  not
    see it as he was hiding at his uncle's friend's house.  A further court
    summons had been issued since he had been in the United  Kingdom.   The
    police were still looking for him, and a warrant had  been  issued  for
    his arrest.  He said that on return to Sri Lanka he  would  suffer  the
    same fate as his employees, who had  all  disappeared  following  their
    arrest.

 7. On 20 March 2015 the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    to recognise the appellant as a refugee.  His claim to be the owner  of
    a hardware store in Sri Lanka was found  to  unsubstantiated.   He  had
    failed to provide a consistent account of whether he did, or  did  not,
    receive a summons whilst he was in Sri Lanka.  Also he  had  stated  in
    his PIF that he would be able to provide copies of the  summonses,  but
    he had failed to do so.  When asked during his asylum interview why  he
    had been unable to provide these documents  taking  into  consideration
    that three months had elapsed between the submission of his PIF and the
    asylum interview, he stated that he had told this  to  the  lawyer  and
    after that he relaxed and forgot about it.  He had failed to provide  a
    reasonable explanation as to why he had not provided the  documentation
    which he stated was available to him, and which went to the core of his
    claim.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Andonian.  A  bundle
    of documents compiled by the appellant's solicitors for the purposes of
    the hearing included a court summons dated 3  June  2011  and  a  court
    summons dated 16 September 2011,  and  also  a  purported  confirmation
    letter from a Sri Lankan lawyer dated 23 May 2014.

 9. In his subsequent decision, Judge Andonian observed  at  paragraph  [2]
    that the appellant was able to leave Sri Lanka without any  difficulty.
    He went to a travel agent who organised the documentation to travel  to
    the UK.  He had come to the UK as a student, and the appellant had gone
    through a Skype interview in Sri Lanka with the college that he  wished
    to sponsor him for  his  studies  in  the  UK.   The  judge  noted  the
    appellant's  immigration  history  since  his  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and expressed the  view  that  someone  seeking  international
    protection would do so at the earliest opportunity.   Even  giving  the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt that whilst he had a visa he had  no
    immediate fear of persecution, after his visa had been curtailed,  that
    should have been  the  trigger  in  his  mind  if  he  had  a  fear  of
    persecution  to  claim  asylum  immediately,  as  he  had  no   further
    protection.  But he did not do so.

10. The judge then went on to address  the  appellant's  alternative  claim
    under Article 8 ECHR for leave to remain on  private  and  family  life
    grounds. The judge explained at paragraph [3] that this  was  the  main
    reason advanced in the appellant's evidence as to why he should not  be
    returned to his home country.

11. The judge returned to the asylum  claim  later  in  his  decision.   At
    paragraphs [6] to [8] he reviewed the asylum claim in detail.   In  the
    course of this review,  he  observed  that  the  distance  between  the
    appellant's shop and his friend's  home  in  Kurunegala  was  some  110
    kilometres, and no evidence had been given  as  to  how  the  appellant
    travelled this distance to go and stay at his friend's house the  night
    that the police allegedly sought to arrest him.  The judge  also  noted
    that the distance between Kandy and the shop in  Anuradhapura  was  115
    kilometres, and indicated  that  there  was  an  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's claim that his friend lived "nearby" and in consequence  he
    routinely stayed with his friend overnight rather than travelling  back
    to Kandy.

12. The judge's  main  findings  on  the  asylum  claim  were  set  out  in
    paragraphs [9] to [13]. The Sri Lankan lawyer said that  the  appellant
    was a client  of  his  firm,  and  he  had  been  charged  with  aiding
    terrorism.  He  said  they  had  appeared  for  the  appellant  at  the
    magistrate's court. The judge found that he could give little weight to
    the letter as it did not  have  a  professional  letterhead  or  proper
    contact details, and it did not identify the partners in the practice.

13. There was no  deed  of  transfer  in  respect  of  the  hardware  store
    business, and at the time when the business was a  going  concern,  the
    appellant was in Dubai. There was  no  documentary  evidence  that  the
    appellant had worked in the hardware store business.

14. In paragraphs [11] and [12] the judge gave a detailed explanation as to
    why he placed little weight on the two court summonses.

15. At paragraph [13] he concluded that the appellant  had  not  discharged
    the burden of proving to the lower standard of proof that he had a well-
    founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Aghawere, who did not appear below, developed  the  grounds  of
    appeal which he had settled.  Mr Melvin  for  the  Secretary  of  State
    adhered to the Rule 24 response that had been settled by his  colleague
    Mr Kandola.  In summary, it was submitted that the Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal had directed himself appropriately.  The judge had  found
    the appellant not credible - see the final sentence of paragraph  [11].
    The judge  considered  the  appellant's  documents  in  the  round  and
    rejected them as unreliable.  The appellant therefore  had  no  profile
    link to the LTTE or any sur place activities that brought him within GJ
    and Others.  Accordingly no error of law was disclosed by the very poor
    and brief grounds.

Discussion

17. Ground 3 is that the judge failed to consider  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return in the light of the leading country  guidance  case  of  GJ  and
    Others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319. This
    country guidance replaces all existing country guidance on  Sri  Lanka,
    and it includes the following headline guidance:

         "(2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state ... Its  focus
             is on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the  LTTE  or  any
             similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the  revival  of
             the civil war within Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  Security  Services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists ...

             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the  Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes ...

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop'  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list.  A person whose name appears on a  'watch'  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does  not  indicate  that  such  a
             person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state or revive the internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual."

18. It is beyond argument that the judge made no reference whatsoever to GJ
    and Others, and in particular to the risk categories which the Tribunal
    identified in that decision.  However, in the course of oral  argument,
    Mr Aghawere accepted that, on the facts as  found  by  the  judge,  the
    country guidance case of GJ and Others was  of  no  assistance  to  the
    appellant on the issue of risk on return.  He agreed with me  that  the
    facts would have to change in order to engender  an  arguable  case  of
    risk on return.  In short, on the facts as  found  by  the  judge,  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden of proving  that  there  was  a
    real risk of him being on a stop list or wanted list, or  as  otherwise
    being of adverse interest to the authorities on return  on  account  of
    his past history or perceived political profile.

19. Accordingly, the error of law challenge hinges on ground  4,  which  is
    that the judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding against  the
    appellant on credibility:

         "The judge merely rejects aspects of the appellant's claim  without
         engaging in reasons why he has reached such conclusions."

20. I invited Mr Aghawere to develop his case with  reference  to  specific
    passages in the decision.  As a result of  this  exercise,  it  emerged
    that Mr Aghawere's main complaint related to the judge's  treatment  of
    the two court summonses.

21. Although not cited to me, I have had regard to the  guidance  given  by
    the higher courts on the approach to be followed to  an  error  of  law
    challenge based on an asserted inadequacy of  judicial  reasoning.   In
    South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL  33,  cited  with
    approval by the Court of Appeal in Muse  &  Others  v  Entry  Clearance
    Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 at paragraph [33], Lord Brown said:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need only refer to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every material consideration."

22. Mr Aghawere submitted that the judge had  wrongly  excluded  the  court
    summonses from consideration on the sole  and  inadequate  ground  that
    they had been produced late.  However, it is not true  that  the  judge
    thereby "excluded" the court  summonses  from  consideration.   On  the
    contrary, he expressly stated at the end of paragraph [11] that he  was
    placing little weight  on  the  documents  from  Sri  Lanka  which  the
    appellant had produced (namely the lawyer's letter and  the  two  court
    summonses) in accordance with the  principles  of  Tanveer  Ahmed.   On
    analysis, the judge gave three reasons for attaching  little  probative
    value to these documents, all of which were properly developed.

23. In summary, although the court summonses were purportedly served on the
    appellant's parents in the summer of 2011, the appellant did  not  have
    the information in relation to these summonses  at  the  time  when  he
    claimed asylum on 12 July 2012.  It  is  apparent  from  the  screening
    interview that he did not mention these summonses at all ("Reason  1").



24. Moreover, although he declared their claimed existence in his  PIF,  he
    had still not produced them by the time of his asylum  interview  three
    months later.  It was open to the judge to find, as he did at  the  end
    of  paragraph  [11],  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to  provide  a
    reasonable  explanation  as  why  he  had  not  provided  earlier   the
    documentation that he said was available to him, and which went to  the
    core of his claim.  Their late production, after the refusal  decision,
    was reasonably characterised by the judge as fresh  evidence  that  had
    been supplied for the purposes of the appeal.

25. As there was not a reasonable explanation for such documentary evidence
    not being produced in advance of the refusal decision, it was  open  to
    the judge to give little weight to the documents ("Reason 2").

26. Mr Aghawere agreed that the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for  being
    dismissive of the lawyer's letter, based on its  presentation  ("Reason
    3").

27. Mr Aghawere accepted that the evidence relating to the lawyer's alleged
    involvement  in  the  appellant's  case  was  open  to  the  additional
    criticism that lawyer had not produced an official court record,  or  a
    contemporaneous record made by the firm, of the alleged  court  hearing
    that the lawyer had allegedly attended on behalf of  the  appellant  in
    response to a court summons.

28. Mr Aghawere submitted that the court summonses had a higher status than
    the  lawyer's  letter  as  they  purported  to  be  officially   issued
    documents.   While  that  is  true,  the  prevalence  of  bribery   and
    corruption in Sri Lanka, which is alluded to by the Tribunal in GJ  and
    Others, means that there is no a priori assumption  of  reliability  in
    documents from Sri Lanka which purport  to  emanate  from  an  official
    source.

29. Mr Aghawere initially criticised the judge for not attaching weight  to
    the registration certificate as evidence of the  appellant's  ownership
    of the hardware store.  He withdrew this criticism  after  I  drew  his
    attention to the fact that in the middle of  paragraph  [9]  the  judge
    noted that the appellant had provided "some evidence"  in  relation  to
    the existence of the business, namely the certificate  of  registration
    of an individual.

30. Mr Aghawere also criticised the judge's finding at the end of paragraph
    [10] where he said that at the time  when  the  business  was  a  going
    concern, the appellant was in Dubai.  He had a  residence  card  there,
    and there was no evidence that he had in fact worked  in  the  hardware
    business.  Mr Aghawere did not challenge the factual  accuracy  of  the
    judge's finding that the appellant was in Dubai when the business was a
    going concern.  His submission was that the judge should not have  made
    an adverse credibility finding on this basis, because the appellant did
    not need to be in Sri Lanka in order to be  involved  in  the  hardware
    store  business.   I  consider  that  this  is  a  mere  expression  of
    disagreement with a finding that was reasonably open to the judge.   It
    was reasonable for the judge to  be  sceptical  about  the  appellant's
    claimed involvement in the hardware store business if he was  in  Dubai
    when the business was a going concern.  It was open  to  the  judge  to
    find that this made it more likely that that the appellant was in  fact
    involved in the business.

31. In conclusion, the judge has given adequate reasons  for  finding  that
    the appellant was not credible either with regard  to  his  account  of
    past persecution or in respect of the facts relied upon as giving  rise
    to a future risk on return to Sri Lanka.

32. Mr Aghawere conceded that ground 5 had no merit, but sought to persuade
    me that Judge Osborne ought to  have  granted  permission  for  him  to
    pursue grounds 1 and 2, which relate to  the  alternative  claim  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  I am  not  so  persuaded.   The  judge  gave  adequate
    reasons in paragraph [4] for finding that the delay of  the  respondent
    in  making  a  decision  on  the  appellant's  refugee  claim  did  not
    materially advance the appellant's claim under  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    judge acknowledged the delay, but held that the effect of the delay did
    not mean that the appellant had established a private life in  relation
    to which it was "so compelling" that breach of that private life  would
    be highly prejudicial to him by his removal from the UK; and that as  a
    result he should be entitled to remain in this  country.   Mr  Aghawere
    submitted that the judge applied too high a standard of proof in making
    this finding.  I reject this submission.  The  judge  rightly  directed
    himself that there had to be compelling  circumstances  to  justify  an
    Article 8 claim succeeding outside the Rules, and it was open to him to
    find  that  there  was  a   complete   absence   of   such   compelling
    circumstances, for the reasons  which  he  gave  in  the  remainder  of
    paragraph [4].

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

