
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/ 06600 /2015, AA
06776 2015,
     AA/ 06790/ 2015 & AA/ 06803 /2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 August 2017                             |On 26 September 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

|                |K B                                       |First Appellant |
|                |S K                                       |Second Appellant|
|                |S K                                       |Third Appellant |
|                |T K                                       |Fourth Appellant|


                           (ANONIMITY ORDER MADE)
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms R Manning, Counsel instructed by Staffordshire
                    North and Stoke on Trent Citizens Advice Bureau
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellants. Breach of this order can be punished as  a  contempt  of
       court. I make this order because the appellants  are  asylum  seeker
       and publicity about their cases could itself put them at risk.

    2. This is a  challenge  to  a  decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       dismissing the appeals of the appellants against a decision  of  the
       respondent that they are  not  refugees  or  otherwise  entitled  to
       international protection.  The  appeals  were  dismissed  under  the
       Refugee Convention, on humanitarian protection grounds and under the
       European Convention on Human Rights.

    3. The appellants are all citizens of Sri Lanka.  The  first  appellant
       is the father of the other three appellants who were born  in  2007,
       2011 and 2014 respectively.  The asylum appeal turned on credibility
       and the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  believe  the  appellants'
       evidence, particularly the evidence of the Firs Appellant and of his
       wife.

    4. It is Ms Manning's case  that  the  judge  gave  wrong  reasons  for
       disbelieving the appellants so that the adverse credibility findings
       are unsound with the result that the appeal  has  to  be  determined
       again.  This appeal has already been determined twice in the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

    5. The grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  do  not  challenge  the
       decision to dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.  It  follows
       that the decision to dismiss  the  appeals  on  grounds  relying  on
       Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights shall stand.

    6. Ms Manning's grounds are commendably brief and make the  best  point
       first.

    7. The grounds challenge particularly paragraph 40  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge's decision.  I set it out below:

  "I have considered the amended letter of complaint and I have taken  into
  account it is signed by the returning officer and dated 7  November  2011
  but what the Appellant has failed to address is  the  Respondent's  point
  that he was in the UK with his passport at this time.  I appreciate  that
  the Appellant has said that the CID officers took a photocopy  but  again
  it is not clear how they could have taken a copy if the passport was with
  the Appellant in the United Kingdom.  Therefore while the  Appellant  may
  have written a letter of complaint I am not satisfied that this aspect of
  his claim is credible given the fact his passport  could  not  have  been
  with his mother in Sri Lanka when he was in the United Kingdom."

    8. The point being addressed here was the first appellant's claim,  now
       established, that although present in the United  Kingdom  he  stood
       for election at a local election in Sri Lanka  and  that  there  was
       significant harassment during that election which  prompted  him  to
       complain.

    9. I am  uneasy  with  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  letter  of
       complaint.  Whilst it is clearly  a  self-serving  document  in  the
       sense that it is only another version of the first appellant's  case
       emanating  from  him  that  his  family  members  were  subject   to
       harassment as a result of his standing in the  election,  if  it  is
       believed it shows that the story being told now was devised as  long
       ago as November 2011. Whilst that does not mean it is a  true  story
       it is something that should be considered when  the  credibility  of
       the case as a whole is evaluated.

   10. The big problem for the Secretary of State is  that  this  paragraph
       clearly shows that the judge was minded to disbelieve the  appellant
       because he had claimed improbably that his passport was in Sri Lanka
       when as a matter of fact it was with him in the United Kingdom.   If
       the appellant had been caught out telling  inconsistent  stories  in
       that  way  it  may  very  well  have  been  a  devastating   adverse
       credibility point.  The difficulty is the point is not  established.
       A hint of the problem comes in the judge's own appreciation that the
       appellant said that the CID officers had taken a copy but the  judge
       clearly understood that to mean they had made a copy else the  judge
       would not have said "it is not clear how they  could  have  taken  a
       copy if the passport was with the appellant in the United Kingdom".

   11. The first reference to the documents  that  I  can  see  is  in  the
       screening interview at page A4 in  the  respondent's  bundle.   When
       summarising his claim the claimant is recorded as saying:

  "Then the army investigation came to our house and took some documents  -
  passport copies and national ID to send to the  airport.   I  don't  know
  why."

   12. It cannot be said with certainty if the appellant had said then that
       the copy passports already existed or if the document was  there  to
       copy.  The point was revisited in the appellant's  asylum  interview
       and he said in answer to question 79 that:

  "The police they wanted my passport copy and they asked for my UK address
  and they wanted my other family details, sister's details and  where  are
  they staying and they asked my mother about my  friends  so  when  mother
  asked them why do they want passport copy and they  replied  we  want  to
  give it to the airport and they hope to  arrest  when  I  return  to  the
  election."

   13. This does not advance things any further.  It is  certainly  not  an
       admission that the passport was there to be copied or taken.  In his
       witness statement at paragraph 68 the appellant said:

  "They refused to show any ID but forcibly collected a copy of my passport
  and details of other family members and friends."

   14. Whilst a fair-minded reader  might  think  that  the  appellant  was
       describing a process whereby the police officers made a  copy  of  a
       passport, that is not what the appellant said.  On each of the three
       occasions when the appellant mentioned the  passport  he  was  clear
       that it was a copy that was required and gave no indication that the
       copy had to be made.  I find this significant.   Nobody  thought  to
       ask the appellant where his passport was at the  time.   The  answer
       might have been the very obvious one that it was  with  him  in  the
       United Kingdom or with the immigration  authorities  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  The appellant has not explained how  his  mother  came  to
       have a copy of his passport.  I imagine that in Sri Lanka,  much  as
       in the United Kingdom, there are people who routinely copy important
       documents, people who might have had  occasion  to  have  copied  an
       important document and people who would never think of doing such  a
       thing.   Paragraph  40   of   the   judge's   decision   reveals   a
       misunderstanding in the evidence.  It was never the appellant's case
       that a copy had to be made by the visiting police.   It  has  always
       been his case that a copy was removed.  It is unsafe to assume  that
       he had been caught out telling a lie.  Rather I  am  driven  to  the
       conclusion that the judge took a bad point and has  disbelieved  the
       appellant in an important aspect of his case where the evidence does
       not support the conclusion that  the  judge  reached.   This  rather
       illustrates the danger of making findings on points  that  were  not
       put directly to witnesses.

   15. This case will have to be heard again and no doubt the point will be
       put but there is no escaping the fact that the appellant  will  have
       had a long time to have worked out a dishonest  answer  if  that  is
       what he wanted to do.  That is not his fault and it may be  that  it
       would be impossible to reject any cogent explanation that he  gives.



   16. Reluctantly I have to accept  that  undermining  this  part  of  the
       adverse credibility finding undermines the Decision and Reasons as a
       whole.  Ms Aboni, correctly  and  forcefully,  pointed  out  that  a
       mistake on this part of the evidence does not lead to the conclusion
       that the appellants are at risk now.  The difficulty is that he gave
       evidence that he is presently at risk in Sri  Lanka.   The  evidence
       was described, with some justification, as being  rather  vague  and
       was disbelieved.  The decision to disbelieve it  was  influenced  by
       the bad point that was taken and cannot be relied  upon.   At  point
       "d" in her grounds Ms Manning complains that the judge has not  made
       clear  findings  on  the  appellant's  wife's  claim  that  she  was
       interrogated  in  her  return  to  Sri  Lanka  and  told  that   the
       authorities knew about  the  first  appellant's  activities  in  the
       United Kingdom (or words to that effect - that  is  my  paraphrase).
       Whilst it is possible to make out a case that the first  appellant's
       wife was disbelieved for other reasons and  there  was  no  need  to
       comment expressly on this point it  is  at  least  undesirable  that
       there have been  no  clear  findings  on  that  part  of  the  first
       appellant's wife's case where she claimed, as she does at  paragraph
       14 of her witness statement, that the  police  told  her  that  they
       "believed that [the appellant] was working as a shadow member of the
       LTTE and had moved to the UK to work out her future  LTTE  plans  in
       the UK and abroad".

   17. Whilst not strictly determinative this is a point of such importance
       it is undesirable that it has not been addressed specifically in the
       decision.

   18. The case has to be heard again and it is better that it is  done  in
       the First-tier Tribunal and so I remit the case  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal for the protection claim to be re-determined.  The positive
       findings made have not been undermined and  should  be  taken  as  a
       starting point.

     Decision

     I set aside the decision  that  the  Appellants  are  not  refugees  or
otherwise entitled to international protection.

     I direct that the case is heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 September 2017              |





