
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06508/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th July 2015                    |On 30th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BSM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Andrew Joseph, Counsel


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal I will refer to the parties in the style by  which  they
    appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

 2. I make an order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269).  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
    Court directs otherwise no report of these proceedings or any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  original
    appellant.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.
    Any failure to comply with this direction may give rise to  a  contempt
    of court proceedings.  I  make  this  order  notwithstanding  that  the
    determination of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge  purported  to  make  no
    anonymity direction.  Such a direction would  have  been  made  at  the
    commencement  of  the  appeal  proceedings.   It  is  clear   that   no
    application was made to the First-Tier Tribunal Judge for  the  lifting
    of such a direction, thus such original direction continues.

 3. The appellant claimed to be a citizen of Iran, born 19 July  1990.   He
    entered the United Kingdom via Greece on an unknown  date  and  claimed
    asylum in December 2013.  His claimed was rejected by the respondent in
    a decision dated 7 August 2014.  He  appealed  against  that  decision.
    His appeal came before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal  Eames  sitting
    at Newport on  9  March  2015.   Both  parties  were  represented  (the
    appellant again by Mr Joseph).  In dealing with the appeal Judge  Eames
    had the benefit of a Sprakab report.  The appellant gave evidence.  The
    judge found the appellant credible.

 4. Judge Eames set out his findings from paragraphs 61 to  65  reaching  a
    conclusion at paragraph 66.  The judge purported to  allow  the  appeal
    both on asylum grounds and on humanitarian protection grounds.

 5. The respondent sought leave to appeal.  The grounds alleged that  Judge
    Eames made a material error of law in finding that  the  appellant  was
    from Iran as claimed having placed no  weight  on  the  Sprakab  report
    which had concluded that the appellant  was  from  Iraq,  despite  also
    evidence that the appellant had claimed to be from Sulaymaniyah  (Iraq)
    when arrested and finger printed in Greece.  The judge  had  failed  to
    consider or mention that evidence at all and that as such  the  judge's
    findings in respect of nationality became "untenable".

 6. In granting leave to appeal, Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Kelly
    gave the following as his reasons:

          "1. The Respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
         decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Eames,  promulgated  on  the
         21st April 2015, to  allow  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
         decision to refuse the Appellant's application for  asylum  and  to
         remove him from the United Kingdom.

         2.   It is arguable that whilst the Tribunal recorded the  evidence
         that the Appellant had previously informed  the  Greek  authorities
         that he was from Suleymania (as opposed  to  Iran)  [see  paragraph
         39], it nevertheless failed to engage with  that  evidence  and  to
         consider it in conjunction with the conclusion in a Sprakab  report
         that the Appellant was from Suleymania.   It  is  further  arguable
         that this affected the outcome of the appeal".

 7. Thus the matter came before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  Joseph
    acknowledged that  no  Rule  24  Response  had  been  provided  by  the
    appellant's solicitors.

 8. Mr Richards in his submission relied upon the grounds.   He  emphasised
    the findings of the  Sprakab  report,  together  with  the  appellant's
    comments when arrested in Greece that he was from Sulaymaniyah in Iraq.
     It was clear that the judge had been aware of that, but had not  dealt
    with it in his findings.  His  failure  to  engage  with  the  evidence
    amounted to an error of law and that error infected all  the  findings,
    and his conclusions must be set aside.

 9. Mr Joseph commented that it was a very narrow issue.  He submitted that
    the judge (paragraph 37) had engaged  with  the  evidence.   Mr  Joseph
    agreed that the judge had not mentioned that  aspect  of  the  evidence
    (the admission in Greece) again in the determination.  He had given  an
    explanation which had been accepted by the  Tribunal.   Inconsistencies
    in the evidence were dealt with at paragraph 53  and  the  judge  dealt
    with the Sprakab report at paragraphs 55 to 57.   Mr  Joseph  indicated
    that there was no need on the part of the  judge  to  make  a  specific
    finding.  He had made findings on all  aspects  of  the  evidence,  the
    appellant had volunteered the information about Greece.   If  an  error
    existed it was not material.

10. Mr Richards  in  response  noted  that  the  judge  had  made  positive
    findings, but had failed to deal with an important piece of evidence.

11. At the end of the hearing I indicated  I  was  reserving  my  decision,
    which I now give with reasons.

12. The very narrow issue in relation to this appeal is the nationality  of
    the appellant.  He claims to be from  Iran,  whilst  the  Secretary  of
    State is of the view that the appellant is from Sulaymaniyah  in  Iraq.
    The respondents view throughout has  been  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Sprakab report combined with the appellant's comments when arrested  in
    Greece  (that  he  was  from  Sulaymaniyah)  effectively  disprove  the
    appellant's claim that now that he is from Iran and not Iraq.

13. A reading of Judge Eames determination shows that he was aware of  both
    aspects of this evidence of nationality.   At  paragraphs  55  and  56,
    Judge Eames deals  with  the  Sprakab  report  and  for  reasons  given
    discounts the linguistic assessment provided by that report.  In  short
    he finds the  "Swedish  linguists"  deficient  in  their  knowledge  of
    Sorani.  However what Judge Eames does not do in assessing the  Sprakab
    report is to assess the linguists' view  that  the  appellant  is  from
    Sulaymaniyah with the appellants own  unchallenged  evidence  given  in
    Greece that indeed he was from Sulaymaniyah.

14. Judge Eames does note the appellant's evidence at the hearing  that  he
    said he was from Sulaymaniyah out of fear, but nowhere is it  suggested
    what the fear was based upon.  Why was he frightened  and  why  did  he
    think that saying he was from Sulaymaniyah would be a safer option?

15. The nationality of the appellant was a prime consideration  in  respect
    of his claim for asylum and I do not  consider  that  Judge  Eames  has
    adequately dealt with the evidence in reaching the conclusion  that  he
    did.  Weight had to be given to the Sprakab report and if  Judge  Eames
    had taken into account the appellants admission he may well  have  come
    to a different conclusion with  regard  to  that  report.   Failure  to
    engage with the evidence  amounts  to  an  error  of  law  and  in  the
    circumstances it must be material to the outcome  of  the  appeal.   In
    short the judge did not give due consideration to the  evidence  before
    him.

16. I therefore find a material error of law in the decision of Judge Eames
    and it falls to be set aside.

17. At the hearing before me both representatives acknowledged that in  the
    event of me reaching this conclusion it would be appropriate  to  remit
    the case for re-hearing before the First-Tier Tribunal, where  findings
    will need to be made with regard to the appellant's  nationality  based
    upon all the evidence that is available. I do nor preserve any of Judge
    Eames' findings.

Decision

18. The decision of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Eames cannot stand  and  must
    be set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal to  be
    heard de novo by a judge other than Judge Eames.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
