
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06052/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st March 2016                   |On 15th April 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     NM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O James instructed by Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            REMITTAL AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  3  September
    1979.  She arrived in the UK, together with her two sons,  on  20  July
    2013 with leave valid until 2 January 2014.  Her leave duly expired and
    on 17 June 2014 she made a claim for asylum.  That claim was based upon
    her fear of return  to  Pakistan  because  she  had  suffered  domestic
    violence at the hands of her husband  over  a  prolonged  period.   She
    feared that on return she and her children would be at  risk  from  her
    husband.

 3. On 7 August 2014, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection and under Article 8 of the ECHR.
     On that date, the Secretary of State made a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant as an overstayer under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act
    1999.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Following a hearing
    on 10 July 2015, in a determination sent on 27 July 2014 Judge  Frazer,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 5. For present  purposes,  the  only  relevant  decision  relates  to  the
    appellant's international protection claim (on asylum grounds) that she
    (and her children) would be at risk on return of domestic  violence  by
    her husband.

 6. Judge Frazer found the appellant not to be credible  and  rejected  her
    account that she had previously suffered domestic violence and was,  as
    a consequence, at risk on return to  Pakistan.   Judge  Frazer  gave  a
    number of reasons at paras 24-34 for rejecting her  account.   He  took
    into account, for example, that the appellant had  not  claimed  asylum
    until a year after her arrival and that this damaged her credibility by
    virtue of s.8(2) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,
    etc) Act 2004 (the "2004 Act") (see para 34).   In  addition,  he  took
    into account that the appellant had not produced mobile  phone  records
    to support her claim  that  her  husband  had  threatened  her  on  the
    telephone and had not given a satisfactory explanation of  how  he  had
    obtained her phone number (see para 29).  Further, the  Judge  did  not
    consider it plausible that the appellant's  husband  had  laid  an  FIR
    against her in Pakistan (see para 30).

 7. In paragraphs  25-28  of  his  determination,  the  Judge  doubted  the
    appellant's credibility  because  of  information  given  in  her  visa
    application which was now inconsistent with her  claim:  in  particular
    that she had four  rather  than  two  children  and  that  her  visitor
    application had been supported by her husband  which  was  inconsistent
    with her claim to be  escaping  from  a  violent  husband  without  his
    knowledge and consent.  Judge Frazer said this:

         "25.     ... She came to the United Kingdom on a tourist visa,  the
             application for which is in the Respondent's bundle.   On  her
             application, the Appellant had stated that she had 4  children
             and had filled out the name and date of the birth  fields  for
             each of those children.  She declared that two of the children
             would not be travelling with her.  She declared that  she  was
             dependent on her husband's income and that her  husband  would
             be funding her trip to the United Kingdom.   As  part  of  her
             application the Appellant submitted a letter from her  husband
             on paper headed 'Savour Rice Mills' wherein he  declared  that
             he wished to support his wife and children during their  visit
             to the United Kingdom   He  appended  a  number  of  documents
             relating to finances to the letter in support.

         26. By contrast in her asylum interview the  Appellant  said  that
             she only had two children named Abdullah and  Ahmad,  the  two
             children that she had with  her  in  the  UK.   The  Appellant
             denied that the other children named on the  visa  application
             form, Fahmad and Iman, were the names of her children.  It was
             put to the Appellant that it seemed odd that the  agent  would
             put  the  names  of  two  additional  children  on  her   visa
             application, especially  as  it  stated  that  they  were  not
             travelling  with  her,  to  which  the  appellant  offered  no
             comment.  I have taken the absence of a response into  account
             under s.8(3)(e) of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
             Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

         27. In both her interview and in her evidence to the Tribunal  the
             Appellant stated that her husband did not know  that  she  was
             leaving the country and taking the children  out  of  the  UK.
             She said that she had raised  money  by  selling  jewelry  and
             provided some evidence of receipts to support this.   This  is
             inconsistent with the document in  support  from  the  husband
             provided for her visa application which  purports  to  support
             the Appellant during her visit to the United Kingdom.  When it
             was put to the Appellant that  it  was  her  husband  who  was
             financial sponsor she said that she was unaware  of  what  was
             put in the visa application form  as  a  friend  of  her  late
             father filled it out on her behalf.

         28. The very core of the Appellant's account is that she had taken
             out a visa to escape her violent husband without his knowledge
             and consent and it was this very issue that had  made  him  so
             angry.  The visa application does not bear this  out  at  all.
             It is evidence of a mother who has taken two of  her  children
             away with her, leaving two behind (presumably with the violent
             husband) and who has been supported in so doing  by  the  very
             husband she is alleging has  caused  her  to  flee.   She  has
             offered no explanation for why the  agent  has  included  such
             details about her family and a  letter  of  support  from  her
             husband which is  so  inconsistent  wit  h  the  core  of  her
             account."

 8. In the result, as I have already said, the Judge reached  his  "primary
    conclusion" that the appellant's account was not credible and that  the
    "inconsistencies went to the very core of her  account"  and  "did  not
    have the ring of plausibility" (see para 34).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that the Judge's credibility finding  was  flawed  since  he  had
    failed to take into account the appellant's explanation that  the  visa
    application form had been completed on her behalf by a  friend  of  her
    father's (an agent) and she had no  knowledge  of  what  was  contained
    within it including the perceived  inconsistent  information  with  her
    claim.

10. Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal  but  on  5
    October 2015, the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Bruce)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal on the following grounds:

         "It is arguable that the determination fails  to  address  specific
         evidence given by the Appellant about her visa form.  At  paragraph
         28 the determination states that she gave "no  explanation"  as  to
         why the biographical details on the VAF are markedly different from
         the account she now advances:  It is arguable that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal has here overlooked paragraph 6 of the Appellant's witness
         statement and the answers given at Q3-8 of the asylum interview."

11. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Submissions

12. On behalf of the appellant, Mr James  submitted  that  a  narrow  point
    raised, namely that the Judge's reasoning in  paras  [26]-[28]  of  his
    determination could not stand in law.

13. First, Mr James submitted that it was simply wrong  for  the  Judge  to
    state in para 26 that the appellant had not offered any comment of  the
    fact that her visa application (contrary to her case)  identified  that
    she had four children.  Mr James submitted that in  her  interview  (at
    B6) the appellant had been asked about this and had explained that  the
    form had been filled in by another person and he may have included  the
    extra children but they were  not  her  children.   In  response  to  a
    question as to why an agent would do this, the appellant  replied  that
    she did not know.  Further, when it was put to her that it was odd  for
    an agent to do this, she responded that  she  could  not  say  anything
    about that.  Mr James relied upon these answers at Questions 7-9 of her
    asylum interview and submitted that the Judge was, therefore, wrong  to
    apply s.8(3)(e) of the 2004 Act  which  states  that  a  decision-maker
    should take into account as damaging of credibility a person's "failure
    without reasonable explanation to answer a question asked by a deciding
    authority".  There had been no failure to answer any question.

14. Secondly, Mr James submitted that in relying upon  the  inconsistencies
    between the information in the visa application and her account in  her
    asylum claim the Judge had not only failed to  take  into  account  her
    explanation (that she was not involved in filling out the form) in  her
    interview but also in paragraph 6 of her witness statement dated 8 July
    2015 (at page 2 of the appellant's bundle).

15. Mr James submitted that these  errors  were  material  to  the  Judge's
    credibility finding which could not be sustained on the  basis  of  his
    other reasons, in  particular  her  failure  to  produce  mobile  phone
    records.

16. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    essence of the Judge's determination was that he did  not  believe  the
    appellant's account.  Mr Richards said that there was no explanation as
    to why the details had been wrongly given in the visa application  form
    even if that had been done by an agent.   The  Judge  was  entitled  to
    expect an explanation from the appellant and to take an adverse view if
    none was given.  Further, he  pointed  out  that  the  Judge  had  been
    entitled to rely upon the year's delay after arriving in the UK  before
    the appellant claimed asylum by virtue of s.8 of the 2004 Act  and  had
    given ample reasons overall for his conclusion.

Discussion

17. There is no doubt that the Judge fell into error  in  paragraph  26  in
    applying s.8(3)(e) of the 2004 Act in considering, as damaging  of  the
    appellant's  credibility,  that  she  had  failed  without   reasonable
    explanation to answer a question asked by  a  deciding  authority.   In
    relation to the questions at interview directed  to  there  being  four
    children named on her visa application, the appellant  did  provide  an
    answer.  It was not a "no comment" response; it was that the agent  had
    completed the form and that she had no idea why  he  had  included  two
    children who  were  not  hers.   Section  8(3)(e)  is  directed  at  an
    individual's failure to provide any response to a question rather  than
    an individual who provides  a  response  which,  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's view, is inadequate.

18. In addition, I accept Mr James' submission that the Judge in paragraphs
    26-28 has failed to engage with the appellant's explanation of why  the
    evidence she was now giving was inconsistent with that obtained in  her
    visa application.  In relying on the inconsistency,  it  was  incumbent
    upon the Judge to engage and grapple with the  appellant's  explanation
    and to reach a reasoned finding as to whether he accepted  it  or  not.
    If he accepted the  explanation,  the  inconsistencies  might  well  be
    irrelevant or, at  least,  of  much  less  weight  in  the  credibility
    assessment.   Only  if  he  rejected  her   explanation   could   those
    inconsistencies tell against the truthfulness of her account.

19. Finally, a matter raised in the grounds but not directly referred to by
    Mr James in his oral submissions, concerns  the  Judge's  reasoning  in
    paragraph 28:  in particular the final sentence where the Judge  states
    that the appellant has offered no explanation why the agent would  have
    included details of her family which were false and a letter of support
    from her  husband.   The  Judge  clearly  took  this  into  account  in
    assessing her credibility and, it would appear from his  conclusion  in
    paragraph 34,  in  effect,  he  considered  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's visa application not to have the "ring of plausibility"  if
    she were fleeing domestic violence by  her  husband.   There  is,  with
    respect to the Judge, a rather  obvious  reason  why  such  information
    might be included in a  visa  application  in  any  circumstances.   To
    demonstrate support and continued roots  in  Pakistan  is  relevant  in
    assessing the bona fides of a visit.  The information could  have  been
    included for that reason even if the appellant has previously  suffered
    domestic violence and feared it in the future.  Some matters which defy
    common sense can entirely appropriately described as  implausible  but,
    such a characterisation is improper if a given the set of circumstances
    or behaviour may be consistent with more than one explanation (see e.g.
    MM (DRC - plausibility) Democratic Republic of Congo [2005] UKIAT 00019
    at [20]-[23]).  That was, in my judgement, the position in this  appeal
    at least to the extent that without providing a substratum  of  reasons
    it is unclear why the Judge considered that there was, in effect,  only
    one  proper  explanation  of  the  inconsistencies  arising  from   the
    appellant's visa application form.

20. For these reasons, the Judge erred  in  law  in  reaching  his  adverse
    credibility finding.  I do not  accept  Mr  Richards'  submission  that
    these errors are immaterial. I accept that the Judge gave a  number  of
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's credibility, including the  delay
    in claiming asylum,  the  failure  to  produce  mobile  phone  reports,
    records  of  claimed  threatening  calls  by  her   husband   and   the
    unsatisfactory explanation as to how her  husband  obtained  her  phone
    number. However, reading the Judge's reasoning as a whole I  am  unable
    to  conclude  that  without  the  reasoning  contained  in  the  flawed
    paragraphs 26-28 of his determination the Judge would necessarily  have
    reached the same conclusion  on  credibility.   In  my  judgement,  the
    adverse view he took  of  the  appellant  based  upon  the  information
    provided in the visa application form was a material factor leading him
    to his adverse finding.

Decision and Disposal

21. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellants appeal on asylum grounds involved the making of  a  material
    error of law.

22. That decision is, accordingly, set aside and must be remade.

23. Given that the Judge's credibility finding cannot stand and that, as  a
    result, the appellant's appeal has to be  determined  de  novo,  having
    regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statements  the
    nature and extent of fact finding  required  makes  it  appropriate  to
    remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo  by  a
    Judge other than Judge Frazer.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:


