
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06055/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 November 2014                             |On 28 November 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              NM (Afghanistan)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:              Mr C Avery, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr R Halim, Counsel, instructed by
                           Hammersmith and Fulham Community Law Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nightingale sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    on 24 September 2014) allowing his  appeal  on  asylum  and  Article  3
    grounds against a decision by the Secretary of State made on  6  August
    2014 to refuse to vary his leave to remain in the United  Kingdom,  and
    to make directions for his removal under Section 47 of the Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act  2006.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an
    anonymity direction, and I consider that it  is  appropriate  that  the
    claimant should have anonymity  for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Afghanistan, with  an  assessed  date  of
    birth of 1 January 1995.  He is recorded as having  been  fingerprinted
    in Greece on 28 April 2009.  He first came  to  the  attention  of  the
    United Kingdom authorities when he claimed asylum at ASU Croydon on  29
    September 2009.  He said he was aged 14, according to what his paternal
    uncle had told him on  his  departure.   He  came  from  a  village  in
    Nangarhar Province, and his religion was Muslim  (Sunni).   His  normal
    occupation was helping his uncle on his farm, and he had four years  of
    schooling.  Both his parents were deceased, and his paternal uncle  had
    brought him up.  He had left Afghanistan about two months ago.  He  had
    arrived in the UK by lorry and on the same day he  had  come  to  claim
    asylum.  His reason for coming to the UK was that the Taliban had  come
    to their village, and tried to recruit young  boys  to  become  suicide
    bombers.  His uncle had arranged for him to come here.

 3. The London Borough of Croydon conducted an age assessment on 29 October
    2009.  He stated that he was 14 years old, but his physical  appearance
    presented slightly older.  He was slim and tall.  There was no evidence
    that he had been shaving any beard, but he had  a  moustache  that  was
    shaved.  In interview, the claimant was confident and expressed himself
    well.  He was very confident in talking with adults.  The conclusion of
    the assessment was that his physical appearance and demeanour presented
    older than 14 years, but younger  than  16  years.   It  was  therefore
    decided by the assessing social worker to accept his  claimed  date  of
    birth of 14 years, turning 15 years in January 2010.

 4.  The  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  refused,  but   he   was   given
    discretionary leave to remain until the age of 17� in  accordance  with
    the Secretary of State's policy  for  the  treatment  of  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking children where adequate reception arrangements  had  not
    been established for them in Afghanistan.

 5. In June 2012 the claimant applied for further leave to remain, and  his
    application was refused on 29 July 2014.   On  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation, it was noted that he was  a  19  year  old  male.   He  had
    conducted his asylum interview in Pashtu which is  one  of  the  native
    Afghan languages, so language would not be a barrier to his relocation.
     He had been able to travel from Afghanistan to the United Kingdom with
    the use of agents.  He had been able to adapt to  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom despite the differences in language  and  culture.   Since  his
    arrival  in  the  UK,   he   had   studied   at   various   educational
    establishments, and he had provided various certificates.   The  skills
    that he had gained in the UK would assist him  to  find  employment  on
    return  to  Afghanistan.   His  actions  demonstrated   a   degree   of
    resourcefulness and an ability to adjust and adapt to  his  surrounding
    environment.  This showed he could support himself with or without  the
    help of his family on return to Afghanistan.  There were  organisations
    which could assist migrants who wished to return to  their  country  of
    origin.  If he contacted the Refugee Action Choices  Scheme,  he  would
    have financial assistance available to him  if  he  accepted  voluntary
    return.  This would enable him to continue his education in Afghanistan
    or to start a business there.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Mr Halim represented the claimant before the First-tier  Tribunal.   In
    his skeleton argument, he submitted that the claimant was  at  risk  on
    return to his home area in Nangarhar  Province  even  if  his  historic
    account of past persecution  was  not  accepted.   He  cited  objective
    evidence to the effect that the claimant's home area was controlled and
    dominated by the Taliban.  The claimant had endeavoured  to  trace  his
    paternal uncle in whose care he had lived before  fleeing  Afghanistan.
    The details that the claimant had provided to the Red Cross as  to  his
    uncle's particulars were truthful, as it had led to the  ICRC  learning
    from shopkeepers and other residents that the claimant's paternal uncle
    and family had indeed lived there, but had moved away two  years  prior
    to the enquiries being made.  The ICRC visited the area towards the end
    of 2011.  The ICRC was unable to find out where the  claimant's  family
    had moved to.  Thus the claimant would be returning to his home area as
    a young adult without any  family  to  provide  the  primary  means  of
    protection.

 7. On the question of internal relocation, he submitted that it was  clear
    that internal relocation to Kabul  would  be  unreasonable  and  unduly
    harsh.  In support of this proposition, he cited  the  following  dicta
    from Lord Bingham in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5 at paragraph 20:  "If,
    for instance, an individual would be without family links and unable to
    benefit from an informal social  safety  net,  relocation  may  not  be
    reasonable."  He also cited paragraph 2.3.4 of the  latest  Operational
    Guidance Note on Afghanistan dated September 2014 as follows:

         It is important to note that the  UNHCR  guidelines  emphasise  the
         traditional extended family  and  community  structures  of  Afghan
         society continue  to  constitute  the  main  protection  in  coping
         mechanism, particularly rural areas where infrastructure is not  as
         developed.  Afghans rely on these structures and  links  for  their
         safety and economic survival, including access to accommodation and
         adequate  level  of  subsistence.   Since  protection  provided  by
         families and tribes is limited to areas where family  or  community
         links  exist,  Afghans,  particularly   unaccompanied   women   and
         children,  and  women  single  head  of  households  with  no  male
         protection, will not be able to lead a life without undue  hardship
         in areas with  no  social  support  networks,  including  in  urban
         centres.

 8. In her subsequent determination, the judge allowed the appeal on asylum
    and Article 3 ECHR grounds. She rejected the claimant's account in  his
    asylum interview of being personally approached by  the  Taliban.   But
    she accepted that his departure from his village, and subsequently from
    Afghanistan, was arranged for him by his  uncle  who  feared  that  the
    claimant would be  forcibly  recruited  into  the  Taliban.   She  also
    accepted that his uncle subsequently sold his property in the area  and
    left, as this was supported by the investigation of the ICRC.

 9. She found it reasonably likely that his home village was one  of  those
    in Sangim which was presently occupied by, and in the de facto  control
    of, the Taliban.  While the claimant was 19 years of age, she  bore  in
    mind the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  KA  and  the  fact  that
    assessment of risk on return was not subject to  a  bright  line  rule.
    Accordingly, she found it reasonably likely  that  the  claimant  could
    face forced recruitment by the Taliban in his home area.

10. At paragraph 47 she turned to consider  whether  or  not  it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the claimant to relocate to a safer area, namely
    Kabul.  She cited paragraph 2.3.4 of the Operational Guidance  Note  on
    Afghanistan dated September 2014.

11. She went on to observe in paragraph 48 that the  claimant  was  not  of
    course a minor any more.  But there was a real risk that he was telling
    the truth that he had no family links in Kabul.  He would be  returning
    to Kabul in the absence of family links as a young adult male.  She had
    considered AK and had taken into account the difficulties  suffered  in
    Kabul both by way of violence, but also poverty and the  affect  of  so
    many internally displaced persons living there.  But in AK it was noted
    that these considerations would not in general  make  return  to  Kabul
    unsafe or unreasonable.

12. At paragraph 49 the judge continued:

         I have considered the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  JS  (former
         unaccompanied child - durable  solution)  Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT
         00568 (IAC).  The point is made that it is necessary to  take  into
         account the guidance in AA  (unattended  children)  Afghanistan  CG
         [2012] UKUT 0016 (IAC) about the risks in the light of the reminder
         in KA there is no bright line across which the  risk  to,  and  the
         needs of, a child suddenly disappear.  The [claimant] is a slightly
         built young man who, in my view, might easily  be  mistaken  for  a
         younger person (my emphasis).  In his home area he was  raised  by,
         and supported by, his uncle.  He  has  no  such  support  in  Kabul
         where, it is generally accepted, there is  violence,  poverty  and,
         indeed, a large number  of  internally  displaced  persons  seeking
         accommodation, employment and  subsistence.   The  [claimant]  will
         have nobody to help him in this regard.  I am  far  from  persuaded
         that the fact that he has now achieved his 19th  birthday  has,  to
         any great extent, lessened the vulnerabilities which  he  exhibited
         as an unaccompanied asylum seeking child on arrival (my  emphasis).
         While I accept that he has undertaken some education in the  United
         Kingdom, including English language and mechanical courses,  he  is
         without the contacts in Kabul by way of family  to  assist  him  to
         obtain the basics for subsistence.  Taking the evidence  before  me
         in  the  round,  I  find  the  combination  of  this   [claimant's]
         particular characteristics, including his lack of family members or
         knowledge  of  Kabul  and  relatively   youthful   appearance   (my
         emphasis),  coupled   with   the   background   evidence   of   the
         circumstances in Kabul, including, but limited  to,  the  violence,
         poverty and level  of  internally  displaced  persons,  render  the
         internal relocation  alternative  unduly  harsh.   I  am  therefore
         persuaded this is not a [claimant] who can reasonably  be  expected
         to internally relocate.  I make it clear that it is the combination
         of all these factors upon which I have reached this view.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

13. A member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  an  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. The judge had  provided  no
    adequate reasons for the conclusion that the  claimant  was  a  refugee
    because the risk to unattended children set out by the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the country guidance case of AA would still apply  to  him,  despite
    the fact that he was now 19.   If  having  no  previous  experience  of
    living in Kabul or any relatives there to live  with  was  adequate  to
    establish a risk on return to that city for a 19 year old man, then the
    country guidance case of AA would have said so, because  this  scenario
    would apply to a very large proportion of appellants.  It did not,  but
    rather established a particular social group for the  purposes  of  the
    Refugee Convention of  "unattended  children".   While  KA  established
    there was no bright line such that this particular social  group  might
    include those beyond the age of 18, it was submitted that  to  find  an
    appellant aged 19 years and  9  months  should  still  belong  in  that
    category  required  "proper   reasons   pointing   to   some   specific
    vulnerability".  An imprecise observation  that  the  claimant  was  of
    slight  build  was  neither  an  adequate  nor  a  rational  basis  for
    concluding that the claimant was at risk on return to Kabul.

The Grant for Permission to Appeal

14. On 21 October 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons: "The point raised by  the  grounds
    is arguable otherwise  KA  could  apply  to  a  much  larger  group  of
    individuals than previously indicated."

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

15. At the hearing before me, Mr Avery developed the argument raised in the
    grounds of appeal and submitted that the judge had failed to follow and
    apply JS.

16. On behalf of the claimant, Mr Halim distinguished JS on the facts.  The
    crucial difference here was that there was a positive  finding  in  the
    claimant's favour that he had no family to return to either in his home
    area or in Kabul.  Before the First-tier Tribunal he had not sought  to
    rely on the proposition that the claimant had  a  youthful  appearance,
    and it was a red herring.  What was pivotal to the judge's  finding  on
    internal relocation was the absence of family support in Kabul.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

17. As a general rule, reaching the age of majority is an absolute cut  off
    point where the rights of a  child  are  concerned.   The  UNCRC  which
    underpins our domestic law and jurisprudence on the rights of the child
    (including the requirement that the best interests of the  child  shall
    be a primary concern in all actions concerning children)  unequivocally
    does not apply to a child once he or she has reached the age of 18.

18. In LQ (Age: immutable characteristic) Afghanistan [2008]  UKAIT  00005,
    the AIT found that the appellant, an orphan aged 15, would  be  subject
    to the risks of exploitation and ill-treatment, and was a member  of  a
    PSG. But he would be a refugee only whilst the risk to him as  a  child
    remained.

19. In DS (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]
    EWCA Civ 305 Lloyd LJ observed at [54]:

         That leaves a  degree  of  uncertainty  for  the  definition  of  a
         particular social group.  Does membership cease on the day  of  the
         person's 18th birthday?  It is not easy to see that  risks  of  the
         relevant kind to who is a child would continue  until  the  eve  of
         that birthday, and cease at once the next day. However, for present
         purposes it  is  sufficient  that  a  particular  social  group  is
         recognised consisting of Afghan citizens who are under 18 years old
         and who are orphans, whether  strictly  speaking  or  in  practical
         terms.

20. In KA (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1014 at [18] Maurice Kay LJ said that the assessment  of  risk
    on return cannot be subject to a bright line Rule.  He called  it  "the
    18th birthday point", and cited with approval the first  two  sentences
    of what Lloyd LJ said at paragraph [54] of DS (Afghanistan) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 305.  Maurice  Kay  LJ
    continued:

         Given  that  the  kinds  of  risk  in  issue  include  the   forced
         recruitment or the sexual exploitation of vulnerable  young  males,
         persecution is not respectful of birthdays -  apparent  or  assumed
         age is more important than chronological age.

21. Maurice Kay LJ  returned  to  the  18th  birthday  point  theme  in  EU
    (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 32 at paragraphs [8] and [9].  He said it would simply be  inhumane
    to return an unaccompanied young child, specifically in cases  such  as
    the present, to Afghanistan, at least where there would be no family to
    take care of him or her  on  arrival  in  Kabul.   But  that  rationale
    applied with less and less force with increasing age.  He continued  at
    paragraph [9]:

         In this connection, it is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the
         birthday that has been asserted to a claimant is  often  arbitrary.
         For example, a claimant contending to have been  aged  16  in  June
         2012, but who is unable to  give  his  date  of  birth,  may  as  a
         formality have been given the date of birth of 1 January 1996.   If
         his age is disputed, and he is assessed  as  aged  18,  he  may  be
         recorded as  having  been  born  on  1  January  1994.   Thus,  the
         Secretary of State's decision  letter  dated  28  January  2010  in
         relation to EU records his  date  of  birth  as  '01  January  1995
         (disputed) 01 January 1993 (assessed)'.  I do not  think  that  any
         one believed that he was born on 1 January of  either  year.   That
         date was given as a formality to reflect his age  as  asserted  and
         assessed.  In such a case, the origin of the precise date of  birth
         is a further reason why the  achievement  of  adulthood  cannot  of
         itself necessarily change the assessment of risk on return.

22. In the same case, Maurice Kay LJ made the following observations  about
    the facts of QA at paragraph [34]:

         In my judgment,  the  only  criticism  that  can  be  made  of  the
         determination of the Upper Tribunal is that it  treated  QA's  18th
         birthday as a bright  line,  which  is  particularly  inappropriate
         where, as in his case, there is doubt as to  his  precise  date  of
         birth.  However, no attempt was made before the First-tier Tribunal
         or the Upper Tribunal to suggest that by reason of  his  appearance
         or his conduct he should be regarded as  vulnerable  in  Kabul  (my
         emphasis). There was no evidence that even children were at risk of
         forced recruitment in Kabul.

23. Turning to the decision of Judge  Nightingale,  I  consider  there  was
    insufficient reasoning by her on the application of the  18th  birthday
    principle to the question of the viability of the  claimant  internally
    relocating to Kabul. It was not the  claimant's  case  that  he  was  a
    vulnerable young adult, or that he would be vulnerable  to  persecutory
    harm in Kabul in the form of sexual exploitation or forced  recruitment
    by the Taliban. Moreover, at the date of the hearing the appellant  was
    aged 19 years and 9 months according to his assessed date of birth of 1
    January 1995.  His uncle had told him on his departure that he  was  14
    years old, so even allowing for a margin of error of six months  either
    way, he was on any view well passed the age of 18.  So two of the  main
    reasons given  in  the  authorities  for  applying  the  18th  birthday
    principle (continuation of persecutory harm beyond the  18th  birthday,
    and inbuilt imprecision as to the actual date of birth) did not apply.

24. In order to bring the claimant within the scope of  the  18th  birthday
    principle the judge made an observation that had not been relied on  by
    the claimant's legal representatives, and had not been canvassed at the
    hearing.  This observation was that, because of his slight  build,  the
    claimant looked younger than he actually was (a young  adult  aged  19)
    and thus, by implication, looked like a child under the age of 18.  The
    observation was self-evidently tendentious, as it had not  occurred  to
    his legal representatives that the claimant  looked  younger  than  his
    chronological age. Its inherent subjectivity is highlighted by the fact
    that in the age assessment the social workers were of the opinion  that
    the claimant looked older, not younger, than his asserted  age  of  14.
    The claimant's build did not cause them to believe he was younger  than
    14.

25. Furthermore, as with a Merton compliant age assessment, the question of
    whether the claimant  was  a  vulnerable  adult  required  an  holistic
    assessment, which took into account all material factors including  the
    claimant's  emotional  maturity  and   his   ability   to   communicate
    confidently with adults.  From the assessment of Social  Services,  the
    claimant already had a confidence in speaking to adults which made  him
    present older than he was. There was no evidence before the judge which
    indicated that the claimant would present on return as  a  child  under
    the age of 18, in terms of his demeanour and communication skills.

26. Mr Halim submits that the judge's finding about the claimant's youthful
    appearance is a red herring, for two reasons.  Firstly, it was not part
    of his case before the First-tier  Tribunal  (either  in  the  skeleton
    argument or in oral submissions) that the claimant looked younger  than
    18, and would thereby be vulnerable  on  that  account.   Secondly,  he
    submits that the claimant's youthful  appearance  was  only  one  of  a
    number of factors relied on by the judge as cumulatively giving rise to
    an Article 3 risk,  and  as  rendering  internal  relocation  to  Kabul
    unreasonable and unduly harsh.  Accordingly, he submits, if  the  judge
    erred in her application of the "no bright lines" principle, the  error
    was not material to the outcome.

27. While I accept that the absence of  family  in  Kabul  was  a  material
    factor in the judge's reasoning, it is clear  that  she  also  attached
    considerable weight to the finding that  the  claimant  looked  like  a
    child.

28. In AK, the relevant headnote guidance  given  by  the  Tribunal  is  as
    follows:

         (iv) Whilst when assessing a claim in the context of Article  15(c)
             in which the respondent asserts that Kabul  city  would  be  a
             viable internal relocation alternative,  it  is  necessary  to
             take   into   account   (both   in   assessing   safety    and
             reasonableness) not only the level of violence  in  that  city
             but also the difficulties experienced by that city's poor  and
             also the  many  internally  displaced  persons  (IDPs)  living
             there, these considerations will not in general make return to
             Kabul unsafe or unreasonable.

         (v)  Nevertheless, this position is qualified (both in relation  to
             Kabul and other potential places of internal  relocation)  for
             certain categories of women.  The purport of the current  Home
             Office OGN on Afghanistan is that whilst  women  with  a  male
             support network may be able  to  relocate  internally,  '...it
             would be unreasonable to expect lone women and female heads of
             household to relocate internally' (February 2012 OGN,  3.10.8)
             and the Tribunal sees no basis for taking a different view.

29. As Judge Nightingale recognised, the thrust  of  AK  was  that  it  was
    neither unsafe nor unreasonable for the claimant, a young  adult  male,
    to return to Kabul.  So in order to find that it was  unreasonable  for
    the claimant to return  to  Kabul,  she  had  to  take  up  Mr  Halim's
    invitation  in  his  skeleton  argument  to  apply  the  18th  birthday
    principle so as to treat the claimant as being the member of  the  same
    PSG as an orphaned child under the age of 18.  Apart from  the  finding
    on the absence of family in Kabul or elsewhere, the only other relevant
    finding capable of taking the claimant outside the general thrust of AK
    is the finding that he largely retains the vulnerability which  he  had
    as a 14 year old, and this finding is squarely  based  on  the  finding
    that the claimant looks as if he under the age of 18.

30. The absence of family in  Kabul  or  elsewhere  is  a  highly  material
    consideration, but it is not a trump card such as to render the judge's
    error an immaterial one.  In JS, the Tribunal held at paragraph [43] as
    follows:

         But, in any event, if and when removed from the United Kingdom, the
         appellant would be returned to Kabul.  We are not satisfied  he  is
         able to show that he would be at risk of  serious  harm  or  return
         there.  The evidence tends to show that he is a relatively  capable
         young  man   with   no   particular   physical   or   psychological
         vulnerability.  I do not accept that because he was  classified  as
         vulnerable in Social  Services  terms  on  arrival  in  the  United
         Kingdom as an unaccompanied 15 year  old,  he  does  not  have  the
         ability to live in the capital of his own country  without  serious
         risk to his life or inhuman or degrading  treatment;  nor,  on  the
         hypothesis, that it would be unsafe for him to  live  in  Nangarhar
         that it would be unreasonable for him in Kabul.  He is  not  of  an
         age where he is  vulnerable  to  sexual  exploitation,  he  has  no
         physical or mental impairment  or  any  other  characteristic  that
         would  take  him  out  of  the  general  guidance   given   in   AK
         (Afghanistan)."

31. In paragraph [48] the Tribunal said:

         In the absence of particular features and strong ties formed during
         his residence here as a child, Miss Cronin really has to rely on  a
         very bold submission that it is disproportionate to return  any  19
         year old male to Afghanistan after four years' residence here as  a
         child, unless there is satisfactory evidence of a  family  awaiting
         him  there  or   similar   satisfactory   reception   arrangements.
         Understandably she was reluctant to go that far,  but  stripped  of
         the generalities arising from the Social Services background,  that
         it is in substance all she is left with.  We do not accept  such  a
         bold submission.  As we noted in the hearing it would have  a  very
         significant impact on  the  respondent's  practice  and  successive
         policies in dealing with unaccompanied children by way  of  limited
         leave in assessing the circumstances after age 18.

32. Although in paragraph  [48]  of  JS  the  Tribunal  was  addressing  an
    argument under Article 8, their observations have ramifications  for  a
    refugee and/or Article 3 claim.   The  implication  of  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning in JS is that prima facie it is not unreasonable for a  young
    adult male to relocate to Kabul where he  has  no  physical  or  mental
    impairment or any other characteristic that would take him out  of  the
    general guidance given in AK  (Afghanistan).   The  absence  of  family
    support in Kabul does not per se make return to Kabul either unsafe  or
    unreasonable.

33. In conclusion, I find that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
    vitiated by a material error of law, such that it should be  set  aside
    and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

34. Mr Halim accepted that the nature  of  his  case  was  such  that  oral
    evidence was neither required nor appropriate for the purposes  of  the
    remaking of the decision.  The claimant's case on remaking is the  same
    as the case that had been presented to the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    was that internal relocation to Kabul was unreasonable and unduly harsh
    simply because the claimant had no family there.

35. Accordingly, for the purposes of remaking the  decision,  I  take  into
    account all the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, and I
    preserve Judge Nightingale's finding that  the  claimant  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution on  return  to  his  former  home  area  in
    Afghanistan.  I also take into account the  additional  evidence  which
    was served by Hammersmith and Fulham Law Centre under cover of a letter
    dated 14 November 2014.  Of particular note is an article posted on the
    internet by Refugee Support Network UK about life for  young  returnees
    in Afghanistan.  The article was posted on 29 September 2014,  and  was
    published on www.ein.org.uk.  The article by  Emily  Bowerman  entitled
    "Three Things You Need To  Know  About  Life  For  Young  Returnees  In
    Afghanistan" reports on the outcome of interviews over a  period  of  a
    month with young people in Afghanistan who have spent  their  formative
    years in  the  UK's  care  system  before  being  forcibly  removed  to
    Afghanistan on turning 18.  The interviews were conducted by  RSN  team
    member Bryony Norman, along with a Kabul based  colleague.   Ms  Norman
    reports as follows:

         Only 43% of the young people I met with had been able to  reconnect
         with a family member upon return to Afghanistan.  29%  were  living
         with friends they had either known in the UK, or whom they had  met
         since returning to Afghanistan.  One young person was living with a
         family friend who he had met for the first time since returning  to
         Afghanistan, whilst in the most extreme example  one  young  person
         was staying with a stranger - although he now describes  him  as  a
         friend - who he had met at the airport.  He described how he had no
         one there, and how this meant that he feared for his own safety.

36. The reason why it is in general reasonable and  not  unduly  harsh  for
    young adult males to return to Kabul, even if they do not  have  family
    there with whom they can reconnect, is because in general they  are  of
    sufficient maturity and resourcefulness to fend  for  themselves,  make
    new friends and obtain access  to  informal  social  support  networks.
    Having a family member in Kabul is not the sine qua non for accessing a
    social support network and obtaining the basics for subsistence, as the
    above report illustrates.  The claimant used to worship  at  his  local
    mosque in Nangahar province, and so seeking companionship and emotional
    and practical support from fellow adherents to his faith at a mosque in
    Kabul is an obvious avenue for him  to  pursue.   He  can  also  access
    financial support for the purposes of establishing himself in business,
    as stated in the refusal letter.

37. Having regard to the country guidance case of AK, I find that there  is
    not a real risk of the claimant suffering  Article  3  harm  if  he  is
    returned  to  Kabul.   There  are  also  not  substantial  grounds  for
    believing  that  the  claimant  qualifies  in   the   alternative   for
    humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of the Immigration  Rules,
    or  for  subsidiary  protection  under  the  Qualification   Directive.
    Finally, I find that the claimant does  not  discharge  the  burden  of
    proving that requiring him to internally relocate to  Kabul  is  unduly
    harsh and unreasonable, on account of the absence of  family  there  or
    for any other reason.

38. It was accepted before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  claimant  did
    not have a viable Article 8 claim, and no Article 8  claim  is  pursued
    before me.

Decision

39. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law,  and
    accordingly the decision is set aside and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the claimant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection,
    subsidiary protection and Article 3 grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed        Date 27 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


