
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06780/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     SR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Lambeth Law
Centre


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The  appellant  entered  the  UK  on  09  September  2009  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  that  was  valid  until  31
    December 2011. She overstayed the visa. She later claimed asylum and an
    initial screening interview was carried out on 23  February  2012.  She
    was interviewed in detail about her reasons for claiming asylum  on  08
    November 2012. The respondent refused the  application  in  a  decision
    dated 07 August 2014.

3.     The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hanbury dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated
    on 14 January 2015. A  panel  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  aside  the
    decision on 14 May  2015  and  remitted  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill  ("the
    judge") went on to allow the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  19
    August 2015.

4.     The  respondent  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. No challenge is made  to  the  judge's  positive  credibility
    findings. The respondent argues that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    findings relating to risk on return are flawed  because  he  failed  to
    take into account the relevant country guidance case  of  GJ  &  Others
    (post-civil war:  returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319.  The
    respondent argues that the appellant's history is unlikely to give rise
    to a real risk of serious harm if returned to Sri Lanka in the  absence
    of significant activities in the Sri Lankan diaspora  in  the  UK.  The
    respondent argues that the judge gave inadequate reasons for concluding
    that the appellant would be at risk of persecution notwithstanding  the
    fact that he accepted that she had suffered past persecution.

5.    The appellant argues that it  was  open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to conclude that she was at risk  on  return  on  the  particular
    facts of this case. The judge referred to GJ & Others and outlined  the
    submissions made  by  the  respondent  in  his  decision.  The  country
    guidance case was heard in early 2013 and it was open to the  judge  to
    consider up to date evidence that  was  submitted  in  support  of  the
    appeal.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

7.    The judge set out the details of the appellant's claim for  asylum  in
    his decision [3-12]. He went on to outline the respondent's reasons for
    refusal in considerable detail [13-22]. In considering future  risk  he
    noted the respondent's reference to the country guidance decision in GJ
    & Others and her assertion that the appellant would not be at  risk  on
    return because of her low level of involvement in the LTTE. In the same
    paragraph the judge observed that, at that stage, the appellant had not
    indicated that she was "a Tamil activist in the  Diaspora  working  for
    Tamil separatism or  trying  to  destabilise  the  Unitary  Sri  Lankan
    State." [19].

8.    The judge went on to set out the evidence and the submissions made  at
    the hearing [23-37]. He summarised  the  contents  of  the  documentary
    evidence before the Tribunal, which included a large bundle  containing
    medical evidence as well as up to date background evidence  "from  such
    organisations as Freedom from Torture, The Guardian, the  Home  Office,
    tamil.net, BBC News, and UNHCR, by way of example" [23]. He also  noted
    that the bundle contained copies of various  relevant  cases  and  made
    specific reference to the case of GJ & Others. The  judge  referred  to
    the submissions made by the respondent's representative in relation  to
    GJ & Others [33]. The judge also summarised the submissions made by the
    appellant's representative in the following terms [35]:

         "Mr Bandegani emphasized that even  in  GJ  it  was  accepted  that
         people could get out of Sri Lanka and so there  was  support  there
         for the Appellant's account  as  to  how  she  had  left  her  home
         country.  As  regards  her  "sur  place"  activities,  there   were
         photographs of  her  attending  demonstrations  and  there  was  an
         official letter regarding her involvement with a  particular  Tamil
         organisation  in  this  country.  The  TGTE  with  which  she   was
         associated was a proscribed organisation; this  was  precisely  the
         type of organisation that was identified in GJ. The  government  of
         Sri Lanka would be very concerned indeed about separatist movements
         demonstrating a challenge to the Sri Lankan State and efforts being
         made to resurrect the LTTE. The  Appellant,  of  course,  would  be
         returning from London which  was  seen  as  a  Diaspora  hot  spot,
         according to the Sri Lankan government."

9.    Having set out the background,  evidence  and  submissions  the  judge
    went on to make his findings of fact. He found  that  there  was  "very
    clear and powerful supporting" evidence in  the  form  of  the  medical
    reports prepared in support of her case [45]. He accepted  on  the  low
    standard of proof that it was plausible that she could have secured her
    release from detention on payment of a bribe and noted  that  this  was
    consistent with what was  said  in  GJ  &  Others  [46].  After  having
    considered all  the  evidence  in  the  round  he  concluded  that  the
    appellant had given a truthful account of what happened to her  in  Sri
    Lanka. He accepted that "she was seen, rightly  or  wrongly,  as  being
    associated with the intelligence unit of the LTTE." and  had  been  the
    victim of treatment amounting to persecution in the past for reasons of
    actual or  perceived  political  opinion  [49].  The  judge's  findings
    relating to risk on  return  were  set  out  in  paragraph  50  of  his
    decision:

         "The question now remains as to what level of risk there is for the
         Appellant in the future. Although at the time of the Refusal Letter
         the Appellant had not become particularly involved in  "sur  place"
         activities, the fact of the matter is that she has now demonstrably
         been involved in such anti-Sri Lankan government  activity  in  the
         United  Kingdom.  She  has  associated  herself  with  one  of  the
         organisations  that  is  proscribed  and  that  has  been,   again,
         perfectly well documented in this case, it is the TGTE. It seems to
         me that there has been more than one event that the  Appellant  has
         attended and the level of risk, therefore, for  the  Appellant  has
         increased accordingly. Although there is no direct evidence on  the
         point it seems to me a perfectly reasonable inference to draw  that
         there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood  that  Sri  Lankan
         authorities will be monitoring, and  monitoring  closely,  what  is
         happening in the Diaspora, particularly where it  involved  someone
         such  as  this  Appellant  associating  themselves  with   such   a
         proscribed organisation. What is unquestionably the case is that if
         the Appellant is returned now, and if she is then detained  by  the
         authorities, she would be at real risk  of  persecutory  treatment.
         The way in which the authorities treat those whom they perceive  of
         as representing some threat to the State is very  well  documented.
         They have, in the past, been engaged in torture and there seems  no
         reason to consider that matters have in any way improved. There is,
         as  the  respondent   has   rightly   acknowledged,   a   perfectly
         sophisticated intelligence system in force and someone such as this
         Appellant, who comes from Point Pedro in Jaffna, and  who  has  had
         associations with the LTTE in the past and has continued  what  the
         authorities in Sri Lanka would see as anti-government  activity  in
         this country, would place herself very much at risk of  persecutory
         treatment should she be returned."

10.   The respondent does not  dispute  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  factual
    findings relating to the credibility of the  appellant's  account.  She
    focuses her challenge on whether, on those facts, the judge  was  right
    to conclude that the appellant would continue to be at risk  on  return
    to Sri Lanka. The grounds argue that it was not open to  the  judge  to
    conclude  that  the   appellant's   low   level   of   involvement   in
    demonstrations in the UK was sufficient to place her at risk  in  light
    of the Tribunal's conclusion in GJ & Others at paragraph 336:

         "We do not  consider  that  attendance  at  demonstrations  in  the
         Diaspora alone is sufficient to create a real risk or a  reasonable
         degree of likelihood that a person will attract  adverse  attention
         on return to Sri Lanka."

11.   The respondent argues that even if  the  facts  were  taken  at  their
    highest the judge failed to  explain  adequately  why  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities would perceive  the  appellant  "to  be  a  threat  to  the
    integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  because  they  are,  or  are
    perceived to have a significant role in relation to post-conflict Tamil
    separatism within the Diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities  within
    Sri Lanka" (paragraph 356(7)(a) of GJ & Others).

12.   The respondent's challenge amounts to  no  more  than  a  disagreement
    with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's assessment of the evidence. It  is
    quite clear from my summary of the decision as set out above  that  the
    judge had  in  mind  the  risk  categories  outlined  in  GJ  &  Others
    throughout his assessment of the case. He referred  to  it  in  several
    places in his decision.  The  judge  dealt  with  the  relevant  issues
    relating to UK diaspora activities and whether the appellant  would  be
    perceived, rightly or wrongly, as someone who had been involved in anti-
    government activity and was associated with a proscribed  organisation.
    In substance, the judge addressed in the  relevant  factors  that  were
    identified in GJ & Others as likely to give rise to a risk on return.

13.   In NM & Others (Lone women - Ashraf) Somalia  CG  [2005]  UKAIT  00076
    the Tribunal made clear that, while country guidance  decisions  should
    be followed where relevant, they are  not  of  the  same  character  as
    legally binding precedent.

         "140.    These decisions are now denoted as  "CG".   They  are  not
             starred decisions.   Those  latter  are  decisions  which  are
             binding on points of law.  The requirement to apply  CG  cases
             is rather different:  they should be applied except where they
             do not apply to the particular facts which an  Adjudicator  or
             the Tribunal faces and can properly be held  inapplicable  for
             legally  adequate  reasons;   there  may  be   evidence   that
             circumstances have changed in a material way which requires  a
             different decision, again on the basis that proper reasons for
             that view are given;  there may be  significant  new  evidence
             which shows  that  the  views  originally  expressed   require
             consideration for revision or  refinement,  even  without  any
             material change in circumstances.  It may be that the  passage
             of time itself or substantial new evidence itself  warrants  a
             re-examination of the position, even though the outcome may be
             unchanged.   It  is  a  misunderstanding  of   their   nature,
             therefore, to see these cases as equivalent to starred  cases.
             The system does not have the rigidity of the  legally  binding
             precedent but  has  instead  the  flexibility  to  accommodate
             individual  cases,  changes,  fresh  evidence  and  the  other
             circumstances which we have set out."

14.   In this case the judge did not seek to depart from  the  risk  factors
    identified in the country guidance decision but  conducted  a  holistic
    assessment of the case before concluding that  there  was  at  least  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant would continue to be
    at risk on return. It is not arguable that the judge erred on the facts
    and evidence in this particular case.

15.   The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  suffered  past  persecution.
    Paragraph 339K of the immigration rules makes clear that the fact  that
    a person has already been subject to persecution or serious  harm  will
    be regarded as a serious indication of the person's  well-founded  fear
    of persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm, unless there are
    good reasons to consider that such persecution or serious harm will not
    be repeated.

16.   The conclusions of the Tribunal in GJ &  Others  referred  to  by  the
    respondent related to general attendance at  public  demonstrations  in
    the UK and did not consider the specific issue  raised  in  this  case,
    which was the appellant's additional association with the  Transitional
    Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE). In paragraph 50 of his  decision  the
    judge made reference to the fact that the appellant's association  with
    a proscribed organisation was "well  documented".  Although  he  didn't
    refer to a specific document at  that  stage  he  had  summarised  what
    evidence was  before  him  earlier  in  the  decision,  which  included
    evidence from "the Home Office" [23].

17.   The appellant's bundle contained a  letter  from  the  TGTE  dated  23
    September  2014  outlining  the   appellant's   activities   with   the
    organisation. Mr Bandegani explained that the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was specifically referred to up  to  date  evidence  contained  in  the
    respondent's own background report (Country Information and Guidance  -
    Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism dated 28 August 2014). Paragraph 2.2.32  of
    the report confirmed that the Sri Lankan government proscribed at least
    16 Tamil diaspora organisations including the  TGTE.  Paragraph  2.2.33
    referred to a Human Rights Watch report dated April 2014, which  stated
    the following:

         "2.2.33 Human Rights Watch reported in April 2014  that,  'The  Sri
         Lankan  government's  decision   to   label   16   overseas   Tamil
         organizations as financers of terrorism is so broad that it appears
         aimed at restricting  peaceful  activism  by  the  country's  Tamil
         minority'. Chief Military spokesman Brig.  Ruwan  Wanigasuriya  was
         reported to have stated that under the order, legal action would be
         taken against anyone having links with listed  groups.  This  would
         place local  activists  and  alleged  group  members  visiting  the
         country at risk of being detained and held without charge under Sri
         Lanka's Prevention of Terrorism Act. "The Sri Lankan government  is
         using vague counterterrorism regulations to tie the major  diaspora
         Tamil groups to the ruthless but defunct  LTTE,"  said  Brad  Adam,
         Asia director. "This broad-brush sanction could  then  be  used  to
         punish local Tamil activists  and  politicians  with  international
         ties".

18.   Similar evidence was outlined  in  a  letter  from  the  British  High
    Commission in  Colombo  dated  16  April  2014,  which  was  quoted  at
    paragraph 2.3.6 of the same report:

         " 'On 1 April 2014, the  government  of  Sri  Lanka  announced  the
         designation of 16 Tamil Diaspora organisations and 424  individuals
         under the UN Security Council resolution 1373 on counter-terrorism.
         The order was issued by the Secretary of  Defence.  The  government
         asserts that this action has been taken to stop attempts to  revive
         the LTTE. The BHC has asked the government of Sri Lanka to  provide
         evidence to support this decision. '

         'Among  the  organisations   proscribed   are   the   Transnational
         Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE)  and  the  UK-based  Global  Tamil
         Forum  (GTF)  and  British  Tamil  Forum  (BTF).  When  making  the
         announcement on 1 April, Brigadier Ruwan  Wanigasooriya  said  that
         individuals belonging to  these  organisations  would  face  arrest
         under anti-terrorism laws when travelling to Sri  Lanka.  This  has
         not yet been tested in practice; to date, there have been no  known
         arrests based on membership of one of the newly proscribed  groups'
         "

19.    When  the  judge's  conclusions  relating  to  risk  on  return   are
    considered in light of the background and other evidence before him  it
    becomes clear that his findings were made in the context of the general
    risk factors outlined in GJ & Others and the up to date evidence. Given
    the anxious scrutiny required in protection cases it was  incumbent  on
    the judge to assess  risk  on  return  in  light  of  the  developments
    disclosed by the background evidence that post-dated GJ & Others.  This
    was entirely the correct approach.

20.   For  the  reasons  given  above  I  conclude  that,  in  essence,  the
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal decision amounts to no more than a
    disagreement with the outcome. The judge's findings were fully reasoned
    and took into account the particular facts of the  case,  the  relevant
    country guidance and up to date evidence. His findings were open to him
    on the evidence and do not disclose any material errors on a  point  of
    law.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand

Signed      [pic]      Date 01 December 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
