
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06850/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 14th September 2015                 |              On 14th October 2015   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                     SS
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Reynolds, Counsel instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  19th  November  1995
    and he appeals against a decision of the respondent dated 2nd September
    2014 to refuse to vary his leave to enter or remain and to  remove  him
    from the United Kingdom  following  a  refusal  to  grant  him  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and protection under the  European  Convention.
    His asylum claim was previously considered in August 2010  and  refused
    in a decision letter dated 24th August 2010.    That  decision  of  the
    respondent does not appear to be attached to  the  file  and  does  not
    appear to have been considered in evidence.

 2. The appellant's essential  claim  is  that  he  had  feared  return  to
    Afghanistan because his father was a general  in  the  Afghan  National
    Army and he was a member of a political party which used to  be  called
    the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA or Khalq).   He  set
    out in his witness statement that  he  was  a  child  when  the  events
    occurred and even now was not interested in politics.  He  stated  that
    his family moved around and he lived  in  Pakistan.   When  the  family
    returned to Afghanistan at the beginning of 2010, they were stopped  by
    the Afghani authorities and his father was identified.   The  appellant
    was detained because of his connection with his father and tortured for
    three months and he was  interrogated  repeatedly  about  his  father's
    activities until a friend managed to bribe the authorities  to  release
    him.  A friend of his father's called D  then  helped  him  escape  the
    country.  He feared that if he was sent back to  Afghanistan  where  he
    was previously identified as the son of his father, and  where  he  was
    fingerprinted by the authorities and detained  and  tortured  his  life
    would be at risk.

 3. He arrived in the UK in June 2010 as an  unaccompanied  minor  and  was
    taken into the care of Social Services and lived  in  foster  care  for
    some months before being allowed to move in with his maternal cousin.

 4. He had not been able to find out news of his family since  his  arrival
    in the UK and had no contact with his mother or brother or sisters  and
    had no news about his father.

 5. The appellant claims that he was ill-treated whilst he was in detention
    in Afghanistan and he still has depressive flashbacks.   He  also  says
    that when he was in prison he was beaten by a [sic] electric cable  all
    over his body and generally mistreated.   He  maintains  that  he  only
    lived in Afghanistan between 1996 and 2001 when he was very  young  and
    had no memories of what it  was  like  there  and  could  not  remember
    anything about the place where he lived in Kabul.  He  believed  if  he
    was sent back to Afghanistan he would be arrested at the  airport  once
    identified.  He believed that he would be killed if he was returned  to
    Afghanistan due to his family's links to the old government.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hanbury  heard  the  appeal  on  13th
    November 2014 and dismissed the appeal in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    16th December 2014.

 7. An application for permission to appeal asserted  that  the  judge  had
    first failed to make findings on oral evidence given by three witnesses
    attending the Tribunal in line with the  requirements  set  out  in  MK
    (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

 8. I note that credibility goes to the heart of this  determination.   The
    judge set out in his decision the following:

         "38. However, the core of the appellant's account invariably  turns
             on his honesty and truthfulness as a witness.  First, to  deal
             with the background, I  am  not  satisfied  even  to  the  low
             standard  which  applies  to  these  proceedings,   that   the
             appellant's father and other family members were persecuted by
             Marshal Fahim.  According  to  the  appellant's  own  account,
             Marshal Fahim had killed the appellant's uncle, also called D,
             'before the appellant was born'.  That would  have  been  when
             Mujahedin defeated the communists and took control of Kabul in
             1992 when Najibullah's regime  collapsed.   It  is  incredible
             that the PDPA still posed a threat to the Afghan state by  the
             date the appellant left in 2010.  The  PDPA  was  a  socialist
             party which ceased to exist as long ago as 1977.  It was  then
             renamed as the Waatan Party but banned by President  Mojaddidi
             and President Karzai.  It is not credible that  the  appellant
             and his family would continue to fear Marshal Fahim long after
             the collapse of the party.  In any event, Marshal Fahim is now
             dead.  The respondent did not accept the appellant's story  as
             to the involvement of General Fahim in his family's  life.   I
             agree with the respondent's representative, Ms Mohammadi, that
             the case is 'speculative'.

         39.  There were a number of other aspects to the  appellant's  case
             which did not appear to be truthful.  For example, he  claimed
             in interview that his father's party,  the  PDPA,  joined  the
             Taliban to assist them with logistics after they took over  in
             1996.  That seems most unlikely  given  that  the  appellant's
             father's party was a socialist party completely opposed to the
             views of the Taliban.  The appellant appears to say  that  the
             Taliban 'protected his father' but why would they do so  given
             their diametrically opposed views?

         40.  The  identity  of  the  S  family  was  not  accepted  by  the
             respondent.  It was not accepted that the  appellant's  father
             was a general in the  Afghan  Army  or  that  the  appellant's
             identity  had  been  established   satisfactorily.    It   was
             incumbent upon the  appellant  to  produce  some  evidence  to
             support these claims.  The  appellant  has  extremely  limited
             knowledge  of  his  father's  political  activities   and   no
             knowledge of his whereabouts.  I am not satisfied, even to the
             low standard of proof that applies to these claims, that there
             is a real of risk of persecution to the appellant due  to  his
             father's involvement with the PDPA.  I am not  satisfied  that
             the appellant has told the truth  about  his  father  and  his
             background.  It seems convenient that he  lacked  any  greater
             knowledge of family members, as this  may  have  assisted  the
             respondent in tracing those family members.  The appellant has
             a large number of members of the family  in  Afghanistan  (see
             paragraph 6.6 of his screening interview) yet he  claimed  not
             to know the whereabouts of either his mother or his father."

 9. Three witnesses were brought forward and attended the hearing, namely A
    W A N, SN and MAN.  Determinations for the granting of asylum  for  the
    first two appellants were submitted in evidence.  The key point is that
    the credibility of those witnesses  was  accepted  by  the  judges  who
    allowed their appeals.

10. Although their evidence is recorded there are no conclusions  drawn  in
    relation to their evidence contrary to AK Turkey  [2004]  UKIAT  00230.
    This confirms the necessity to make proper findings on the evidence  of
    all witnesses called before adjudicators.

11. Ground 2 of the application for permission to appeal states that  there
    was an  absence  of  findings  in  relation  to  the  written  evidence
    concerning the N family in the  context  of  the  expert  evidence  (Dr
    Guistozzi) which suggested at paragraph 12 that the position of  the  S
    family was analogous to that of the N family.  It was  pointed  out  in
    the permission to appeal that all three witnesses were granted  refugee
    status specifically on the basis that they were members or connected to
    the members of the PDPA.  I note that the determination in relation  to
    SN was made on 3rd April 2013 which  would  appear  to  contradict  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 38 that "it is incredible  that  the  PDPA
    still posed a threat to the Afghan state by the date the appellant left
    in 2010.  The PDPA was a socialist party which ceased to exist as  long
    ago as 1977."

12. Ms Isherwood submitted that there were no risk to the appellant on  his
    return and this could  be  gleaned  from  the  expert  report  from  Dr
    Giustozzi but the report noted at paragraph 8 that the attention of the
    government would depend on their personal background  and  as  such  an
    assessment  of  the  identity  and  credibility  of  the  appellant  is
    important and material.  I was presented with HK & Ors v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department and particularly referred to paragraph 28
    by Mr Stirling where it states that even though  an  appellant's  story
    may seem inherently unlikely that does not mean that it is untrue.  The
    ingredients of  the  story,  and  the  story  as  a  whole,  should  be
    considered against the available country evidence and  reliable  expert
    evidence.  Judge Hanbury at [39] found that the appellant's account was
    untruthful suggesting  that  the  Taliban  protection  would  be  "most
    unlikely given that the appellant's  father's  party  was  a  socialist
    party completely opposed to the views of  the  Taliban".   This  is  in
    direct contradiction of what is stated in the report  of  Dr  Guistozzi
    [28], who referred to the recruitment of former members of  the  regime
    of the Najibullah, the communists, by the Taliban.

13. The judge makes reference to the fact that "the appellant has extremely
    limited knowledge of his father's political activities and no knowledge
    of his whereabouts", but there was  no  consideration  given  by  Judge
    Hanbury that the appellant was in fact a child when  his  evidence  was
    taken in 2010  on  entry  to  the  UK.   This  was  important  for  the
    assessment of whether there was a risk of persecution to the  appellant
    due to his father's involvement with the PDPA.

14. It was Ms Isherwood's contention that notwithstanding  the  appellant's
    credibility the appellant would not be at risk  on  return  but  it  is
    clearly important  to  establish  and  take  note  of  the  appellant's
    witnesses as to the identity of his father, his status as  it  was  and
    the attendant risk to the appellant.



Notice of Decision


The Judge erred in law for the reasons identified, and, in a manner which
could have a material effect on the outcome.  I set aside the decision
pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of the findings to
be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal under
section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b) of the
Presidential Practice Statement.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
























