
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06192/2013
     aa/06193/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 January 2014                             |On 13 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                                   MRS LA
                                   MISS AA

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss M Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Southwark Law
Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           Decision and Directions

1.   The appellants, citizens of Sri Lanka, born in December 1962 and  March
    1995 appeal, with permission, against a determination of Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole who,  in  a  determination  dated  9
    August 2013, dismissed their appeals against decisions of the Secretary
    of State to refuse to grant asylum under the  provisions  of  paragraph
    336 of  HC  395  (as  amended).    The  appellants  have  been  granted
    discretionary leave to remain until 21 June 2015.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that  the  first  appellant  and
    her husband had faced some  difficulties  in  Jaffna  where  the  first
    appellant's husband was working in  1990.   In  2004  her  husband  had
    travelled to Dubai and two years later she and the second appellant had
    moved to live in Colombo.   In  December  2008  the  first  appellant's
    husband had told her that he was returning to Sri Lanka that month  but
    he had disappeared.  In January and again in March the  following  year
    both  appellants  were  detained  and  ill-treated.    The   appellants
    travelled to Britain in April 2009 where the  first  appellant  claimed
    asylum.

3.   The first appellant made an application for asylum which was  submitted
    with that of her sister. Those  applications  were  refused  and  their
    appeals were dismissed by Judge Grant in the  First-tier.    The  first
    appellant's sister was removed to Sri Lanka.  It has been claimed  that
    she was ill-treated on return and an application has been made  on  her
    behalf in the European Court of Human Rights under  reference  16458/12
    (N and Others v UK). Both appellants  then  made  further  applications
    Although those applications were refused  they  were  given  rights  of
    appeal and it was in those circumstances that their appeals came before
    Judge Wellesley-Cole.

4.   Judge Wellesley-Cole heard evidence from the first  appellant  but  not
    from the second appellant.  She had  before  her  documentary  evidence
    from Sri Lanka as well as medical and psychiatric reports.  She did not
    find that the  appellants'  claims  were  credible  and  dismissed  the
    appeals.

5.   Detailed grounds were  submitted  which  included  an  allegation  that
    Judge Wellesley- Cole had appeared to fall asleep  during  submissions.
    In that regard the grounds relied on the ratio of the determination  in
    KD (Inattentive judges) [2010] UKUT 261.  That determination  indicated
    that where a judge might have given the appearance of  not  giving  the
    appeal full attention there might be  grounds  for  setting  aside  the
    determination on the basis that there had not been a fair hearing.

6.   When the appeal first came before me I did not consider it  appropriate
    to merely accept the allegation made by the appellant's  representative
    and therefore requested that the Presenting Officer at the  hearing  be
    contacted by the Presenting Officer before me for her understanding  of
    what had happened.  The Presenting Officer indicated that she  accepted
    that  there  might  be  some  merit  in  the  allegation  made  by  the
    appellant's representatives.

7.   The further grounds of appeal  allege  that  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  had
    erred in respect of her assessment of the evidence.   For  example,  it
    was argued that there had been accounts  of  two  separate  periods  of
    detention and torture but that these had been elided by  the  judge  in
    paragraph 8 of the determination and that therefore  she  had  made  no
    finding on the second period of detention.   Secondly,  it  was  argued
    that the judge had misunderstood the evidence regarding the  return  of
    the first appellant's husband to Sri Lanka in 2008 and had  incorrectly
    recorded the evidence thereon. It was also argued that she  had  placed
    weight on the fact that at the screening interview the first appellant,
    when asked, had confirmed that she had been ill-treated  but  that  she
    had not amplified that to state that she had been raped  when  detained
    when she had not been  asked to amplify what had happened to her.

8.   It was argued moreover that the judge had not taken  into  account  the
    statement of facts in the case of N  and  Others  v  UK  and  had  been
    somewhat cavalier in her approach to  the  evidence  from  four  mental
    health professionals.

9.   Mr Nath  accepted  that  there  were  concerns  regarding  the  judge's
    assessment of the evidence and that  the  impression  might  have  been
    given that she had not applied anxious scrutiny to the determination of
    the appeal.

10.  I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    in that there is a lack of clarity in the assessment of the evidence by
    the judge who has  not  clearly  stated  what  her  assessment  of  the
    evidence of the appellants on each element of their claim was, nor  has
    she  clearly  indicated  her  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellants'
    evidence.  This, together with the fact that she  may  have  given  the
    impression that she was not focusing on  the  submissions   made,  does
    give the impression that the  judge  might  not  have  applied  anxious
    scrutiny to the appeals of these appellants and in all I consider  that
    this amounts to a material error of law.

11.  I therefore set aside the determination of the judge.

12.  I consider that this is an appeal in  which  the  requirements  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement in paragraph 7.2(a) are  met.   I
    therefore allow the appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  to  the  limited
    extent it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh  on
    all issues.


Directions

    These appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  at
    Taylor House on 22 April 2014.

    Time estimate: 1 day.

    Tamil interpreter.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

