
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: AA/06421/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2016                               |On 16 March 2016              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               N V (Sri lanka)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss L Dickinson, Solicitor, Fursoon Knapper
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Sweeney sitting at Columbus  House,  Newport
    on 10 December 2015) dismissing on asylum and human rights grounds  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State  to
    remove him as a person subject to administrative removal under  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999,  his  asylum/human  rights
    claim having been refused.  The First-tier Tribunal made  an  anonymity
    direction,  and  I  consider  it  is  appropriate  that  the  appellant
    continues to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Reasons for a Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 21  January  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         2.   The grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  assert
             that  the  judge  has  failed  to  consider  the  multifaceted
             implications of GJ and Others (Post-civil war  returnees)  Sri
             Lanka CG [2013] 00139 (IAC) particularly in  relation  to  the
             Appellant's PTSD as a direct result of torture, and whether he
             may be on a stop list on re-entry to Sri Lanka, and whether he
             would realistically be able to seek  treatment  for  his  PTSD
             without revealing to state provided medical services,  details
             of human rights abuses  he  suffered  and  whether  there  was
             adequate consideration of  proportionality  under  Article  8.
             These grounds are arguable and there is an arguable  error  of
             law.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth 22  March
    1965.  He is of Sinhalese ethnicity.  On 14 August 2007  the  appellant
    was issued with a six month family visit visa valid until  14  February
    2008.  He flew from Sri Lanka to the UK on 17 October 2007, and entered
    the UK on the same date, using a genuinely issued Sri  Lankan  passport
    containing his visit visa.  The appellant did not return to  Sri  Lanka
    before his visit visa expired, and was eventually  encountered  by  the
    authorities on 1 August 2013, when  he  was  arrested  for  immigration
    offences.  At that point, the appellant claimed asylum.

 4. His claim is most conveniently summarised in an asylum statement  which
    he signed on 26 June 2015.  He was married, and had two  children.   He
    had his own business in Sri Lanka for five years before he came to  the
    UK.  He had a private bus company for passenger transport, and he  also
    operated a fish transportation business  whereby  he  transported  fish
    from Tamil areas to Colombo.  He owned a bus and a lorry.  He  had  six
    drivers working for him.  He did not drive the lorry transporting  fish
    through Tamil areas because he was scared  to  do  so.   He  had  Tamil
    drivers who did that job.  He drove the  bus  from  time  to  time,  on
    various routes.  He did this to help out his drivers  who  worked  long
    hours.

 5. His problems began around 2005.  He could not remember the exact  date.
    But it coincided with the civil war.  When he was driving  the  bus  in
    Colombo, it was stopped and searched by  the  CID.   He  was  arrested,
    detained and tortured before being released.  On  the  second  occasion
    (in 2006) he was arrested in Colombo with two of his drivers.  On  that
    occasion he was a passenger in the bus.   The drivers were Tamil.  They
    were still missing.  He thought the drivers were carrying illegal items
    in the vehicles, including bombs and weapons.  During  his  arrest  and
    detentions,  he  was  accused  of  being  involved  in  their   illegal
    activities.  He told them he was not involved.  He was asked to make  a
    payment in order to secure his release, and he agreed to do  this.   He
    was not issued with any papers or taken to a court.

 6. His last arrest was in 2007, about five days before he came to the  UK.
    He could not remember exact dates due to memory loss.   This  had  come
    about because he was badly tortured.  He had not claimed asylum when he
    arrived in the UK because he was told by people that they did not  give
    asylum to Sinhalese people, only Tamil people.  He was scared of  being
    sent back, so he just tried to survive here.

 7. The appellant was extensively questioned about the three detentions  in
    his substantive asylum interview.  When the  authorities  searched  his
    vehicles in 2005, they did not find any weapons  or  explosives.   This
    was also the case on the occasion of his second arrest  in  April  2006
    when his bus was heading towards Baddulla.  They suspected that the bus
    was carrying weapons and explosives, but nothing was found on the  bus.



 8. His last arrest and detention had taken place around late September  or
    early October 2007.  He was with his bus and lorry drivers at  Baddulla
    when the authorities appeared.  Again, the authorities were  suspicious
    of weapons and explosives that  might  have  been  transported  on  his
    vehicles.  Two of his bus drivers were shot and killed,  while  he  was
    taken away.  He said he was spared death because he was  Sinhalese  and
    the authorities knew that he would not transport weapons (AIR Q175).

 9. For the purposes of preparing a Medical Foundation  Report,  Dr  Alison
    Wickert conducted three interviews with the appellant of  three  hours'
    duration on each occasion.  The appellant told her  that  the  men  who
    detained him on the third occasion demanded 5  lakhs  to  let  him  go.
    When he agreed to this, they took him to Baddulla Town and told him  to
    go home.  He thought this was on or about 4 or 5 October 2007.  He went
    home and visited his family.  He  was  terrified  that,  despite  being
    released, the TID (Terrorist Investigation Department) or police  would
    come back later to kill  him,  as  they  had  already  killed  his  two
    drivers.  He had previously obtained a visa to go to  the  UK  and  now
    decided to use it.  His passport and his visa  were  in  his  house  in
    Colombo so he went there to collect them, instead of remaining at  home
    in Bandarawela, a town in the hills 125 miles east of Colombo, where he
    lived with his wife and son.  His daughter was at school in Colombo and
    living with her aunt in Colombo.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. Both parties were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Sweeney.   Miss
    Dickinson, Solicitor, appeared on behalf  of  the  appellant.   In  his
    subsequent  decision  the  Judge  set  out  the  submissions   of   the
    representatives at paragraphs [18] to  [30].   At  paragraph  [30],  he
    recorded Miss Dickinson as acknowledging that there was nothing in  the
    appellant's bundle that identified that the appellant would be  exposed
    to risk were he to return to Sri Lanka.

11. The Judge's findings were set out at paragraph [31] onwards.  The Judge
    broadly accepted the appellant's account  of  his  experiences  in  Sri
    Lanka prior to his departure in 2007.  He accepted that he had operated
    a transportation business which he had closed down  in  2006  or  2007.
    The fact that ownership of the bus was transferred back into  his  name
    in 2007 was not inconsistent with the claim, which the judge  accepted,
    that he had immediately sold on the bus, so as  not  to  prejudice  his
    safety.  He found that the fact that  his  vehicles  were  stopped  and
    searched on a number of occasions, that his  drivers  were  Tamil,  and
    what he had garnered from snippets of conversations between his drivers
    which he had overheard (despite his  limited  understanding  of  Tamil)
    could have reasonably led the appellant to  suspect  that  weapons  and
    explosives were present on his vehicles.  He rejected the criticism  of
    the respondent that the appellant would have sacked the drivers  if  he
    suspected them of transporting weapons.  The Judge observed there was a
    war going on at the time, and  it  was  readily  conceivable  that  the
    appellant would have been fearful of the consequences of upsetting  one
    of the adversaries.  He concluded at paragraph [70] that the  appellant
    suffered torture at the hands of  his  authorities  on  three  separate
    occasions in 2005, 2006 and 2007.

12. He accepted the appellant's explanation for not claiming asylum on  his
    arrival in the UK.  It was understandable that the  appellant  accepted
    the advice he received that he would be unlikely to be granted  asylum.
    Given the risks that would arise to him if they were right, namely that
    he would be returned to Sri Lanka, where there was a real risk he would
    be arrested and subjected to torture, it  was  understandable  that  he
    would be keen to avoid such a risk coming to fruition.

13. Having given his reasons for accepting the appellant's account of  past
    persecution, the Judge then turned to address the issue of future  risk
    in paragraphs [80] to [94]:

         80.  Finally, I turn to determine, given  my  conclusion  that  the
             appellant has previously suffered torture, whether  he  has  a
             well founded fear that he will be persecuted should he  return
             there.

         81.  I take into account the country guidance case  of  Re  GJ  and
             others Sri Lanka CG [2013] UK UT00319.  There  is  nothing  in
             the evidence before me to suggest  that  the  appellant  falls
             within any of the four categories of individuals  who  are  at
             real risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return  to  Sri
             Lanka.  Such  was  not  asserted  by  the  appellant  or  Miss
             Dickinson on his behalf.

         82.  There is no evidence that he has had  a  significant  role  in
             relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism.   He  is  not  a
             journalist or human rights activists, has not  given  evidence
             to the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission and there
             is no evidence that his name appears on a stop list.

         83.  I have also borne in mind the Court of Appeal's decision in MP
             NT Sri Lanka [2014] EWCA Civ 829 which makes clear that  there
             may be  cases  which  fall  outside  of  the  four  categories
             mentioned in Re GJ where  the  evidence  shows  that  the  Sri
             Lankan government might regard an appellant as posing a threat
             to the integrity of Sri Lanka.

         84.  Again, no specific facts were asserted by  Miss  Dickinson  on
             behalf of the appellant to show that the appellant was  likely
             to be regarded as posing a particular threat by the Sri Lankan
             government.

         85.  The appellant contends that he would be at risk if he were  to
             return to Sri Lanka now despite having left in 2007 as  it  is
             the  "same  ministers  and  government,  only  the  name   has
             changed".

         86.  The appellant said that he had asked  his  accountant  two  or
             three times if the authorities were still interested  in  him.
             His accountant had told him not to come to Sri Lanka  as  they
             would kill him.

         87.  I have no evidence from the  appellant's  accountant,  whether
             oral or in writing, in support  of  the  appellant's  account.
             Further, there is no evidence as to the basis upon  which  his
             accountant has formed the view that the appellant would be  at
             risk on return.

         88.  In the circumstances,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  are
             substantial grounds for thinking that the appellant  would  be
             at real risk of arrest and subsequent persecution  or  serious
             harm if he returned to Sri Lanka on the basis  that  he  falls
             within one of the four  categories  identified  by  the  Upper
             Tribunal in Re GJ, or for any other reason.

         89.  Accordingly, I am not satisfied that  any  fear  held  by  the
             appellant of future persecution, or future  serious  harm,  is
             well founded.

         90.  I have borne in mind  rule  339K  of  the  Immigration  Rules,
             though given the changed situation  in  Sri  Lanka  since  the
             torture the appellant suffered, that the same occurred some  8
             years ago, and the country guidance case of Re GJ,  I  am  not
             satisfied that the previous torture to which the appellant has
             been subject demonstrates that there is a  real  risk  of  his
             being persecuted or suffering  serious  harm  were  he  to  be
             returned to Sri Lanka.

         91.  In the circumstances, for the reasons I have  given  above,  I
             find that the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof
             to show to the low standard of proof that he faces  a  genuine
             fear of persecution for any of  the  reasons  under  the  1951
             Refugee Convention.  I  can  find  no  alternate  grounds  for
             finding any entitlement to a grant of humanitarian  protection
             above.  I dismiss the asylum appeal.

         92.  In determining this appeal under the Human Rights Act 1998,  I
             find, for  the  same  reasons,  that  the  appellant  has  not
             discharged the burden of proof to show a real  risk  that  his
             removal from the United Kingdom would cause a  breach  of  his
             protected human rights under Articles 2 and/or 3.

         93.  The appellant did not contend  before  me  that  the  risk  of
             suicide was so high were he to be returned to Sri  Lanka  that
             to do so would amount to a breach of his  human  rights  under
             article 2 or 3.

         94.  Similarly, it was not contended that  to  return  him  to  Sri
             Lanka would, by reasons of his health, amount to a  breach  of
             articles 2 or 3.




The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, I asked Miss Dickinson to produce the skeleton argument upon which
    she had relied before the First-tier Tribunal.  She did so, and I noted
    that her skeleton argument was mainly devoted  to  the  issue  of  past
    persecution.  On the topic of future  risk,  Miss  Dickinson's  written
    submissions were confined to the following short passage  in  paragraph
    9:

         Therefore as the appellant fears  persecution  of  the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities, it should be accepted the United Kingdom's obligations
         and the Refugee Convention are engaged if the appellant's claim for
         asylum is found to  be  credible  as  there  would  clearly  be  no
         sufficiency of protection for the appellant if the  appellant  were
         to return to Sri Lanka and the appellant would not be able to  live
         safely in any part of Sri Lanka making internal relocation  in  Sri
         Lanka impossible.

15. Miss Dickinson agreed that she had  not  submitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that the appellant came within  any  of  the  main  risk
    categories identified by the Tribunal in GJ and Others, or that he  had
    a well-founded fear of persecution  on  account  of  falling  into  the
    following additional risk category identified by the Tribunal in GJ and
    Others at paragraph [289]:

         (v)  Certain witnesses of human rights violations...

    But she submitted that the judge should  have  engaged  with  the  risk
    categories highlighted in GJ  and  Others  once  he  had  accepted  the
    appellant's account that he had witnessed  two  of  his  drivers  being
    murdered by the authorities.  On the topic  of  the  appellant  seeking
    treatment for his PTSD in Sri Lanka, she acknowledged that  there  were
    some private clinics where he could access treatment, but she submitted
    that most of them would be State run.

16. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Staunton adopted  the  Rule  24
    response that had had been settled  by  a  colleague.   The  Judge  had
    directed himself appropriately.  This included giving consideration  to
    the case law of GJ and Others  at  paragraphs  [81]  and  [82]  of  his
    decision.  It was perfectly open to him  to  find  that  the  appellant
    would no longer be the subject of scrutiny on return, and in particular
    that he did not fall into any of the four risk  factors  identified  in
    the headline guidance.  It was not true that the appellant  would  have
    to divulge the entirety of his claim in order to receive treatment  for
    PTSD in Sri Lanka.  But even if he did, there was no reason to  suppose
    that the doctors who treated  him  would  report  his  account  to  the
    authorities.

Discussion

17. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  were  settled  by  Counsel
    from Chambers in Exeter, and not by  Miss  Dickinson  who  appeared  on
    behalf of the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.  This  explains
    why there is a lack of correlation between the case which was  advanced
    by Miss Dickinson to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  and  the  asserted
    errors of law in the Judge's decision.

18. Ground 1 is that the Judge erred in law in not  considering  adequately
    whether the appellant would be at real risk of persecution on return as
    a witness of a human rights violation, namely the murder of two of  his
    drivers in 2007.

19. It is convenient at this stage to refer to the country guidance case of
    GJ and Others (post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT
    00319. This country guidance replaces all existing country guidance  on
    Sri Lanka, and it includes the following headline guidance:

         (2)  The focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern  has  changed
             since the civil war ended in May 2009.  The LTTE in Sri  Lanka
             itself is a spent force  and  there  have  been  no  terrorist
             incidents since the end of the civil war.


         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
             activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism
             and to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state .... Its focus
             is on preventing both (a) the resurgence of the  LTTE  or  any
             similar Tamil separatist organisation and (b) the  revival  of
             the civil war within Sri Lanka.


         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  Security  Services
             there remains a real risk of ill-treatment or  harm  requiring
             international protection.


         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
             person at real risk from the Sri Lankan authorities, since the
             government now controls the whole of Sri Lanka and Tamils  are
             required to return to a named address  after  passing  through
             the airport.


         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
             whose names appear on a 'stop' list will be detained from  the
             airport.   Any  risk  for  those  in  whom  the   Sri   Lankan
             authorities  are  or  become  interested  exists  not  at  the
             airport, but after arrival in their  home  area,  where  their
             arrival will be verified by the CID or  police  within  a  few
             days.


         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:


             (a)   Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they
                  are, or are perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or  a  renewal  of  hostilities  within  Sri
                  Lanka.


             (b)   Journalists ....


             (c)   Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                  Learned and Reconciliation Commission implicating the Sri
                  Lankan security forces, armed forces or  the  Sri  Lankan
                  authorities in alleged war crimes ....


             (d)   A person whose name appears on a computerised 'stop' list
                  accessible at the airport, comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant.  Individuals whose name appears on a 'stop' list
                  will be stopped at the airport and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance of  such
                  order or warrant.


         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
             intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in
             the diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know that  many  Sri
             Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants  and  also
             that everyone in the  Northern  Province  had  some  level  of
             involvement with the LTTE during  the  civil  war.   In  post-
             conflict Sri Lanka,  an  individual's  past  history  will  be
             relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
             Lankan authorities as indicating a present risk to the unitary
             Sri Lankan state or the Sri Lankan government.


         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
             'watch' list.  A person whose name appears on a  'watch'  list
             is not reasonably likely to be detained  at  the  airport  but
             will be monitored by the security services after  his  or  her
             return.  If that monitoring does  not  indicate  that  such  a
             person is a Tamil activist working to destabilise the  unitary
             Sri Lankan state or revive the internal  armed  conflict,  the
             individual in question is not, in general,  reasonably  likely
             to be detained  by  the  security  forces.   That  will  be  a
             question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any  diaspora
             activities carried out by such an individual.

20.  According  to  the  Judge's  Record  of  Proceedings,  which  was  not
    challenged as inaccurate, Miss Dickinson not only  did  not  advance  a
    case under paragraph 289(v) of  GJ  and  Others,  but  she  effectively
    conceded that there was no objective evidence,  as  distinct  from  the
    subjective evidence discussed by the Judge at paragraphs [86] to  [87],
    which indicated that the appellant would be at risk on  return  now  on
    account of his past history in Sri Lanka.

21. In any event, the apprehended risk raised in ground 1 does not stand up
    to scrutiny.  The appellant is not publicly identified as a witness  to
    a murder carried out by the Sri Lankan authorities in 2007, and he  has
    no plans to make such disclosure in any public forum.

22. Miss Dickinson submitted  that,  as  the  result  of  the  authorities'
    sophisticated intelligence, there is a real risk that  the  authorities
    in Sri Lanka hold a record on the appellant that includes a  record  of
    the fact that he witnessed the murder of the two drivers.

23. It is part of the headline guidance given by the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and
    Others  that  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities'  approach  is   based   on
    sophisticated intelligence, both as to activities within Sri Lanka  and
    in the diaspora.  But this is a finding that relates to the position as
    it stood at the date of assessment by the Tribunal. It is not a finding
    which relates back to the situation in 2007.

24. On the appellant's account, the authorities never  actually  found  any
    weapons or explosives on the vehicles driven by his Tamil drivers.   On
    the  appellant's  account,  he  was  berated  by  his  persecutors  for
    employing Tamils as  drivers,  but  he  was  not  actually  accused  of
    conspiring with them to carry weapons and explosives.  His  explanation
    for  not  being  killed  alongside  the  two  drivers,  and  for  being
    subsequently released from detention (albeit on payment  of  a  bribe),
    was that the authorities did not believe that he was complicit  in  the
    transportation of weapons and explosives.  Given that this was how  the
    appellant was perceived by the authorities in 2007, at  the  height  of
    the civil war, there was no reason for the Judge to suppose that  there
    was a real risk of the authorities retaining a record on the  appellant
    which described him as being a witness to the  murder  of  two  of  his
    drivers in 2007; still less, that  there  was  a  real  risk  that  the
    appellant would be on a stop list (ground 2).

25. It is argued in ground 2  that,  as  the  appellant  left  the  country
    immediately after the event, the authorities would  not  have  had  the
    chance  to  prevent  him  leaving  the  country.   This  is   factually
    incorrect.  The appellant left the country some weeks later, and he did
    so openly.  He was fearful of re-arrest and further ill-treatment,  but
    it was not part of his case that the authorities were actually  looking
    for him.

26. A residuary point raised in ground 1 is that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to seek effective treatment for his PTSD unless he was  prepared
    to talk to medical professionals in Sri Lanka  about  his  experiences;
    and since such medical services are provided by the State,  this  would
    put the appellant at potential  risk  of  reprisal  "from  other  State
    forces".

27. As Miss Dickinson acknowledged in oral argument, there is no evidential
    basis for this submission.  Apart from  the  fact  that  the  appellant
    could access treatment for PTSD from a private clinic, it  is  fanciful
    to suppose that a medical professional in a State  run  institution  in
    Sri Lanka would report the appellant's account of his past  experiences
    to the Sri Lankan Police or security services.  There is  no  objective
    evidence before me that doctors in Sri  Lanka  do  not  adhere  to  the
    Hippocratic Oath and to universally recognised ethical requirements  in
    the practice of medicine, including the obligation to maintain  patient
    confidentiality.

28. This disposes of grounds 1 and 2.

29. In Ground 3 it is argued that the Judge failed adequately  to  consider
    whether to return the appellant to Sri Lanka will be a  breach  of  his
    rights under Articles 2 or 3 of the ECHR.

30. The reasoning underlying ground 3 is the same as that  which  underlies
    grounds 1 and 2.  It is asserted that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
    whether there was a real risk the appellant would be subject to Article
    3 mistreatment given his status as a  witness  to  very  serious  human
    rights violations.  Alternatively, the Judge failed to consider whether
    the appellant would suffer a violation of Article  3  ECHR  on  medical
    grounds as a result of being unable realistically to seek treatment for
    his acknowledged PTSD  without  revealing  to  State  provided  medical
    services details of the human rights abuses which he has suffered.

31. The evidence of the appellant was he had suffered from the symptoms  of
    PTSD from the time of his arrival in the UK,  but  had  not  sought  or
    obtained medical treatment for PTSD  until  after  a  brief  period  in
    detention in  February  2015,  when  the  symptoms  of  his  PTSD  were
    exacerbated.  In the interim, he  had  coped  through  taking  sleeping
    tablets that had been sent to him by friends in Sri  Lanka,  and  after
    this supply dried up, he had coped without  taking  anything.   At  the
    time of his arrest for illegal working in 2013,  he  had  been  working
    illegally for two years.

32. Ground 3 falls away for the reasons that  I  have  given  in  rejecting
    grounds 1 and 2.  The appellant can realistically  seek  treatment  for
    his acknowledged PTSD from either a  private  clinic  or  a  State  run
    institution in Sri Lanka.  Moreover, the appellant's symptoms  of  PTSD
    are likely  to  be  alleviated  by  the  emotional  support  which  the
    appellant will be able to access from family members in  Sri  Lanka  on
    his return.

33. Ground 4 is that  the  Judge  failed  adequately  to  consider  whether
    returning   the   appellant   to   Sri   Lanka   would   constitute   a
    disproportionate breach of the appellant's Article  8  rights.   It  is
    argued that the appellant has built up a private life in the  UK  at  a
    time when he had a legitimate reason not to return to Sri  Lanka  until
    the country guidance for Sri Lanka changed in GJ and Others.

34. The issue of risk on return has to be  assessed  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  It is irrelevant that the appellant might arguably have  been
    able to prove a well-founded fear of  persecution  if  he  had  claimed
    asylum in 2007.  The appellant did not claim asylum  before  his  visit
    visa expired, and he thus  became  an  overstayer.   By  the  time  the
    appellant claimed asylum, the civil war had long since come to an  end.
    Under Section 117B of the 2002 Act, the Judge was bound  to  treat  the
    appellant as having built up his private life  in  the  UK  unlawfully.
    Alternatively, even if his status was only precarious, the judge  would
    still have been constrained to attach little weight to the  appellant's
    private life in  the  proportionality  assessment.   Furthermore,  Miss
    Dickinson did not advance an Article 8 claim at all, as  she  confirmed
    to me in the course of oral argument.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
