
[pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: AA/06405/2012
     AA/07289/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Date Sent                  |
|On 22nd July 2013                               |On 9th August 2013         |
|Prepared 23rd July 2013                         |                           |


                                   Before

       vice president of the upper tribunal miss e arfon-jones dl and
                     DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE DEARDEN

                                   Between

                                 Mr Q H and
                                   Mr S H
                         (anonymity directions made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Pickering
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the review of appeals against the Respondent's  decisions  made
    on 21st June 2012 and  25th  July  2012  respectively  to  refuse  each
    Appellant's application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under
    the Asylum and Human Rights  Conventions  and  under  the  Humanitarian
    Protection Provisions.  These matters have been dealt  with  as  orders
    granting  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  under   the
    provisions contained in the Transfer of Functions  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal Order 2010.

The History of these Matters

 2.  These  Appellants  claim  to  be  gay  lovers.   The  Appellants  made
    applications to the Secretary of State  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United  Kingdom  under  the  provisions  referred   to   above.    Each
    Appellant's application was refused by the Respondent on 21st June 2012
    and 25th July 2012 respectively.  Each Appellant elected to appeal  the
    decision of the Secretary of State.   Each  Appellant  appeared  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly sitting in Bradford on 13th August 2012
    and 7th September 2012.  In a determination subsequently promulgated on
    12th September 2012 the appeals of each Appellant were dismissed.

 3. The Appellants filed  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal.   Judge
    Vaudin d'Imecourt refused permission.   The  matter  was  then  further
    appealed to Judge of the Upper Tribunal Chalkley who in a determination
    dated 12th March 2013 said,

         "I believe that the first challenge  may  raise  properly  arguable
         grounds which suggest that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has  erred
         in law although, having looked briefly through the file I have  not
         been able to find any copy of the Operational Guidance  Note  which
         it  is  said  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Both
         challenges may be argued.  Permission to appeal is granted".

The Representations

 4. Ms Pickering relied on the Grounds of Appeal filed by her colleague  on
    18th September 2012 and 17th October 2012.  Ms Pickering also relied on
    the skeleton argument which was handed to us shortly before the hearing
    commenced.

 5. Ms Pickering maintained that  there  were  two  difficulties  with  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

      i) The judge had not considered adequately or at all  the  Operational
         Guidance  Note  setting  out  the  Respondent's  position.   Whilst
         acknowledging that the Operational Guidance Note did not  have  the
         force of law and was  not  determinative  of  the  appeal  of  each
         Appellant, Ms Pickering maintained that it was of persuasive  value
         and should have weight attached to it as a useful tool in assessing
         the dangers to gays in Pakistan.

     ii) Ms Pickering maintained that the judge had failed  to  mention  the
         authority of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  It was maintained that  the
         judge had not asked the right questions regarding the sexuality  of
         each Appellant and in particular had not asked why it was that they
         had behaved with discretion in the United Kingdom.

     We were invited to set aside the judge's decision and substitute a new
    decision allowing the appeals of each of the Appellants.

Has the Judge Erred in Law?

 6. The issue for us at this stage of the review is whether the  judge  has
    made an error of law and in answering that  question  we  approach  the
    matters raised in the same order as Ms Pickering.

1. The Operational Guidance Note

 7. Ms Pickering maintains that the judge had  before  him  an  Operational
    Guidance Note which has been issued  by  the  Respondent  and  provides
    guidance  to  the  Respondent's  officials  as  to  how  to   determine
    applications for asylum from Pakistan nationals.

 8. We indicated to Ms  Pickering  that  our  files  did  not  contain  the
    Operational  Guidance  Note   referred   to.    Whilst   Ms   Pickering
    acknowledged that the Operational Guidance Note had not  been  sent  in
    the Appellant's bundle from Messrs  Sovereign  Solicitors  of  Bury  in
    Lancashire, it was maintained by  Ms  Pickering,  who  appeared  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly on 13th August and 7th September  2012,
    that she had handed in the Operational Guidance Note before  the  first
    hearing commenced.  However, interestingly, not only did  we  not  have
    the Operational Guidance Note  referred  to  but  Mr  Diwnycz  for  the
    Respondent also did  not  have  the  Operational  Guidance  Note.  This
    suggested to us that Ms Pickering may be mistaken in her assertion that
    she handed in a copy of  the  same  before  the  case  commenced.   The
    absence of the document on the  Tribunal  file  and  the  file  of  the
    Respondent in fact persuades us that no such document was handed in and
    Ms Pickering's recollection is mistaken.  The judge can hardly be  said
    to have made an error of law sufficient to  warrant  the  determination
    being set aside if he did not consider something which was  never  even
    before him at the relevant time.

 9. In the alternative and without prejudice to the foregoing, if we accept
    that Ms Pickering did hand in the Operational  Guidance  Note  referred
    to, we observe that this is but guidance to caseworkers employed by the
    Respondent, but does not amount to anything which has force of  law  or
    Parliamentary approved rules.  We find that  the  Operational  Guidance
    Note is literally that, that  is  guidance  to  caseworkers  which  can
    change on a regular basis, but reflects the type of thinking which  the
    Respondent undergoes before making a decision on  anyone's  claim.   We
    found that the Operational Guidance Note is not mandatory  advice,  can
    be departed to on a discretionary basis and should have limited  weight
    attached to it.

10. Indeed the relevant Operational Guidance Note is quoted in the  grounds
    which have been filed.  We  had  a  certain  amount  of  difficulty  in
    reconciling the contents of paragraph 3.10.6 and 3.10.8.  The first  of
    those paragraphs states "As gay men, lesbians and bisexuals in Pakistan
    may be considered to be members  of  a  particular  social  group  they
    should be granted asylum".

11. The latter paragraph says "However, if an individual  chooses  to  live
    discreetly because he/she wants to avoid embarrassment or  distress  to
    her family and friends he/she will not be deemed to have a well-founded
    fear of persecution and will not qualify for asylum".  We did  pose  to
    Ms Pickering that it was perhaps too wide to say that gay men, lesbians
    and bisexuals in Pakistan should be granted asylum, especially when one
    bears in mind the rider to that position at 3.10.8.

12. We have overall concluded that if the OGN was before the judge, he  was
    entitled to place limited weight upon it for the reasons disclosed.

2. HJ (Iran)

13. The grounds maintain that Judge Kelly made no  proper  assessment  with
    regard to the HJ position and neither did the judge  analyse  what  the
    motivation was for the Appellants behaving  discreetly  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

14. In fact on a fair reading of the determination the judge finds that the
    Appellants are gays and that,

         "The main tenor of their evidence, however, was that although  they
         do not make a secret of it,  the  Appellants'  relationship  is  an
         essentially private and exclusive one ... I am satisfied  that  the
         Appellants have conducted their relationship  discreetly.   I  find
         that this has not been because they are fearful of the reaction  of
         others ... but is because they are essentially private  people  who
         keep themselves to themselves".

    Indeed, at paragraph 20 the judge says, "I find that the Appellants are
    in a homosexual relationship and that they conduct  their  relationship
    with discretion because they are naturally private individuals".

15. At paragraph 22 of the determination the judge says,

         "There is of course much learning upon the subject of the  exercise
         of discretion  within  the  context  of  asylum  law.   However  Ms
         Pickering agreed that the issue in this case can be reduced to  the
         question of  whether  the  manner  in  which  the  Appellants  have
         hitherto conducted their relationship in the United Kingdom  (where
         there is  no  risk  of  them  being  harmed  on  account  of  their
         homosexuality) would place them at risk of being harmed  were  they
         to continue it, in like manner, in Pakistan  ...  I  have  no  real
         doubt that the hitherto discreet manner  in  which  the  Appellants
         have preferred to conduct their relationship in the United  Kingdom
         would not be such as to place them at real risk of harm  were  they
         to continue it in Pakistan".

16. We accepted that the judge had not specifically mentioned the  case  of
    HJ, but the sentences quoted above easily persuade us  that  the  judge
    had the ratio of HJ uppermost in his mind at the time that he made  the
    decision.  Whilst it would have been helpful if the judge  had  briefly
    quoted HJ it is not appropriate to overturn the judge for failing to so
    mention, especially when it is apparent that he was fully aware of  the
    ratio of that authority.

17. Ms Pickering complains that the judge did not ask the  right  questions
    because he did not enquire why the Appellants behaved discreetly in the
    United Kingdom.  In our conclusion this suggestion is  in  error.   The
    judge analysed the way in which  the  Appellants  had  behaved  in  the
    United Kingdom and concluded that they are essentially  private  people
    who keep themselves to themselves.  They have no particular  desire  to
    socialise with other gays.  The judge was satisfied, for  reasons  open
    to  him,  that  the  Appellants  have  conducted   their   relationship
    discreetly not because they are fearful of the reaction of others,  but
    because they  are  private  people  who  wish  to  keep  themselves  to
    themselves and choose of their own volition to behave with discretion.

18. In our conclusion, contrary to the grounds, Judge Kelly asked  all  the
    relevant questions and clearly showed that he was aware  of  the  legal
    position.  The judge concluded for reasons which were open to him  that
    if the Appellants had behaved discreetly in a  free  and  open  country
    like the United Kingdom out of their own choice, they would behave in a
    likewise manner in Pakistan.   Whilst  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    immediate families of the  Appellants  would  be  aware  of  their  gay
    relationship he concluded,  bearing  in  mind  the  way  in  which  the
    Appellants chose to behave in the United Kingdom and  would  behave  in
    Pakistan, that it was perfectly open to  them  to  internally  relocate
    well away from the homes of their parents in some new location where no-
    one would know that they were gay simply  because  they  chose  not  to
    advertise that fact, being private individuals.

19. We have reviewed the determination as a whole  and  concluded  that  no
    error of law is  disclosed.   As  a  consequence  the  appeals  of  the
    Appellants are dismissed and the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Kelly dismissing each Appellant's appeal is upheld.

20. We make an anonymity direction on the same basis as that made by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kelly shown at paragraph 25 of his determination.






Signed                              Date   8th August 2013


Judge Dearden



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Dearden
