

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06506/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Sent           |
|On 20 March 2014                              |On 16 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     YD
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M McGarvey of McGarvey Immigration and Asylum
                 Practitioners Limited
For the Respondent: Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule 14 of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea who was born on 17 December 1991.
       He claims to have arrived in the United Kingdom sometime in 2010.  He
      claimed asylum on 13 June 2010.  On 24 June  2013,  the  Secretary  of
      State refused the appellant's application  for  asylum.   On  25  June
      2013, the Secretary of State made a decision to remove  the  appellant
      as an illegal entrant to Guinea.

   3. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a
      determination promulgated on 23 August 2013, Judge  Britton  dismissed
      the appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human
      rights grounds.  Judge Britton made an adverse credibility finding and
      concluded that the appellant had fabricated his claim based  upon  his
      sexual orientation  and  that  he  had  been  trafficked  to  the  UK.
      Consequently, he did not accept that the appellant would be at risk on
      return to Guinea.

   4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.   On
      18 September 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Landes) granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that
      it was arguable that the Judge's finding that the  appellant  had  not
      established he was a victim of trafficking and so at risk of being re-
      trafficked was legally flawed.

   5. In her Rule 24 response, the Secretary of State indicated that she did
      not oppose the appellant's application and invited the Upper  Tribunal
      to determine the appellant's appeal  afresh.   Thus,  the  appeal  was
      listed before us.

   6. At the hearing, Mr Richards conceded that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      decision could not stand and that fresh findings on the  evidence  had
      to be made.

   7. Consequently, we conclude that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      involved the making of an error of law and  it  is  agreed  that  that
      decision must be set aside.

   8. Having regard to the nature and extent of the fact finding required to
      determine this appeal, and having regard to para  7.2  of  the  Senior
      President's Practice Statements, we remit this appeal  to  the  First-
      tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a Judge other than  Judge
      Britton or Judge Landes.

                               Signed




                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
