

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: AA/06052/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 3 April 2017                               |On 23 May 2017               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between


                                     MN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr James, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  She claimed asylum on  17  June
   2014 and her application was refused on 7 August 2014 and a decision  was
   made to remove her  as  an  illegal  entrant  under  section  10  of  the
   Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. The Appellant appealed this decision  to
   the First-tier Tribunal and her appeal was dismissed on  all  grounds  by
   First-tier Tribunal Judge O'Brien in a decision promulgated  on  27  July
   2016.


2. The Appellant was granted permission to  appeal,  on  renewal,  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Kamara on 5 October 2016. The reasons  for  the  grant  of
   permission were that it was arguable that the Judge  erred  in  concluded
   that the Appellant provided the same address in her  screening  interview
   as was provided in her visa application form for the reasons given in the
   grounds. It was further arguable that the Judge erred in stating that the
   Appellant had made no reference during the hearing to  an  accusation  of
   adultery made by her husband when that matter formed part of her  written
   evidence before the Tribunal.

   The Grounds


3. The first three grounds are drafted under the headings: failure  to  take
   account of a relevant consideration; absence of  evidence  to  support  a
   conclusion and breach of natural justice but boil down to  an  allegation
   that  the  Judge  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  regarding  the
   Appellant's address in her screening interview that failed to  take  into
   account her evidence, was unsupported by the evidence and failed to  take
   into account  relevant  considerations.   The  fourth  ground  is  headed
   'procedural fairness' and asserts  that  the  First-tier  tribunal  Judge
   erred in his assessment of the Appellant's evidence. He referred  to  her
   written evidence that her husband had reported  her  to  the  police  for
   adultery and found that no mention of it had  been  made  in  the  asylum
   interview and no evidence had been heard relating to it at  the  hearing.
   The evidence was contained  in  her  witness  statement  and  no  further
   evidence was heard regarding her  husband  reporting  it  to  the  police
   because she was not cross-examined or asked any  further  questions.  Her
   evidence was  not  challenged  but  the  Judge  concluded  that  she  had
   embellished her account.


   The Rule 24 Response


4. The Respondent opposed the Appellant's  appeal  and  submitted  that  the
   Judge directed himself appropriately and the findings in respect  of  the
   screening interview were open to him on the evidence.


   The Hearing

5. Mr James submitted that the screening interview was not signed by  anyone
   and it was not known whether the visa was in front  of  the  interviewing
   officer and her evidence was that it was not the address she gave and was
   not a record of what was said.  In  circumstances  where  it  was  signed
   neither by the Appellant nor the officer any weight to  be  attached  was
   lessoned. The fact that there was a similar  amendment  in  a  subsequent
   document ought to have given rise to a question on the part of the  Judge
   which he failed to deal with and that it was  a  core  finding  that  the
   Judge used  in  dismissing  the  appeal  based  on  the  address  in  one
   interview. The broader point was that  it  would  seem  unusual  for  the
   Appellant not to deal with that at the asylum interview and  it  was  not
   clear on what basis that correction was made. It was more likely that the
   address was taken from the papers and changed. He did  not  know  whether
   she was provided with a copy of the interview, but that was not fatal  as
   it was a document  that  had  an  incorrect  address  and  there  was  an
   explanation as to why an address was found on the visa form  and  it  did
   amount to an error of  law.  The  final  ground  was  the  allegation  of
   adultery to the police. The Judge relied on the fact that  this  was  not
   mentioned. It was not put to her in  cross-examination.  It  was  in  her
   written evidence and it was clear that the Judge relied  on  that  as  an
   adverse finding. She was not cross-examined on that point and it was  not
   a matter that should have been held against her. Evidentially it did  not
   undermine her claim as it was in her witness  statement.  He  had  missed
   that part of the witness statement. That taken together with the  address
   formed the two key issues on which the Judge dismissed the claim and  the
   way he dealt with this was erroneous.


6. Mr Hibbs submitted that she had claimed her husband  made  an  allegation
   of adultery but the case was  not  argued  on  the  basis  that  a  false
   allegation of adultery would put her at risk. There was not the evidence.
   Her witness statement contained a last  paragraph  to  that  effect.  The
   Judge could not be held at fault for the Appellant  not  putting  forward
   more to her case and the objective evidence was not  there.  The  grounds
   were a disagreement with the findings of fact. What  was  being  asserted
   was that the Respondent had made something up in the screening  interview
   and that was a bold assertion to  make.  She  was  asked  at  the  asylum
   interview and she said the agent filled in the application form. She  was
   cross-examined about the visa application. When it was pointed  out  that
   she made it in person she said she did go in and got documents with  that
   address on. Without a clear copy of the  record  of  hearing  or  witness
   statement from Counsel it was not a point that could be argued today.

7. Mr James submitted that what the Judge was  doing  at  paragraph  40  was
   dealing with an overall credibility finding.

Discussion

8. I deal with grounds 1-3 together as they relate to the same evidence.  It
   was the Appellant's case that she was at risk of persecution on return to
   Pakistan because her husband had physically abused her and  her  children
   and threatened to kill her if she returned. The Respondent had raised  in
   the reasons for refusal letter that the Appellant had declared an address
   in her visa application form in Lahore which was consistent with the bank
   statement for her husband provided with her  visa  application  form  and
   given by her in her screening interview. The Respondent therefore did not
   consider that the Appellant had been truthful  in  her  asylum  interview
   when she said that she had no idea who lived at the address.


9. The Appellant stated in her witness statement dated 8 July 2015 that  she
   did not fill in her application form herself and some of the  information
   was definitely untrue, such as her having two more sons.  She  said  that
   her visa was arranged by a friend of her father's and she just signed  it
   when someone, who she thought might be an agent, brought the paperwork to
   her.

10. The Judge recorded the Appellant's evidence in relation  to  this  issue
   in cross-examination at paragraphs 12 and 13. She is recorded  as  saying
   that she had applied for her visit visa through an agent,  although  when
   challenged that the record of application showed that it had been made in
   person, she said that the agent had given her the documents,  showed  her
   where to sign and she had taken them to the British High Commission.  She
   denied having lived at the address given in her  screening  interview  or
   knowing anything about it, and said that she had given the  same  address
   as at the asylum interview. She thought that the immigration officer  had
   gleaned that address from her visit visa application and not written down
   what she said.

11. The First-tier Tribunal's findings are at paragraphs 37  to  43  of  the
   decision. The Judge found at paragraph  39  that  her  account  that  the
   address on her screening interview would  have  been  filled  in  by  the
   interviewing officer from the information on  her  visa  application  was
   untrue. He came to this conclusion on the basis of her evidence that  she
   had given an address at the  screening  interview.  The  address  on  the
   asylum interview record was crossed through and  he  found  that  if  the
   Appellant's account were accurate, the address on the screening interview
   would have similarly been crossed through.

12. The grounds assert that it was the Appellant's  evidence  that  she  was
   never given a copy of her screening interview. I  asked  Mr  James  where
   this evidence was to be found as it  was  not  recorded  in  the  Judge's
   decision nor was it in the Appellant's statement of July  2015  which  Mr
   James confirmed was her only one. He confirmed that  counsel  before  the
   First-tier Tribunal had not provided his own  note  of  proceedings.  The
   Judge in contradiction to the assertion in the grounds of appeal notes at
   paragraph 18 that it was the Appellant's evidence that she had been given
   a copy of the screening interview record but had not read it and had  not
   signed it because she had not been asked to.   The factual basis for  the
   assertion in the grounds has not been made out.

13. Further, I find that the Judge gave adequate  reasons  grounded  in  the
   evidence for his finding that her account in relation  to  the  screening
   interview was untrue, namely that the Appellant had said in evidence that
   she had given an address at the screening interview. In the circumstances
   he found it not credible that the address would have been  amended.  That
   finding was open to him and adequately reasoned.

14. Ground 4 asserts  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  was
   embellishing her account was procedurally unfair.  The  Judge  stated  at
   paragraph 40 of the decision that the Appellant's claim that her  husband
   had reported her to the police for  adultery  was  of  concern,  firstly,
   because as found in KA, it was no longer a straightforward matter  for  a
   husband to accuse his wife of adultery. He then says that no  mention  of
   this was made in the Appellant's interview and no mention of it was  made
   at the hearing. Instead he was told that her mother had said that he  was
   looking for her like a 'mad dog'. He states  that  he  is  drawn  to  the
   conclusion that she is "embellishing her  account,  in  particular  given
   that she accepts that she has had no direct contact from her  husband  in
   at least a year, probably considerably longer."


15.  The Appellant's statement was dated 8 July 2015 and at paragraph 8  she
   asserted that since coming to the UK her husband had reported her to  the
   police for committing adultery with a man she had never heard of.  It  is
   not in issue that she neither was she examined in chief  about  this  nor
   was she cross-examined. The Appellant was interviewed in July 2014.


16. I do not find that this a fair finding in  all  the  circumstances.  The
   Appellant had provided this information in July 2015 and it  was  in  her
   witness statement. I do not consider that an  adverse  inference  can  be
   drawn from the fact that she was not additionally examined  in  chief  in
   relation to this or cross-examined. Further, she did  not  claim  in  her
   witness statement to have this information directly from her husband  and
   the source of the information  was  not  explored  in  evidence.  In  the
   circumstances I find that  it  cannot  be  reasonably  classified  as  an
   embellishment of her account entitling  the  Judge  to  make  an  adverse
   credibility finding.


17.  This  finding  led  the  Judge  to  reject  the  Appellant's  case   on
   credibility grounds.   The findings on credibility therefore cannot stand
   and on reading the reasoning as a whole I am unable to conclude  that  he
   would have reached the same conclusion but for this finding.


Notice of decision


18. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal  on
   asylum grounds involved the making of a material error of law.


19. I set the decision aside and the  appeal  will  be  determined  de  novo
   having regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
   Statements due to the nature and extent of fact  finding  required  by  a
   Judge other than Judge O'Brien.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date 14 MAY 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
